VOL. XXVIII NOVEMBER 1 No. 21 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 323 

Thorns, Thistles and the Curse 323 

The Norfolk Convention 324 

Berean Study in Tabernacle Shadows 326 

The Triumph of Gideon 327 

Catalogue of Bibles, Testaments, Students' Helps, 

Etc 328 

Each Shall Give Account to God 331 

"Before the Judgment-Seat of Christ" 332 

"The Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink". ...333 

"All Things Indeed are Pure" 334 

"He That Doubteth is Damned" 334 

Unto the Third and Fourth Generation 335 

An Interesting Question Answered 335 

page 322 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



HEAVENLY MANNA in handsome durable leather binding, 
gold edges and stamping, are ready. Price, $1.75 each. Wholesale 
rates to all readers, $1.00 each, any quantity. 

A WORD TO BRITISH FRIENDS 



The Editor is always pleased to have your personal letters, 
but as for business communications (including TOWER 
subscriptions) we are sure that your interests will be served 
best and most quickly if you will address our British Branch, 
London, as above. 

All new publications announced in these columns can be 
expected at the London office about a month later, as that is 
the length of time usually required for ocean freight service. 

The above message to the friends in Britain will apply to 
the friends in Australasia by substituting Melbourne for London 
and remembering that ocean freights from here to your 
coast require about three months. 

HYMNS OF DAWN WITH MUSIC 



Our readers have for years inquired for this book. We 
now have it for you in handsome cloth binding and at cost 
price. It is the best and the cheapest hymn book in the world, 
at 35 cents per copy, postpaid, and contains 333 of the choicest 
hymns of all ages. By express, collect, 25c each, in any quantity. 



R4080 : page 323 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
THORNS, THISTLES AND THE CURSE 



AS a benevolent feature of the curse or sentence of 

God upon our race because of Original Sin, 

we are told that God said to Adam when 

driving him forth from Eden, "Thorns and thistles 

shall the earth bring forth unto thee... and thou 

shalt eat bread in the sweat of thy face." Without the 

thorns and thistles and battling with them man would 

have found life too easy, and would in indolence have 

sunken into depravity more rapidly than he has done. 

But the curse is to roll away— times of restitution 
are at hand when the great King, Messiah, will exercise 
his power among men for their uplift; and when the 



great demoralizer, Satan, and his associated demons 
will be restrained. Then the thorns and thistles would 
be a real menace to man's rapid rise, for they with the 
insect pests would serve to absorb his vitality and hinder 
him from intellectual progress. 

We should expect, therefore, that now or very soon 
some means would be found for coping with and subduing 
these pests. Already science has done much to 
combat the insect foes by washes, sprays, etc. But 
now from governmental institutions we have the glad 
message that thorns and thistles may be easily vanquished 
—by a cheap chemical spray which kills the 
weeds, while non-injurious to grain, etc. It is even 
claimed to be beneficial to some varieties of the latter. 

The Technical World says:— 

"It is estimated that weeds cut down the yield of 
grain in this country at least twenty per cent. Under 
these conditions agriculturists have for several years 
occupied themselves in the attempt to discover a chemical 
that can be used for spraying grain-fields. To 
make it a success it is necessary that the chemical 
should destroy the weeds, but leave the cereals uninjured. 
...Numerous methods of extermination have 
been tried and abandoned because they were ineffective, 
injured the grain crop, poisoned stock, or were too 
expensive. 

"From this it is evident that any means that can be 
found to destroy these pests will mean one of the greatest 
discoveries for agriculture that has ever been 
made. No mechanical invention in farm machinery 
will compare with it in importance. 

"It can now be said with certainty that such a discovery 
has been made. The first successful experiments 
were attempted in June, 1906, by the Agricultural 
College of the University of Wisconsin. The work has 
been carried on under the direction of Prof. R. A. Moore. 

"The experiments carried on consist in spraying 
the field with a ten-per-cent. solution of iron sulphate. 
The idea of controlling wild mustard by this method 
was conceived last year at the university experiment 
station. The work was based on information derived 
from Germany, where experiments had been tried on 
mustard. Plans were laid to make tests on the university 
farm as soon as the wild mustard appeared. 
No machine for the purpose is made in this country. 
A sprayer costing $135 was imported from Germany. 
The tests on the university farm were entirely successful. 
Professor Moore then experimented on other Wisconsin 
farms, in Dane, Kenosha and Waukesha counties 
and at Lynn, Lyons county, Minn. As far as known 
these are the only experiments that have yet been made 
in this country and in every case there is evidence that 
the weeds have been annihilated, while there has been 
no perceptible injury to the grain. The grains that have 
been tested are oats, barley, wheat and spelt. No tests 
have been made on rye in the United States, but Prof. 



Staglich has had success in spraying rye in Europe. 
Experiments are also being made on Indian corn, and 
the results so far have been successful. The only effect 
that is seen on the grain is the blackening of the lower 
and older leaves that are doomed to wither eventually, 
while the young leaves, that bring the cereal to maturity, 
are unharmed. There are no complaints from any 
center of deterioration either in the quality or quantity 
of the grain crop sprayed. There has been no difference 
observed in the time of ripening. No tests have been 
made in this country on clover or grasses, but experiments 
made in Scotland show that in no case was damage 
done to the young clover or grass, while the mustard 
was entirely destroyed. 

"So far the sulphate-of-iron solution is found to 
act definitely on mustard, yellow-dock, cockle-bur, 

R4080 : page 324 

smart-weed, rag-weed, and Spanish needles, while 
there is every reason to believe that it will destroy 
Canada thistle.... 

"It is at once apparent that every section of the 
country will share in the benefit of this discovery. The 
various weeds that iron sulphate will destroy are found 
to prevail in different localities. The white daisy is 
familiar to Eastern farmers, the rosin-weed to Western, 
wild mustard is widely scattered, and Canada thistle 
grows in most of the Northern States." 

Nor is this all that is making ready for "times of 
restitution," when the Scriptures declare "the earth 
shall yield her increase." A means has been found for 

ENRICHING THE SOIL 

It has long been known that soil is impoverished 
by the exhaustion of its supply of nitrogen. It has been 
known also that there are vast quantities of nitrogen 
in the air; but no one has known how to get it to reunite 
with the soil. Beds of nitrogenous fertilizers in 
far-off lands have been transported at great cost to rejuvenate 
depleted soils— but the cost is too great for 
general use. Recently two successful methods have 
been discovered for separating nitrogen from the 
air by electricity at a comparatively small cost, and it 
is confidently predicted that its manufacture on a large 
scale will soon supply a cheap restorative for earth's 
rejuvenation. 

Meantime another means has been found— "some 
good microbes have been employed to aid the work 
of reclamation." These useful bacteria operate only in 
connection with leguminous plants— such as the various 
clovers, vetches, peas and beans. The nitrogen-fixing 
bacteria form nodules on the roots, and these absorb 
nitrogen from the air and fix it in the soil. This 
not only causes the legumes to flourish but enriches 



the soil for different succeeding crops. 

A circular before us from the U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, 
Washington, D.C., relates the foregoing in 
other terms, and offers to the public on application the 
salts in proper quantity free of charge. 

Doubtless the same Divine Wisdom which is now 
supplying man with skill to construct machinery and 
manufacture electric lights, etc., is operating also in 
this "Day of His Preparation" in the ways above indicated 
to remove the thorns and thistles and to cause 
the wilderness to blossom as the rose. Thank God for 
the eyes of faith to recognize him as our Deliverer by 
whomsoever he may send the assistances. 



R4081 : page 324 

THE NORFOLK CONVENTION 

IT seems too stereotyped to say so repeatedly, "Our 
last convention was best of all." Yet how else 
can we properly report? At Indianapolis we said, 
"This is surely one of the best conventions ever held, if 
not the best of all." Nevertheless some who attended 
it went later on to the Niagara gathering, and said, 
"This is still better." And now, some who attended all 
three persistently claim that the Norfolk Convention 
was best of all. In the Editor's opinion these three 
seasons of refreshing were all so good as to be beyond 
comparison. Each, however, had its special features. 
The last continued longer than the others, and, besides, 
afforded to many specially favorable opportunities for 
fellowship en route, going and returning; and this we 
must reckon as one of the special Convention blessings. 
And these comparatively few who went from one Convention 
to another prolonged and increased their spiritual 
exhilaration as per the Apostle's advice: "Be not 
drunk with wine... but be ye filled with the Spirit." 

CONVENTION OF BELIEVERS IN THE ATONEMENT SACRIFICE 
OF CHRIST-"A RANSOM FOR ALL" 

Saturday, Sept. 28th, the friends began to arrive 
in goodly numbers and full of joyous anticipation of 
spiritual refreshment. The local friends, joined by 
several who went early to assist them (the Lord reward 
them all!), had made excellent arrangements for 
the comfortable entertainment of all, whose number 
was about 750— some going and others coming throughout 
the eight days of the session. So far we have 
learned of none who went away without a blessing from 
the Lord. 

The opening service at 10 a.m. Sunday, Sept. 29, 
started with a hymn of praise to God, after which 
Brother Russell led in prayer, invoking the divine 



blessing upon the Convention, and upon its influence 

in Norfolk, and on the dear friends far and near whose 

hearts were with us, and upon the influence of the Convention 

upon the little groups and classes represented 

—that a holy and blessed experience might result to the 

comfort and encouragement of many of the saints. 

Brother W. W. Murray, as the representative of the 
local Church, then delivered an Address of Welcome and 
introduced Brother VanAmburgh as Chairman for the 
first four days of the Convention. Brother VanAmburgh 
at 1 1 a.m. delivered the first discourse, on "Redeemed" 
—Titus 2:13,14. The audience, nearly all 
"brethren," seemed very appreciative of what they 
heard. 

The general attendance was 600 to 800, except for 
the publicly advertised discourse of Sunday afternoon 
on "To Hell and Back," delivered by Brother Russell. 
On that occasion a close estimate was 2200, though 
some guessed double that number. Excellent attention 
was given for nearly two hours. Some of the foremost 
people of the city were in attendance. The Mayor, introducing 
the speaker, without endorsing anything, 
asked a courteous and attentive hearing. The city was 
considerably stirred and two ministers attempted a public 
refutation— the Baptist preaching on "To Hell and 
to Stay" and the Methodist on "To Hell and be Damned." 
But "their guns were spiked," we feel sure, so 
far as those were concerned who received and read the 
freely distributed WATCH TOWER on "What Say the 
Scriptures About Hell?" And, by the way, all of our 
readers are welcome to these TOWERS free, for use 
amongst their friends. They discuss and explain every 

R4081 : page 325 

Bible text containing the word "hell," and various "parables 

and dark sayings," which are generally 

misunderstood. 

At 7.30 p.m. Brother Russell spoke again, on "The 
Hopeless and the Hopeful." (Eph. 2:12,13.) Many of 
you already have this through the newspapers which 
publish a sermon each week. 

MONDAY, SEPT. 30 

The opening session was devoted to praise and 
testimony, after which Brother Russell answered Bible 
questions propounded by the audience. 

At 2.30 p.m. Brother Alex. Graham delivered a very 
interesting discourse on the text, "Having Harps of 
God." At 3.30 a Testimony Meeting was held for an 
hour and a half. 

Brother C. E. Fowler spoke in the evening, taking 
as his topic, "Overcoming— What? How?" The necessity 
for overcoming the world, the flesh and the 
Adversary was shown, and that faith and prayer and 



determination are necessary to success. 

TUESDAY, OCT. 1 --COLPORTEUR DAY 

After a Praise and Prayer Service, Brother Russell 
preached from the text, "He that reapeth receiveth 
wages and gathereth fruit unto eternal life." The 
usual congregation was present and the various features 
of Harvest work were referred to— "Colporteuring," 
"Volunteering," "Pilgrim Work," and the other 
numerous ways, great and small, by which all who 
will— all who love the Lord and the brethren and the 
Truth— may thrust in the harvest sickle. The wages 
were shown to be partly present but mainly future. 

In the afternoon Brother J. H. Cole addressed the 
Colporteurs on successful methods, and gave very helpful 
and interesting illustrations along the lines of our 
circular, "Hints to Colporteurs." 

The Colporteur Praise and Testimony Meeting in 
the evening was an excellent one and evidenced the 
fact that the dear Colporteurs are receiving a great 
blessing and are carrying blessings to others. Some 
thought this service alone worth all the Convention 
had cost them of time and expense. Many not Colporteurs 
were deeply moved and blessed by it. 

WEDNESDAY, OCT. 2 

Our Sunrise Prayer and Praise Service at 5.30 a.m. 
was attended by about 450 to 500 of the friends. Brother 
Russell, who led the meeting, pointed out the fact that 
we are now in the Millennial Dawning and that God's 
promise is that "He shall help her (the Church) early 
in the morning." (Psa. 46:5.) The unusual hour, the 
fellowship, the hymns and prayers referring to our 
hopes of the dawning of Zion's glad morning, all conspired 
to a holy solemnity and blessed joy. 

We had two hours of splendid Testimony and 
Praise Service, beginning at 10 a.m. One dear brother 
from the wilds of the North Carolina mountains, with 
tears of joy on his cheeks, declared that he must go 
home, for he was so full he could hold no more. But 
he remained, doubtless realizing with others that holy 
joy enlarges our hearts and increases our capacity. 

At 3 p.m., in the largest Baptist Church in Norfolk, 
about 700 assembled for the discourse on "The 
True Baptism," by Brother Russell. 

In all 53 were immersed. Two colored brethren 
purposed being baptised the next day in the river, because 
Southern usage forbade the use of the Church 
fount, but they were not permitted to do so. 

In the evening Brother Bohnet delivered a very interesting 
and profitable discourse on "The Righteous 
shall Flourish like the Palm Tree." 

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 3 



Brother A. E. Williamson arrived and became 
Chairman of the Convention for its latter half. The day 
was left open for rest and individual fellowshiping, the 
only general service being in the evening, when Brother 
F. Draper delivered a very interesting and helpful discourse 
on the text, "The Spirit, the Water and the 
Blood, these three agree in one." Brother Russell departed 
for Allegheny by the afternoon train. About 
thirty-five who learned of the time and place were present 
and gave him a hearty goodby. As he stood on the 
rear platform while the train pulled out all joined in 
singing, "God be with you till we meet again." 

FRIDAY, OCTOBER 4 

After another splendid Praise and Testimony Meeting 
lasting an hour and a half, Brother M. L. Staples 
preached on "The New Creation." (I Tim. 3:15.) Many, 
we trust, were refreshed and strengthened in purpose. 

In the afternoon the harmony of the Great Pyramid's 
Testimony with that of the Bible was forcibly 
presented by Brother H. C. Rockwell. 

In the evening, following a Praise service, 
Brother W. J. Thorn addressed the Convention ably on 
the topic, "Full Assurance of Faith." 

SATURDAY, OCTOBER 5 

Another good Testimony Meeting of an hour and a 
half showed clearly that as the Convention progressed 
many of the dear friends became more and more filled 
with the Lord's Spirit which overflowed from their 
beaming eyes as well as in their fervent words. Then 
Brother S. D. Senor delivered an interesting discourse 
on "Gathering and Scattering." 

The afternoon service was a discourse by Brother 
E. H. Thompson, whose topic was, "The Three Fires of 
the Atonement Day, and their Antitypes." His address 
was both interesting and instructive. 

After a Praise service Brother A. E. Burgess gave 
the evening address on, "Study to Show Thyself Approved 
unto God: a workman that needeth not to be 
ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth." He was 
heard with interest and profit surely. 

SUNDAY, OCTOBER 6 

The last day of this great feast opened with another 
stirring testimony meeting. Then Brother H. Samson 
spoke pointedly and feelingly on "The Witness of the 
Spirit." 

The afternoon discourse was by Brother A. E. Williamson, 
whose topic was "The Bridal Garment." A 

R4082 : page 326 



large audience gave closest attention to this portrayal 
of how the robe of Christ's imputed righteousness becomes 
through consecration and obedience our Bridal 
Garment. 

In the evening a symposium on Love was participated 
in by Brothers A. E. Williamson, S. Kuesthardt, 
D. H. Thornton, J. F. Rutherford and F. L. Hall. Then 
followed a splendid Love Feast, in which all participated 
with hand and heart and voice, bidding each other 
goodby and expressing the hope of meeting soon in 
the Great Convention beyond the vail— "the General 
Assembly of the Church of the First-Borns, whose 
names are written in heaven." 

TWO PASSED ON BEFORE 

On the Saturday preceding the Convention, Brothers 
H. Holmes and U. G. Munsell and their wives (all active 
Colporteurs) having arrived a little in advance were 
active in preparing for and welcoming others. Toward 
nightfall they went to a boat-landing to meet a party 
from Boston. There, learning that the boat that night 
would land at a different pier, the two brethren hastened 
to it, leaving the sisters to come on more leisurely. But, 
five minutes later, the two dear sisters were killed under 
the wheels of a shifting engine which suddenly 
came upon them from a freight-yard switch. 

The finding of them a few moments later was a 
harrowing experience for their dear husbands, one of 
whom remarked, "If it had not been for the Truth and 
its blessed, quieting and hallowing influence I would 
at once have run to the river and suicided." The Lord's 
grace and TRUTH greatly sustained both of these 
brethren and those who sympathized with them in their 
grief. The remains were taken to their homes in Connecticut 
and buried there, steps being taken to secure 
an able presentation of their faith to their gathered 
friends. The husbands returned then and spent the 
closing days of the Convention— not in mourning, but 
in praising God for our blessed hope, which forbids 
our sorrowing as others who have no hope. We have 
the best of hope for both of the sisters, for their faithfulness 
and self-sacrificing spirit attested their devotion 
to God. No doubt their death shed a solemnizing 
influence over the Convention as a whole. 



page 326 
BEREAN BIBLE STUDY IN TABERNACLE SHADOWS 
OTHER SIGNIFICANT TYPES 
DECEMBER 1 



1. Does St. Paul differentiate between merely justified 
believers and those who go on to sanctification, in 
Romans 12:1? 

2. How does his discrimination there correspond to 
the difference between the typical priests and their 
brethren, the Levites, from whom they were separated 
to the work of sacrifice and higher service? 

T.117, last par. 

3. Have all justified believers of this Gospel Age been 
eligible to membership in the Royal Priesthood 

until the "harvest" time? 

4. Will the opportunity for entering the ranks of the 
antitypical priests ever cease? T.118, line 11. 
C.216-220. 

DECEMBER 8 

5. What is the usual interpretation of the text, "Now 
is the acceptable time"? 

6. What is the correct interpretation of it? T.l 18, 
line 12. 

7. Do those who now consecrate themselves to God as 
priests sacrifice as New Creatures, or as sinners, 

or as justified humans? Rom. 12:1. 

8. Do they offer spiritual or fleshly sacrifices? John 6:51; 
Col. 1:22,24; I Pet. 4:1; Heb. 10:10. 

9. If this be true, why do we read that the Church is 
a "holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices, 
acceptable to God"? I Pet. 2:5. 

DECEMBER 15 

10. Are we justified in accepting the reading of the 
Sinaitic MS., the oldest Greek MS. of the New 
Testament, which omits the word spiritual in 

I Pet. 2:5? See Tischendorf Testament; also list 
of interpolations shown in new WATCH TOWER 
BIBLES. 

1 1 . Is it conceivable that the Lord should wish us to 
sacrifice spiritual interests? Are we not always 

to sacrifice the earthly so as to gain the spiritual? 

12. Is it probable that many in the Church at any time 
have been sacrificing priests? T. 1 18, par. 1. 

13. What was the proportion of numbers as between 
the priests and the Levites? T.118, par. 2. 

14. Considering this typical teaching on the subject, 
should we be surprised that those professing consecration 
to death in God's service and living accordingly 

are few— a little flock as compared with 

the millions of Christendom? Compare C.163. 

DECEMBER 22 

15. How many nominal Christians make up the population 
of your city or town? And what number 



do you know who profess faith in Jesus as their 
Redeemer and have renounced sin and are living 
saintly lives? 

16. Even amongst the great, rich, wise and noble, according 
to the estimation of the world, do you find 

many possessing the fruits of the holy Spirit? 

17. If the type shows 8580 Levites to 5 priests, is it not 
a faithful picture in prophecy? T. 1 18, par. 2. 

18. What was signified by the laver of water in the 
Tabernacle Court? T.119, par. 1. 

19. If that washing meant the putting away of the filth 
of the flesh, does its antitype apply only to the 
antitypical priests— the "little flock"? T.l 19, par. 1. 

20. Are natural men "totally depraved," as some teach, 
or do some of the divine characteristics in a modified 
degree still persist despite the fall? 

DECEMBER 29 

21. May a justified believer be wrongly consecrated to 
a work instead of to the Lord? T.l 19, par. 2. 

22. Do Church work, Rescue work, Temperance 
work, etc., sometimes deceive well-meaning people 
and take the place of the proper work of complete 

page 327 

sacrifice to God— to do the will of the Father 

in heaven and to finish his work of gathering out 

the "Elect"? T.l 19, par. 2. 

23. Should we then be surprised that so few see "the 
deep things of God"— hidden behind the Tabernacle 
Vail, which represents full consecration- 
death of the will? T.119, par. 3. 

24. Does the Golden Altar of the holy, like the candlestick, 
represent not only Jesus but also all those 

whom he accepts as "his brethren," his "Body"? 
T.120, par. 1. 

25. Do the "royal priests" offer their own incense 
(prayers) to God, or are they offered by their Advocate 
and Head? John 15:7; Rev. 8:3; T.120, par. 1. 



R4082 : page 327 

THE TRIUMPH OF GIDEON 

-JUDGES 7:13-23.-NOVEMBER 17.- 

Golden Text:— "Though a host should encamp 
against me, my heart shall not fear."— Psa. 27:3. 

GIDEON was one of the judges of Israel raised up 
by the Lord. He delivered his people from the 
Midianites who had invaded Palestine and 



taken possession of its most fertile part, pillaging the 

country of its produce. Under God's special covenant 

with Israel we know that he would have protected them 

from these invaders had they remained faithful to him. 

We are not surprised, therefore, that the narrative 

shows that the Israelites at this time had succumbed 

to the idolatrous influences of the Canaanites who still 

dwelt in the land. Gideon's father was one of the chief 

men of his tribe and district, and upon his plantation 

he had erected a statue to Baal in the midst of a consecrated 

grove, on a hilltop. Notwithstanding this established 

idolatry in the home, Gideon appears to have had 

considerable knowledge of the true God and of the deliverances 

effected by him for his people in the past, 

and when conversing with his angel visitor he shows 

not only his knowledge of the Lord's dealings in the 

past, but his surprise that the Lord had ceased to care for 

his people. It did not even seem to occur to him that 

the Lord's disfavor, as manifested in the successes of 

the Midianites against Israel, was on account of Israel's 

disloyalty to the Lord in idolatry, etc. It is probable 

that this same sentiment pervaded the nation in general 

and that, in some sense of the word, they respected Jehovah 

at the same time they worshiped Baal also. 

God's favors to Spiritual Israel and his protection 
are along spiritual lines against spiritual enemies and 
spiritual difficulties; and yet how few Spiritual Israelites 
when they get into spiritual difficulties realize that 
it must, in some sense of the word, be traceable to the 
Lord's providences! How few of them properly look 
to see to what extent their spiritual adversities, weaknesses, 
coldness, alienation from the Lord, etc., are 
due to the permission of some kind of idolatry in their 
hearts! Not an idolatry, probably, that entirely ignores 
the Lord; but one which, while thinking favorably 
of his spiritual blessings and victories of the past, 
simply wonders at his disfavor of the present, and fails 
to recognize that it is impossible to serve at the same 
time both God and Mammon; that God's favor and 
close communion and protection can not be expected 
while we permit in our hearts a rival reverence for 
wealth or fame or human institutions and creeds, or 
self or family to any degree or extent. 

Evidently the Lord saw that the Israelites were 
at this time ripe for a change— that under the adversities 
inflicted through their enemies they were 
humbled to such an extent that they would be ready to 
see where was their fault, and to turn from idolatry 
again to the Lord. But the Lord wished an agent for 
his service, and instead of using a supernatural one— 
an angel— he chose, as usual, to use a man. And he 
chose, as usual, to use a suitable man, fit for the purpose. 
Gideon seems to have been a man of middle 
age, for he had a son at this time of probably fifteen 
years of age; he was well born, as is implied by the 
record that he was fine of form and feature. 



True, the adage is, "Handsome is that handsome 
does"; it is true, too, that some who are handsome fail 
to measure up to their appearance in the conduct of 
life; nevertheless, it is beyond question that to those 
who can read character, the face and form, unless 
marred by accident, indicate the character and the 
training. The noble, the brave, the generous, the 
wise, by nature, by birth, show these qualities in feature 
and form; nevertheless God is not always able to 
use as his servants the naturally noblest and finest of 
the human family. Too frequently with such nobility 
goes a spirit of pride and self-conceit, which renders 
the individual unsuited to the Lord's purposes of the 
present time, when humility and obedience to the Lord 
are the prime essentials. The Apostle noted this, saying 
that not many wise, not many noble, not many 
learned hath God chosen, but the weak things and the 
ignoble things— rich in faith, heirs of the Kingdom. 
(I Cor. 1:26.) How gracious is this arrangement which 
opens the way to the highest divine favor for the humblest 
who hears the voice of the Lord and responds 
with humility and zeal! Let the ignoble, then, who 
have tasted of the Lord's grace, be encouraged to trust 
that, even though ignoble by nature, the grace of the 
Lord is able to work in them such a transformation of 
character that they may in heart, at least, become 
copies of God's dear Son, and thus be prepared for the 
finishing touches of our promised "change" in the First 
Resurrection. 

As Gideon's band may be considered a figure or 
illustration of the overcomers of this Gospel Age— the 
Church, the little flock— so Gideon himself would fitly 
represent the Captain of our salvation, whose example 
we are to follow, and whose character is to impress all 
his followers. Of Gideon it is declared that he looked 
like the king's son— that in appearance, form, etc., he 
had a nobility which marked him as above the ordinary 

R4082 : page 330 

rank and file. So our Lord Jesus is the King's Son, 
and so all whom he accepts to be of the little band, his 
little flock, are to be conformed to his image by the 
power of God working in them "to will and do of his 
good pleasure"; working in them through a knowledge 
of the truth;— the knowledge of the exceeding great 
and precious promises of God's Word. Whatever they 
are by nature, it is God's design that eventually they 
shall be like their Lord and Captain, see him as he is 
and share his glory, honor and immortality. 

After receiving the Lord's invitation to be the deliverer 
of his people, Gideon also received a test; he 
was to hew down the trees constituting the grove of 
Baal and was to overthrow the statue and was to offer 
to the Lord sacrifices upon a rock, using the wood from 
Baal's grove and image as the fuel. Sure that he was 



following the Lord's command, he did not wait to gain 
even the consent of his father, much less that of his 
people in that vicinity, who he knew would be greatly 
incensed by such a procedure. Assuring himself that 
his commands were of the Lord, he hesitated not one 
moment, but accomplished the destruction and made 
the offering, doing the work by night, knowing it would 
be interrupted by the people if done in the day time. 
The citizens of his clan demanded his life, appealing 
the matter to his father, who evidently was a chief 
amongst them; but the wise decision of the father was 
that if Baal could not defend himself against his son, 
there was certainly no need of any one taking up the 
cause of Baal. 

Thus the Lord protected the one whom he had chosen 
for his servant, and brought him more markedly 
than ever before the attention of the people, so that 
when he sent out invitations for volunteers from various 
quarters, an army of thirty-odd thousand assembled 
to his standard. But the Lord said to Gideon that 
there were too many, and that all were not of the kind 
desired. From the human standpoint the thirty-two 
thousand of Israel had no show of conquering the hundred 
and thirty-five thousand of their enemies (Judges 8:10); 
but from the standpoint of faith in God, who 

R4083 : page 330 

called them to this service, victory was certain, though 
none could foresee in what way it should be brought 
about. 

The Lord had in mind a glorious victory, but it was 
to be achieved by his might and power alone. The 
honor due to the human instruments who were privileged 
to share in it was not to be in their skill and 
strength in battle, but in their faith in God and in their 
zeal in obeying his orders, as an evidence of the 
strength of their confidence in God. 

Then the Lord commanded Gideon to prove them. 
Gideon's army had a chance to see the hosts of the 
enemy; they had a chance to consider that their 
enemies were used to warfare while they as a people 
had for now a long time been accustomed to the peaceable 
pursuits of agriculture. Accordingly, the first test 
of faith applied was permission for all the fearful to 
return home. This reduced the army to ten thousand; 
yet many if not all of these who first volunteered, but 
were now rejected, probably had an opportunity a little 
later on of joining in the battle after the Midianites had 
been discomfited and were in full retreat. But the ten 
thousand courageous men, fearless in the presence of 
an enemy many times their own strength, must have 
been men of faith in the Lord, men who, in some respects 
at least, resembled Gideon in their hearts, in 
their courage, in their trust in Jehovah; nevertheless 
there were still too many for the Lord's purpose. The 



next test was a test of zeal. When led down to the 
brook to drink, all but three hundred halted very leisurely 
and knelt down to drink, which required the 
loosening of their armor and unfastening of their 
swords. But three hundred did not stop to do this, 
but hastily scooped up a little water and lapped it from 
their hands. This zeal, inspired by a living faith in 
God, was just the element of character for which the 
Lord was looking; and these three hundred "peculiar 
people," full of faith and active zeal, were the only ones 
acceptable to God and privileged to share the honors 
of delivering Israel from a mighty host of oppressors. 

Just so the Lord Jehovah contemplates the conquest 
of the world for Christ (Zech. 14:3); and Christ, 
like Gideon, is called of God to lead a "little flock" of 
"called and faithful and chosen" ones (Rev. 17:14) forth 
to the conquest of the hosts of sin. The selection of 
Gideon's army was an illustration of the Lord's method 
in the selection of a "peculiar people" who will share 
with him the honors of victory in the conquest of sin 
and all its defiling host. 

Of these there is first a call to faith in the Lord, 
resulting in justification and acceptance; secondly, 
there is a call to consecration, in full view of the requirements, 
in full view of the enemy, and our Captain 
requests all of the justified ones who come to him to 
sit down first and count the cost, whether or not they 
are willing to sacrifice their all under his leadership. 
The large majority, when they come to see the cost, to 
realize the battle that must be waged between the followers 
of the Lord and the forces of the world, the flesh 
and the devil, are rather inclined to say, We prefer not 
to engage in battle, we are timid, we are fearful, we 
have not sufficient confidence either in Gideon or in 
Gideon's God. It is in accord with the Lord's will that 
such should be considered separate from God's army, 
though they may have subsequently an opportunity for 
joining in the battle against evil. 

It is not sufficient that we should have faith in the 
Lord and in the Captain of our salvation and should 
make our consecration to the Lord's will; but further 
tests are made with a view to making a final selection 
of a very special class to constitute the little flock. It 
will be a test of water— symbolizing the truth. It becomes 
a very important question to every consecrated 
one as he is brought to a knowledge of the truth how 
he will receive it— appropriate it. In the picture or 
type those accepted of God to be Gideon's little flock 
used their hands to lift the water to their mouths, a 

R4083 : page 331 

sup at a time, as a dog uses his tongue to lift the 
water; while the others drank like as a horse who 
puts his mouth into the water and sucks it. The 
hand is a symbol of energy, and we might understand 



this to signify that the persons most approved of the 
Lord will use energy and discretion in partaking of the 
truth— these will not bow down in the mire of human 
servility, but will maintain their own erectness of manhood 
and will partake of the water of truth, lifting their 
heads upward and acknowledging its heavenly origin 
by whatever stream or channel it may come to them. 

The selection complete, the remainder of the brave 
men were not sent home but to Gideon's tent or headquarters, 
there to be ready for their share in the battle 
later. Those whom God would specially use were supplied 
with peculiar implements: (1) a ram's horn; (2) 
a pitcher; (3) a lamp, or torch, placed inside the 
pitcher and thus obscured from the view of their enemies. 
The three hundred were divided into three companies 
and the individuals of each company were scattered. 
They approached close to the enemy and 
practically surrounded their camp. When Gideon blew, 
all who heard the blasts made similar blasts upon their 
trumpets; when Gideon broke his pitcher and let the 
light of his torch or firebrand gleam forth, the others 
did the same, blowing meantime with their trumpets 
and alternately shouting, "The sword of the Lord and 
of Gideon." It was the Lord's battle and the Lord's arrangement, 
and it was carried out as intended; the Midianites 
awakened from their slumbers panic-stricken, 
believed themselves surrounded by immense hosts, and 
fled precipitately, killing one another in their fright 
and confusion. Perceiving the routes they would take, 
Gideon hastened with his ten thousand followers to 
intercept them and to complete the defeat. Meanwhile 
others of the people, learning of the condition of things, 
joined in the battle to the ultimate and utter discomfiture 
of the Midianites, and the destruction of the vast 
majority of their hosts, including their leaders. 

Our Captain, the Lord, has given special instructions 
to those whom he will specially use in the conflict 
of evil now in progress. Each one shall follow the 
example of the Captain of our salvation. First, he shall 
blow upon the trumpet, representing the proclamation 
of the truth, and proclaim that the sword of the spirit 
of truth is of Jehovah and of his anointed Son; and 
secondly, they shall break their pitchers and let their 
light shine out. The pitchers represent our earthen 
vessels, and the breaking of them in order to let the 
light shine out signifies that to which we are exhorted 
by the Apostle, saying, "I beseech you, therefore, 
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your 
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, 
your reasonable service." We see how our Chief-Captain 
broke his earthen vessel; we see what a light 
streamed forth. Our highest ambition must be to follow 
his example, to walk in his steps, to lay down our 
lives for the brethren as he laid down his life for us. 
Meantime the blowing of the trumpet is to progress 
as well as the shouting in the name of Jehovah, our 



Captain, and the sword of the spirit of truth is to be 
wielded. The result will be victory; the enemies of the 
Lord will be overwhelmed. 

But many others than the little flock will be associated 
in the work of overthrow, though theirs will be a 
special work as specially chosen instruments of the 
Lord. Now is the time for response to the call of our 
Captain; now is the time for standing the tests and 
being full of faith and confidence in the Lord that he 
is able to give us the victory. Now is the time for 
understanding the will of the Captain, following his 
example, and imitating him and laying down our lives 
for the brethren, and as sacrifices, holy and acceptable 
to God and our reasonable service. Now is the time 
for the proclamation and for publicly declaring our 
confidence in him who called us, who gave us the light, 
and who has privileged us to be his little flock; and 
very shortly will come the time for the fleeing of the 
enemy. Let us be faithful to our tests and opportunities, 
and thus be accounted worthy of a share in the 
service and the glory that shall follow. 



page 328 
Bibles, Testaments, Students' Helps, Etc. 

SUPPLIED AT WHOLESALE COST PRICES 



THIS LIST SUPERSEDES ALL PREVIOUS LISTS 

Bible publishers announce that, owing to increased cost of material 
and labor, they have found it necessary to advance the price of 
many of the cheaper grades. 

IN presenting our list of Bibles this year, we have dropped a number 
which we previously carried and have selected others which we 
think more desirable. We give below a list which, although not 
very large, we think will cover a range sufficiently broad to suit the 
wants of nearly all. However, should any of the friends desire a 
more complete list to select from, we shall be pleased to mail publishers' 
catalogues upon postal card application. 

First in importance among Bibles we rank the 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE 

described on next page. 



TEACHERS' BIBLES 



No. (Add Postage on these, 20c. each.) Pub. Our 

04403 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., round corners, Price Price 

red under gold, references, linen lined, 

7-1/4 x 5 $1.35 $ .94 

8301 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, illustrated, full teachers' helps, references, 

linen, 7-3/4 x 5-1/4 1.45 1.00 

(Add Postage on these, 26c. each.) 

8701 Long Primer, French Morocco, div. cir., red 
under gold, helps, references, concordance, 
illustrated, linen, 8-1/2 x 6 1.95 1.33 

8702 Same as 8701, leather lined 2.35 1.58 

COMBINATION TEACHERS' BIBLES 

These Bibles show the variations of the Revised Version at the 
foot of each page. Otherwise they are ordinary "Teachers' Bibles," 
with maps, concordance, etc., illustrated. 
(Add Postage on these, 28c each.) 
610 Bourgeois, French Seal, div. cir., red under 

gold, 8 x 6 x 1-3/4 5.00 1.35 

614 Same as 610, leather lined 6.00 1.63 

LINEAR TEACHERS' BIBLES 

Hitherto these Bibles have been sold by Subscription Agents 
only. Their special feature, differentiating from other Teachers' 
Bibles, is that they show the readings of the Common and Revised 
Versions side by side in the same line, self -pronouncing. 
(Add Postage on these, 30c each.) 
350 Small Pica, French Seal, red under gold, full 

teachers' helps, 8-3/4 x 6 x 1-1/2 6.00 2.10 

360 Small Pica, Levant Morocco, kid lined, otherwise 
same as 350 10.00 4.25 

POCKET BIBLES 

(Add Postage on these, 15c each.) 
01 153 Ruby, French Morocco, round cor., red under 

gold, div. cir., text only, 5-1/2 x 3-7/8 x 1-1/8... .95 .63 
01327 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, text and maps, 6x3-3/8 x 1-1/4 1.20 .78 

01329 Same as 01327, leather lined to edge 1.60 1.05 

194 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, text, 5-7/8 x 4 x 1-1/4 1.10 .75 

INDIA PAPER POCKET BIBLES 

"Mite" Bible (the smallest Bible.) 
093x Venetian Morocco, div. cir., gilt edges with 

magnifying glass, 1-3/4 x 1-1/4 x 5/8 1.00 .75 

(Add Postage on these, 8c each.) 
01 103 Diamond, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, text only, 4-1/2 x 2-1/2 x 1/2 1.40 .98 

01112 Persian Morocco, leather lined to edge, otherwise 
as 01103 2.00 1.35 



01157x Ruby, French Morocco, div. cir., leather lined, 

red under gold, text only, 5-5/8 x 3-7/8 x 9-16 2.00 1.35 

03029x Pearl, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather lined, silk 

sewed, red under gold, references, 5-1/8x3-7/8x5/8.. 3.25 2.15 

031 14x Ruby, Persian Levant, div. cir., leather lined, 

silk sewed, red under gold, references, 5-5/8x4x3/4. 3.25 2.15 
(Add Postage for these, 4c each.) 

0612 Diamond, Persian Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, red under gold, text only, 3-3/4x2-1/2x7/8... 2.25 1.55 

02002x Brilliant, Persian Morocco, div. cir., leather 
lined, red under gold, maps (smallest reference 
Bible made), 3-5/8 x 2-1/2 x 5/8 2.50 1.70 

INDIA PAPER BIBLES 

(Add Postage for these, 15c each.) 

8635 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, references, maps, 7 x 4-3/4 x 5/8 1.75 1.13 

8636 French Seal, leather lined, otherwise as 8635 3.00 2.14 

9635 Brevier, large face, French Morocco, div. cir., 

red under gold, references, 7-1/8 x 5 x 1 2.75 1.90 

9636 French Seal, silk sewn, leather lined, otherwise 
as 9635 4.00 2.85 

03265x Minion, Levant Morocco, div. cir., calf lined 
silk sewed, red under gold (thinnest minion 
reference Bible), 6-7/8 x 4-3/4 x 5/8 4.25 2.85 

THUMB INDEX ON A BIBLE, 25c EXTRA 

INDIA PAPER BIBLES-(Continued) 

03274x Minion, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather lined, silk 

sewed, red under gold, references, index, concordance 
and maps, 6-7/8 x 4-7/8 x 7/8 4.50 3.00 

03554x Brevier, black face, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather 
lined, red under gold, references, index, self- 
pronouncing, concordance and maps, 8-1/8 x 
5-1/2 x 7/8 5.50 3.60 

0358 lx Long Primer, black face, same as 03554x, 7-3/4 x 
5-1/4 x 15-16 6.00 4.00 

08651/2xLong Primer, Levant, div. cir., calf lined, silk 
sewed, red under gold, teachers' helps, arranged 
as cyclopedic concordance, 7-3/4 x 5-1/4 x 
1-1/8 8.35 5.25 

OXFORD REVISED BIBLES (Amer. Com.) 

(Add Postage on these, 25c each.) 
3750 Brevier, Cloth, round cor., red edges, maps, 

8x5-5/8 1.00 .70 

3752 Brevier, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, 8 x 5-5/8 2.00 1.30 

AMERICAN STANDARD REVISED BIBLE 

(Add Postage on these, 20c each.) 



160 Bourgeois, Cloth, references 1.00 .80 

172 Bourgeois, Egyptian Seal, references, red under 

gold, div. cir 2.00 1.60 

(Add Postage on these, 30c each.) 

260 Long Primer, Cloth, references, 8-3/4 x 6-3/4 1.50 1.15 

272 Long Primer, Egyptian Seal, references, red 

under gold, div. cir., 8-3/4 x 6-3/4 3.00 2.25 

(Add Postage, 15 cents each.) 
Minion, black faced, reference edition, self-pronouncing, a 
fine edition— 4-3/4 x 7. 

152 Egyptian Seal, div. cir., red under gold 1.75 1.38 

154 Persian Levant, leather lined to edge, otherwise 

same as 152 3.25 2.35 

(Add Postage, 12 cents each.) 

152x India paper edition of 152 2.75 1.97 

154x India paper edition of 154 4.00 2.81 

LAP BIBLES FOR THE AGED-References, Light 
Weight, Large Print 

(Add Postage on these, 25c each.) 

2002 Pica, Cloth, red edges, 9-1/4 x 6-1/2 x 1-1/4 2.00 .90 

2014 Pica, French Seal, limp, size same as 2002 2.75 1.43 

2022 Pica, French Seal, div. cir., size same as 2002 3.50 1.75 

2232 Arabian Morocco, grained leather lining to 

edge, silk lined band and marker 6.00 2.80 

CHILDREN'S ILLUSTRATED BIBLES 

(Add Postage on these, 1 lc each.) 
216 Minion, French Morocco, limp, red under gold, 

5-3/4x3-5/8 1.15 .82 

215B Minion, French Morocco, references, div. cir., 

red under gold, 7-1/4x5-1/4x7/8 1.50 .85 

TESTAMENTS 

(Add Postage on these, 3c each.) 
21 13 Nonpareil, French Morocco, limp, gold title, side 

and back, gold edges (vest-pocket edition), 

4-3/8x2-7/8x1/2 40 .22 

21 13P Same as above, with Psalms 50 .27 

2115 Same as 2113, with div. cir., and red under gold 56 .30 

21 15P Same as 2115, with Psalms 66 .35 

013RL Same as 2113, with words of our Lord in red 

letters 60 .33 

015RLSameas013RL, with div. cir., red under gold 80 .42 

2142x Nonpareil, French Seal, limp, grained leather 

lining, red under gold, gold roll (thin), 4-3/8 x 

2-3/4x3/8 85 .43 

2142PX Same as 2142x, with Psalms 1.00 .50 

010 Diamond, Venetian Morocco, limp, gold edges, 

3-3/4x2-1/4x1/4 50 .35 

014 Diamond, Arabian Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, red under gold, India paper, 3-3/4x2-1/4x1/4. .90 .65 
(Add Postage on these, 5c each.) 



287 Brevier, Roan leather, flexible, gold edges, with 
Psalms, 6-1/4x4-1/2 42 .42 

NEW TESTAMENTS FOR THE AGED 

(Add Postage on these, 10c each.) 

212 Small Pica, Roan, square cor., 5-3/4x8-1/4 45 .45 

283 Same as above, with Psalms, 8-1/4x5-1/2x3/4 50 .50 

REVISED TESTAMENTS 

0100 Brevier, Cloth, red edges, 16 mo., including 
postage .23 

TEXT BIBLES 

(Postage, 7c.) 
178 Agate type, cloth, red edges, 4 x 5-3/4 17 .17 

(Postage, 12c.) 
131 Nonpareil type, cloth, red edges, 5-1/4 x 7-1/4 25 .25 

page 329 

CONCORDANCES AND OTHER BIBLE STUDY HELPS 

First in this list we mention the several volumes of 

"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURE" SERIES 

—referring inquirers to the second page of each issue of this journal 
for prices, etc. We commend also, as aids, the following publications 
by other presses, which we supply at specially low prices because of 
the assistance they will lend to the study of God's Word. We mention 
these somewhat in the order in which they seem to us to be desirable 
aids. 

THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE 

We specially recommend this Bible 
for its smallness of size, lightness of weight 
and good-sized print, and above all for the 
helps to Bible students and teachers 
bound with it. Printed on India paper; 
excellent press work. It is a reference 
Bible, 4-1/2 x 6-3/4 and 3/4 inch thick. Its 
special feature distinguishing this Bible 
from all others is 

ITS B ERE AN BIBLE 
TEACHERS' MANUAL 

Parti. 

DAWN STUDIES COMMENTS 

Part II. 

INSTRUCTORS' GUIDE TEXTS 

Part III. 

BEREAN TOPICAL INDEX 



Part IV. 

DIFFICULT TEXTS EXPLAINED 

SPURIOUS PASSAGES NOTED 

PartV. 

INDEX TO SCRIPTURES TREATED 

at considerable length in 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

WHOLESALE PRICES 
IN ANY QUANTITY 

POSTAGE, 10 CENTS EACH 

No. W-138-So called French Seal, 
red under gold, round cornered, 

divinity circuit $1.38 

No. W- 150— Same as above, linen 

lined 1.50 

No. W-300-Best Genuine Sealskin, 

calf lined, silk sewed 3.00 

Patent index 25 cents extra, but we do 
not advise this on so small a book. 
The above very special price was secured 
only by our placing a very large order— 
10,000 copies. This is probably the 
largest-sized single order ever placed for 
India paper Bibles. 

DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 

FOR THE HOUSEHOLD OF FArTH. 

This publication, we believe, will be in 
great demand as soon as known. It is a 
text-book for each day in the year— and 
good year by year continuously. 

But this is more than a text-book; it 
has an appropriate comment under each 
text selected from the columns of back 
issues of ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

Our new edition of the "Manna" contains the same texts 
and comments as the former one; but it has twice as many 
pages. Every alternate leaf is blank ruled, for use as an 
Autograph and Birthday record. It is printed on fine bond paper 
and bound in handsome dark blue cloth. It would be well worth 
$1.00 or more, in any book store. 

NEW PRICES, WHOLESALE AND RETAIL. 

The new "Manna" will be sold by Manna Colporteurs and others 
at 50 cents each (60 cents when gotten by mail or prepaid express). 
The wholesale rates, open to any TOWER reader, are as follows 
cash with order:— 

1 copy, postpaid $ .35 

10 or more copies, by express, prepaid, each 30 

10 or more copies, by freight or express, charges collect, each. .20 



We, of course, prefer the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES to be colporteured; 
but a good follow-up work can be done with "Manna" 
by those who cannot do the regular work with the STUDIES. 

We hope this little book will find a place at every breakfast 
table; and that spiritual refreshment may thus be enjoyed with the 
natural food, stimulating thankfulness to the Giver of all Good and 
thus inducing the peace of God and favoring both spiritual and natural 
health and well-being. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT 

This very valuable work, published under the author's copyright 
by Fowler & Wells Co., New York City, has been sold by them at 
$4 in cloth and $5 in half leather binding. For several years a friend, 
an earnest Bible student, desirous of assisting the readers of our 
Society's publications, has supplied them through us at a greatly 
reduced price; now he has purchased the copyright and plates from 
the Fowler & Wells Co., and presented the same to our Society as a 
gift, under our assurance that the gift will be used for the furthering 
of the Truth to the extent of our ability, by such a reduction of price 
as will permit the poor of the Lord's flock to have this help in the 
study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICES.-These will be sold with ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER only. In cloth binding $1.50 (6s. 3d.)— includes postage and 
one year's subscription, new or renewal, to Z.W.T. On thin paper, 
in full morocco leather, divinity circuit, red under gold edges, silk 
sewed, leather lined, $2.50 (10s. 6d.)— includes postage and one year's 
subscription to Z.W.T. 

THE TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENT 

This is the ordinary Common Version in cloth binding. As 
footnotes it gives the reading of the three oldest Greek MSS., Sinaiticus, 
Vaticanus and Alexandrine, wherever these differ from the Common 
Version. This is a very valuable little work, published in Europe, 
which we specially import for the benefit of our readers. Price, 50c, 
including postage. 

LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD 
TESTAMENT 

This is the standard translation amongst English reading 
Hebrews, by one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is a 
valuable aid in critical study of the Old Testament. Our special 
price, in leather binding, including postage, is $1.10. 

ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE 
SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 
A valuable work for all critical students. Price, in cloth binding, $5, 
including postage. We are not permitted by the publishers to cut 
this price; but may and do give postage free and give besides a 
premium of any four volumes of the SCRIPTURE STUDIES series in cloth 
binding with each Concordance, or six volumes if purchaser pays 



the expressage. 

THE EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE TO THE 
SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Strong (Methodist). 
This is also an able work and useful in critical study. It has some 
advantages over Young's; after getting used to it we prefer it. 
Special reduced prices,— in cloth binding, $3; half leather, $5. 
Carriage prepaid, 65c. extra. 

CRUDEN'S CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

A valuable work, but scarcely necessary to those who have either 
one of the above mentioned. English only. Cloth binding, $1, 
postage included. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY 

This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's work. 
It is a large volume of 1020 pages. In cloth binding, $1.30, including 
postage. 

"BIBLE TALKS IN SIMPLE LANGUAGE" 

This is the best book of its kind we have ever seen. It presents 
the Bible stories in simple, but not childish language, and seems 
remarkably free from the bad theology so common in this class of 
books. All Christian parents should have a Sunday Bible lesson 
with their children, and this book furnishes interesting topics, to 
which may be added as much concordant "Present Truth" as the age 
of the children will justify. Parents are responsible for their children's 
training in theology as well as morals. This will assist you in 
the discharge of this duty, and thus be a blessing to yourself as well as 
to your children. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and 
corners, gilt edges. A subscription book at $3. Our special price 
75 cents, plus 25 cents postage. 

SCRIPTURE STUDIES-INDIA PAPER 

Calls for SCRIPTURE STUDIES divided into small portions, light, 
convenient for the pocket, that could be read on the cars, etc., led 
us to prepare an India-paper edition. The entire volume is on this 
very fine paper reduced to three-eighths of an inch in thickness and 
about four ounces in weight. [The type is exactly the same size as in 
the regular editions.] It is a beauty. Leather covers, gold edges. 
Its cost, with postage, is raised to 75c each for the first three volumes 
and 85c each for the remainder per volume, at which price it is 
supplied to WATCH TOWER subscribers. 

We regret inability to promise these definitely, as we are experiencing 
great trouble in securing the India paper. We hope to 
have the last three volumes by Dec, 1907, and the preceding three 
about Feb., 1908. 



Specimen Lines of Various Sizes of Type Referred to on 
Reverse Page: 

This line is Brilliant type. This line is Diamond type. 

This line is Pearl type. This line is Ruby type. 

This line is Nonpareil type. This line is Emerald Minion. 

This line is Emerald type. 

This line is Minion type. 

This line is Brevier type. 

This line is Bourgeois type. 

This line is Long Primer type. 

This line is Small Pica type. 



R4083 : page 331 

EACH SHALL GIVE ACCOUNT TO GOD 

--ROMANS 14: 12-23. -NOVEMBER 24.- 

Golden Text:— "Judge this rather, that no man put a 
stumbling-block or an occasion to fall in his brother's way." 
—Romans 14:13. 

AGAIN the International Sunday-School Committee 
requests Christian people in general to 
consider the evils of intemperance— the importance 
of temperance in all things on the part of 
those professing godliness. Such lessons seem to be 
all the more important when we perceive that the rush, 
the push, the hurry, the consumption of nervous energy 
on the part of people in general, seems to be causing an 
increase of nervous and mental disorders and an enlargement 
of the lists of the insane. Certainly no one 
claiming benevolence of heart and soundness of judgment 
could in any sense of the word advocate or encourage 
intemperance, realizing that it is a fruitful 
source of crime, depravity, immorality, etc. We note 
with pleasure the spread of local option and total prohibition 
in many of the southern States. Not that such 
restraints are the highest ideals of liberty, but that- 
seeing the necessity for the restraints— those who love 
liberty are willing to share the bondage for the sake of 
their fellow-citizens, to whom full liberty is admittedly 
injurious. Either climatic variations or financial and 
social changes account for the fact that there was less 



tendency to drunkenness in the days of the Lord and 
the apostles than there is now, and probably for this 

R4084 : page 332 

reason the Scriptures have less to say respecting this, 
which is one of the chiefest evils in our day. 

But no amount of interest in the temperance question 
should permit us to read into the divine Word what 
was not intended by the inspired writers— though we 
may properly enough draw inferences and conclusions. 
First of all we must take the lesson provided for us as 
we find it. It is a part of the Apostle's discussion of 
liberty and law, custom and conscience, on questions 
that were prominent at the time of writing. The Jews 
were accustomed to observe their Law with great exactness, 
and very properly so. Consequently it seemed 
a very peculiar lesson for them to be obliged to learn, 
that they were no longer under the Law, hoping for 
eternal life through the observance of it, but were under 
grace, hoping for life eternal by the forgiveness 
of their sins through the merit of the sacrifice of 
Christ. The Jews at Rome, for instance, had experienced 
trials and difficulties for a long time in their endeavor 
to observe the Law— the keeping of the Jewish 
Sabbath Day, the avoidance of meats that had been 
strangled or offered to idols. When these accepted 
Christ they had great difficulty in realizing that the 
Law Covenant under which they had been seeking to 
please God was at an end, and that they must seek new 
principles for their guidance in respect to worship, 
service, self-control. Naturally enough some minds 
grasped the situation more quickly than did others. 
Some accepted Christ and felt all the previous bondage 
to the Jewish ritual; others saw more broadly that 
Christ had become the end of the Law Covenant to 
everyone that believeth, and that the Law which he had 
instituted had indeed the spirit of the ten commandments 
and the Jewish ritual but not the letter of them, 
and that to him that is in Christ Jesus there is no Law 
except that of love: love to God supremely, love to the 
brethren and love to our neighbors— a law seen to be 
very comprehensive indeed when studied, but on its 
surface quite different from the Law of commandments 
given to the house of servants. 

"The New Commandment," or new law of love, left 
much more to the discretion and judgment of the individual 
than did the Law commandments given at Sinai 
and written in stones. With the latter there was no 
discretion, but with the former responsibility for decision 
rests largely with the individual and his own 
conscience. Hence some, reasoning broadly, said to 
themselves, "The Jewish Law Covenant being at an 
end its restrictions are no longer in force where they 
would clash with the law of love and the spirit of 
a sound mind: I may, therefore, eat such food as I find 



will be helpful to me, and am no longer forbidden to 
eat certain kinds." Further, as the mind expanded 
and grew it was realized that the idols were not gods 
at all, and hence that the custom of the people to offer 
the meat to idols before it was sold for consumption 
had really done the meat no harm, and hence it might be 
eaten without any disrespect to God if he were acknowledged 
and thanked therefor. 

CONSIDERING THE WEAKER BRETHREN 

In reasoning on this question the Apostle leaves 
no room for doubt as to his conception of the right or 
wrong of the question at issue. He agreed heartily with 
the enlightened few that an idol was nothing more than 
a piece of human handiwork, and that therefore the 
offering of meat before it as a sacrifice amounted to 
nothing and did not injure the meat any more than it 
did the idol good. The Apostle would, therefore, feel 
free to eat such meat if it came convenient to him, even 
though he might have preferred to have such as 
had not been so offered. But while endorsing the position 
of the more intelligent he sympathized with the 
less intelligent, realizing that with many of them it 
would require considerable time to surmount their 
natural prejudices and give their consciences the 
proper and sure footing on the subject. In other words, 
all Jews would need education along this line, and 
some could take the education more rapidly than others, 
but the former should be sympathetic with the latter 
and to a large extent should defer to them. 

"BEFORE THE JUDGMENT SEAT OF CHRIST" 

Our lesson opens in the midst of this argument 
with the declaration, "So then each one of us should 
give an account of himself to God." By these words the 
Apostle seeks to impress the thought that the weaker 
brethren are not to judge and censure the others, 
neither the stronger brethren to judge and censure the 
weaker. All are to remember that God is the Judge, 
and that each one needs to criticise himself rather than 
to criticise his brother— to make sure that he himself 
has a conscience void of offence toward God and man. 
Each one so doing may feel sure eventually of the divine 
approval. The same thought is given in a preceding 
verse (v. 10), which reads, "For we shall all stand before 
the judgment-seat of Christ." Each one of the 
Church is on trial, and our Lord Jesus as the Father's 
representative criticises and examines the various 
members of his Body, not with a view to cutting them 
off, but, on the contrary, for their aid and encouragement, 
assistance and instruction and preparation for 
the Kingdom. As we are now before the judgment-seat 
of Christ, so during the Millennial Age the whole world 
of mankind will be before his judgment-seat and be 



separated into two classes, sheep and goats. During 
the world's judgment the overcomers of this Gospel 
Age, the brethren, the Bride, will be with the Lord in 
his Millennial throne as he promised, "To him that 
overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne"; 
and again, "To him that overcometh will I grant power 
over the nations"; and again, "Know ye not that the 
saints shall judge the world"?— in conjunction with 
their Lord. -Rev. 3:21; Rev. 2:26; I Cor. 6:2. 

But not only are we now standing before the judgment-seat 
of Christ, and day by day rendering up a 
measure of account in respect to our faithfulness, loyalty, 
etc., but eventually at the close of this age the decisions 
will be given by him as he pictures in the parable 
of the young nobleman. On his return from a far 

R4084 : page 333 

country, invested with full power and authority, he will 
give to every one in his Church according as his work 
has been— according to his faithfulness in the use of 
his talents, privileges, opportunities— according to his 
faithfulness and obedience to the "New Commandment" 
given to all, that they should love one another as he 
had loved them. Then every man's work shall be made 
manifest, however misunderstood in the present time. 
Some highly esteemed amongst men will be shown to 
be less esteemed of the Lord, and some little esteemed 
amongst men will be granted high honors in the Kingdom. 
Therefore, we are not to gauge ourselves entirely 
by what our fellow-men might think, but to have special 
respect to the Lord and his judgment of us. Hence 
the Apostle argues, Let us not, therefore, judge [condemn] 
one another any more, but let our judgment 
rather turn to ourselves, to see that nothing in our conduct 
toward our brethren shall be in any sense of the 
word contrary to our Master's new law of love. Watching 
that law carefully, and applying it to ourselves, we 
will be hindered from any course of conduct which 
would tend to stumble a brother; and such a love for 
the brethren as would lead us to the renouncement of 
our own liberties where necessary would certainly be 
pleasing in the sight of the Lord and the heavenly 
Father, and assure us a place and a higher honor than 
would otherwise be ours. 

"FOR WHOM CHRIST DIED" 

The Apostle then assures his hearers of his own 
conviction that there is no such thing as legally unclean 
or forbidden food from the Lord's standpoint for those 
who are New Creatures in Christ. Love for the brethren, 
however, should lead us to renounce to some extent our 
own liberties and preferences lest our exercise of liberty 
might do injury to some for whom Christ died. His 
argument is that if we have the love of Christ we will 



hesitate to do anything that would wound or injure or 

cause a stumbling of conscience to any member of the 

Body. If Christ so loved them that his death was made 

available to their salvation, we should so love them as 

to be willing to cooperate for their assistance and do 

nothing that might stumble or hinder them. He argued 

further that having taken a stand for the Lord and 

for righteousness we should be careful that our outward 

conduct would conform to this in as large a degree 

as possible, and that this would mean that we 

should do nothing that to others would seem to be unrighteous. 

"Let not your good be evil spoken of," 

rather exercise yourself along such lines of goodness 

and in such a manner as will have the approval of all 

who have respect for religious things. An application 

of this principle today would seem to be that we who 

have a clearer knowledge than have some others of the 

meaning of the Sabbath, for instance, should so conduct 

ourselves in the observance of Sunday as would 

bring no disrespect to the Lord nor to his Word. A 

proper time and occasion may occur for explaining our 

R4085 : page 333 

higher thought respecting the significance of the Sabbath, 
but meanwhile let us reverentially keep Sunday, 
not as under the bondage of the Law, but as a great 
privilege and opportunity for fellowship in spiritual 
things, better than any we could ourselves devise. The 
same principle will apply to other matters or outward 
manifestations in which reverence for God and holy 
things may have a bearing upon our influence with 
others. Reverence for all good things is surely appropriate 
to all who love the Lord and love his righteousness. 
Increasing knowledge would make us increasingly 
reverential, not only in heart, but also in outward 
demonstration. 

"THE KINGDOM OF GOD IS NOT MEAT AND DRINK, BUT 
RIGHTEOUSNESS AND PEACE AND JOY IN THE 
HOLY SPIRIT" 

This statement by the Apostle has been grievously 
misunderstood and misconstrued by some, and interpreted 
to teach that the Kingdom of God is not a real 
Kingdom to come, with Jesus as the King, the Church 
as the joint-heirs in the Kingdom, and the world as 
the subjects, to bless, rule and uplift during the 
Millennial Age. It is used to oppose this thought, the 
claim being that when the words Kingdom of God are 
used throughout the Scriptures they signify not a real 
Kingdom but a rule of righteousness, joy, peace, in the 
hearts of believers. This is a serious misinterpretation 
of the Apostle's thought. His argument may be paraphrased 
thus: Abstain, dear brethren, from the use of 
your liberty in Christ wherever you find that it would 



stumble the conscience of another or be to his hindrance 
in any manner. Consider not that the advantages of 
being counted in as members of Christ's prospective 
Kingdom consists in these liberties to eat and drink 
what you choose, but rather consider that the blessings 
we enjoy in the present time as members of that prospective 
Kingdom are the peace of heart, the joy of heart, 
the righteousness of the Lord and his holy Spirit. These 
are the blessings of the present time, and not the mere 
liberties in respect to food. Hence we may readily renounce 
these liberties if they interfere with the advantage 
of others, and we will thereby find ourselves increasing 
in love and joy and peace of the holy Spirit by 
reason of such sacrifices. The Church indeed is the 
Kingdom of God in an embryotic sense— in the sense 
that each member is here being instructed and prepared 
for the duties and privileges of the Kingdom to 
come, especially being developed and tested along the 
lines of his own fitness for a share in that Kingdom. 
But all of this emphasizes the fact expressed in our 
Lord's prayer that God's Kingdom is to come, and, 
coming, will bring about in the world that condition of 
things in which eventually God's will will be done on 
earth as it is now being done in heaven. 

Continuing this thought the Apostle urges (vs. 18,19) 
that such service, such self-denials for Christ's sake, 
are well pleasing to God, and will also have the approval 
of right-thinking men, and that all the Lord's followers 
therefore should thus be making for peace and 
those things and conditions whereby they may edify, 
strengthen and build one another up. What a precious 

R4085 : page 334 

lesson is here! Oh, that all of the Lord's dear people 
could catch the spirit of the Apostle's exhortation and 
see how beautiful it must be in God's sight that his 
people should emulate the example of their Redeemer 
in their willingness to deny themselves for the sake of 
helping others. With this spirit prevailing largely in a 
company of the Lord's followers, assuredly there would 
be a great blessing and great upbuilding of one another, 
a great strengthening of character and great assistance 
one to the other, and great absence of puffed-up 
superiority and disdain for those unable to see and appreciate 
every feature of the divine plan. 

"The things that make for peace." Oh, how blessed 
the congregation of the Lord's people which has a 
goodly number of such followers of Christ, especially 
if they be among the leading ones! How their love and 
peace and unity of spirit would assist them to be kind 
and generous toward others and helpful— not by ignoring 
the principles of truth, not by putting the light under 
a bushel, but by presenting the Truth in so kind 
and gentle a manner that all who are of the Truth 
would appreciate it and be strengthened thereby. How 



potent the Apostle's argument, "Overthrow not for 
meat's sake the work of God"— do not jeopardize the 
interests of either the Church or of an individual in it 
merely for the sake of preserving a non-essential. As 
the Apostle exhorted Timothy, "Condescend to men of 
low estate," condescend to the weakest and humblest 
of the Lord's true followers; come down to them in 
speech and in conduct that you may be the abler assistant 
of those who need the uplifting and enlightening 
influence of the Truth in the spirit. 

"ALL THINGS INDEED ARE PURE" 

We are not to understand these words of the Apostle 
to indicate that nothing is impure or unclean. Quite 
to the contrary. He has elsewhere pointed out many 
impurities of thought and act, and advised the Church 
against these. Here his words are confined to the subject 
in hand— nothing indeed is unclean— no kind of 
meat. He proceeds, however, to point out where wrong 
might be done even in eating of that which is cleanest, 
most desirable, or in the exercise of any other liberty- 
it is evil to the one whose conscience would be injured 
by it. In a word, conscience is one of our most valuable 
assets; according to our obedience to conscience 
will be our standing before the Lord. If, therefore, we 
violate our own consciences in anything we do, we are 
doing ourselves injury; or if by word or example we influence 
others to violate their consciences, however 
harmless a thing in itself it may be, we are doing them 
a serious injury, the outcome of which we cannot fully 
estimate, for it might go on to great and greater ungodliness 
and eventuate in the Second Death. Hence, 
it is good not to eat flesh nor to drink wine nor to do 
anything whereby thy brother might be stumbled or 
offended or made weak. 

FAITH VERSUS CONDEMNATION 

"The faith which thou hast, have thou to thyself 
before God." That is to say, our outward conduct need 
not necessarily show all the depth of our knowledge 
and faith and liberty. God knows the heart, he sees 
the progress we have made, and he will be the better 
pleased with us if for the sake of the brethren we do 
not declare all our liberties at a time and a place when 
they might prove injurious to others of his dear family. 
The Apostle proceeds to point out that if we be 
critical in examining our own conduct and motives we 
may find something therein very similar in kind to that 
which we are disposed to criticize in others, though 
perhaps in relation to a different subject. His words 
are, "Happy is he that condemneth not himself in that 
which he alloweth." For instance, he who judges 
another, allows or concludes that that other's motives are 
inspired by pride or ambition; if he turns his criticism 



upon himself may sometimes find something of this 
kind in his own heart. He who allows that his neighbor 
is a slanderer and condemns him for it should turn 
his criticism upon himself to see that his own words 
are always above reproach— never upon the slanderer. 
Happy and blessed the person who, seeing faults in 
others, after careful examination finds himself to be 
entirely free from these. Such certainly are exceptional 
characters. 

"HE THAT DOUBTETH IS DAMNED" 

With the wrong conception before the mind the 
words of the Apostle sound extremely harsh, "He that 
doubteth is damned if he eat." The idea conveyed by 
these words to many minds laboring under the delusions 
of the "dark ages" is that the person who eats 

R4086 : page 334 

meat clean in itself but thinking the matter to be wrong, 

thus defiling his own conscience by eating, would be 

damned— sent to an eternity of torture. But no such 

thought was in the Apostle's mind nor could it be properly 

understood in his words. He there emphasized the fact 

that any person eating meat, however clean, but thinking 

it to be a sin, a crime, to eat it, would as a consequence 

be under condemnation for having violated his 

conscience, his judgment of the Lord's will, and this 

would serve as a cloud to separate between himself and 

the Lord, who judges the heart and not merely the outward 

conduct. Such an alienation might ultimately 

lead to the loss of the great prize of our high calling, 

and thus into the Great Company, or possibly eventually 

into the Second Death. The Apostle explains why 

this condemnation would hold, saying, "because he eateth 

not of faith"— not in harmony with his conscience— 

and whatsoever is not in harmony with faith and conscience 

is a sin. The principle here applied to the 

question of using or not using spirituous liquors would 

certainly be profitable to all of God's people: the person 

who uses them believing them to be sinful is violating 

his conscience; the person who uses them knowing 

that another will be affected thereby unfavorably is 

violating the law of love, "Love thy neighbor as thyself." 

The matter becomes a very important one in 

our day, more than ever before, because today the 

question of conscience in the matter of using liquors is 

more pronounced than ever before. 

R4086 : page 335 

The following article, clipped from the Literary 
Digest, is translated from the French, and will, we 
trust, be both interesting and instructive to many in 
connection with this lesson: 



"UNTO THE THIRD AND FOURTH GENERATION" 

"One cannot be, with impunity, the son of a drunkard" 
—so says Dr. A. Joffroy, a French physician, who 
writes on "Alcohol and Alcoholism" in the Revue 
Scientifique (Paris, July 13). Dr. Joffroy's article reads 
in places like an old-fashioned temperance tract, but it 
is in reality a pitiless scientific statement of facts. 
Diseases, the author points out, are of two kinds, those 
that attack persons in normal health and those that 
touch only those who are predisposed to them. To 
create such morbid predispositions alcohol is eminently 
suited, and in this way it strikes down not only those 
who abuse it, but their descendants, often ceasing its 
ravages only when it has obliterated a whole family. 
We can quote here only a small part of what Dr. Joffroy 
says. First comes his division of diseases into the two 
categories mentioned above. We read: 

"In the case of some diseases (scarlet fever, smallpox, 
plague, etc.) the pathogenic agent produces the 
specific malady in every one exposed to contagion, 
whatever may have been his previous condition of 
health. But, on the other hand, there is a whole class 
of diseases that attack only such as are predisposed. 
Of 100 infants fed in the same way, one or two will become 
abnormally fat, because, for example, the father 
had gout or the mother diabetes.... 

'"But hereditary predisposition exists also with 
nervous diseases, and alcoholism is one of the most 
effective means of creating such predisposition, as well 
as developing it where it exists. To have cholera or 
rheumatism, for instance, one must have obese, nervous 
alcoholic parents. A man may be seized with shaking 
palsy, following some violent emotion,... but heredity 
must be present to facilitate the action, and alcoholism 
is generally found to be at the bottom of this 
heredity.' 

'"In mental diseases,' Dr. Joffroy goes on to say, 
'the role of heredity is greater still. We may almost say 
that predisposition is absolutely necessary for these.' 
The author rejects the classification made by some 
authors who divide mental diseases into those of the 
normal and abnormal brain. The former, he thinks, 
do not exist, a diseased brain being always abnormal. 
Even poisons that act on the brain select those who are 
predisposed, and this is eminently true of alcohol itself. 
Predispositions (generally alcoholic) determine 
the special form of drunkenness and explain why wine 
makes one man gay, another sad, another quarrelsome. 
Likewise, hereditary predisposition explains why alcoholism 
results, with one man, in an ulcer of the stomach, 
with another in cirrhosis of the liver, with others 
in paralysis of one or another set of nerves. The writer 
continues: 

'"On epilepsy the action of alcohol is quite clearly 



manifest; sometimes a subject plainly epileptic from 

infancy takes to drink at about 20, with the result that 

his attacks increase in violence at each excess; sometimes 

a man of thirty to forty years who has had only 

slight seizures in childhood begins to have the characteristic 

attacks, which disappear or lessen when he becomes 

abstinent.... 

'"In order that I may be clearly understood I will 
repeat the definition that I have given elsewhere of incipient 
degeneracy. "The totality of organic defects, 
of hereditary or acquired origin, which, by lessening 
organic resistance, create new morbid aptitudes and 
make causes pathogenic when of themselves they would 
be powerless to injure a normal organism." 

'"And I repeat again that, in the creation of these 
new morbid aptitudes, this hereditary predisposition, 
which dominates almost all pathology, alcoholism 
stands preeminent, doing more harm and counting 
more victims than tuberculosis. Alcoholism, in fact, 
not only affects the individual, but its effects are continued 
to his descendants. One cannot be, with impunity, 
the son of an alcoholic. Alcoholism begins with 
the father and strikes down his children, and generally 
its action continues, until, in the fourth or fifth generation, 
it has destroyed the family. But before this final 
result is reached, the alcoholics and their descendants 
are, according to circumstances, hurled into disease, 
madness or crime, filling our hospitals, asylums and 
jails, as I have already said. 

'"Blind indeed are those who, ignorant of the dangers 
of alcohol, see in it only a source of revenue!'"— 
—Translation made for the Literary Digest. 



R4085 : page 335 

AN INTERESTING QUESTION ANSWERED 

QUESTION.-In Acts 20:28 the reading is peculiar, and 
seems to imply that the Father, and not the Son, was the 
purchaser of the race; yet this disagrees with other Scriptures. 
How should we understand the matter? 

ANSWER.— The Diaglott translation is very much better 
than that of our common version, and reads, "which he hath 
purchased with the blood of his own"— "Son" being 
understood. 

The question may still arise with some, In what way 
did the Father purchase the race? We answer, In the 
same way that he has been the author of the entire plan of 
salvation. All that our dear Redeemer has done for us has 
been the carrying out of the great plan of Jehovah, purposed 
in himself before the foundation of the world. It is in harmony 
with this that the Father declares himself the Redeemer, 
"Jehovah thy Redeemer, and the Holy One of Israel." 
(Isa. 41:14; 43:14; 54:5.) Again we read, "Jehovah is my 



Shepherd." (Psalm 23:1.) In like manner the Father is 
the Creator, although all things were made by the Son (as 
the Father's agent) "and without him was not anything made 
that was made."— John 1:3. 



page 337 

SEMI-MONTHLY 