‘Out of the Heart’s Abundance’
HUMANS usually cannot keep good news to themselves, can they? They feel compelled to tell others. This is especially true when the good news can be a real blessing to the hearers. That is why Jehovah’s Christian witnesses, with hearts filled with appreciation for the precious promises of God, are moved to share Bible truth with others. It is just as Jesus Christ said: ‘Out of the heart’s abundance the mouth speaks.’​—Luke 6:45.
Because of making good use of opportunities that present themselves in daily life to discuss the Scriptures, many Witnesses have had the joy of seeing others take their stand for true worship.
For example, a Witness was doing some shopping at a crowded supermarket in California. At the meat counter the woman next to her remarked: “My! The price of meat is so high. I don’t see how anyone with a family can afford to buy meat.” The Witness replied: “A lot of families can’t afford it. Many are going hungry today.” The woman agreed and noted that things were getting so bad she did not know where it was all going to end. Commenting on what happened afterward, the Witness writes:
“I told her many people felt the same way she did and were really concerned about the future. We discussed the fact that despite man’s efforts things do not improve but continually get worse.
“I continued: ‘I don’t know if you read your Bible very much, but I read mine all the time. According to Jesus’ words, these critical times are in fulfillment of Bible prophecy. Conditions are not going to get any better, but will even get worse.’ She thought for a moment, then said, ‘I’ve tried to read my Bible, but I just can’t understand it.’ I told her it was probably because most Bibles are written in archaic English and we don’t speak that way in this modern day. That is why I had gotten myself a Bible written in modern English.
“She asked if anyone could buy that Bible. I told her if she would like to have one, I just happened to have an extra one in my car that I could let her have. She was very pleased and said she would wait while I went to the car for it. When I got to the car I found I had placed my last copy.
“I remembered that another Witness lived about three blocks from the store. So I prayed all the way to his house that he would have a Bible. And he did.
“As it took longer than I had expected, I really did not think the woman would still be at the store when I got back. But she was waiting right where I had left her. I read to her from 2 Timothy 3, Matthew 24 and Luke 21. People were wheeling carts all around us as we were reading the Bible. Then she said she wished she knew her Bible like I did. So I asked if she would like to have me come to her home and help her to understand the Bible. She gave me her address, and I made arrangements to call at her home.”
A home Bible study was started with this woman. Today, as a baptized witness of Jehovah, she is making public expressions herself to others about her Bible-based hope. Truly there is good reason to use every opportunity to share the comforting message of the Bible with others. Does your heart move you to do so?

