Announcements
▪ Literature offer for July and August: Any of the following 32-page brochures may be used: Does God Really Care About Us?, Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, “Look! I Am Making All Things New,” Should You Believe in the Trinity?, The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, The Government That Will Bring Paradise, What Happens to Us When We Die?, What Is the Purpose of Life​—How Can You Find It?, and When Someone You Love Dies. The brochures A Book for All People, Our Problems​—Who Will Help Us Solve Them?, Spirits of the Dead​—Can They Help You or Harm You? Do They Really Exist?, and Will There Ever Be a World Without War? may be offered where appropriate. September: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? October: The Watchtower and Awake! magazines. Where interest is found on return visits, subscriptions may be offered.
▪ Starting in September, circuit overseers will give the public talk entitled “How True Christians Adorn Divine Teaching.”
▪ Since the annual meeting of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania will be held on Saturday, October 6, 2001, no tours will be conducted that day at the branch office facilities at Brooklyn, Patterson, and Wallkill, New York. Any who have planned to visit on that Saturday should reschedule their visit to another convenient time. No congregation literature requests will be processed for shipment or for pickup that day.
▪ Beginning with the July 15, 2001, issue, The Watchtower will be available in Sango as a semimonthly edition.
▪ New Publications Available:
Does Fate Rule Our Lives?​—Or Does God Hold Us Responsible? (for Muslims) (Tract No. 71)​—Portuguese
Does God Really Care About Us?​—Assyrian
Hellfire​—Is It Part of Divine Justice? (for Muslims) (Tract No. 74)​—English, Portuguese
Isaiah’s Prophecy​—Light for All Mankind I—​Cebuano, Turkish
Is There a Creator Who Cares About You?​—Macedonian
Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Who Are They? What Do They Believe?​—Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, Finnish, German, Japanese, Lithuanian, Norwegian, Serbian, Slovak, Slovenian, Swedish, Turkish, Ukrainian, Urdu
Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life​—Monokutuba, Welsh, Zande
Lasting Peace and Happiness​—How to Find Them—​Vietnamese
New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures​—Macedonian
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—Iloko, Tagalog
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (Large size)​—Korean
The Greatest Name (for Muslims) (Tract No. 72)​—English, Macedonian, Portuguese
Watch Tower Publications Index 1999​—Portuguese
Who Are Jehovah’s Witnesses? (for Muslims) (Tract No. 73)​—English, Portuguese, Sinhala
▪ New Audiocassettes Available:
The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived (eight cassettes in an album)​—Spanish

