Can You Serve Where There Is a Greater Need?
1 Have you ever contemplated moving to where there is a need for more Kingdom proclaimers? If invited to “step over . . . and help,” would you respond as did the apostle Paul? (Acts 16:9, 10) In many congregations, there is a need for spiritually mature families, pioneers to help cover the territory, or qualified elders and ministerial servants to help take the lead. The territory may be made up of small isolated towns scattered throughout large rural areas. The nearest Kingdom Hall might be many miles away. Secular work may be limited. The weather may not always be ideal. Would you be willing to take on such a challenge? How is it possible to make a success of it?
2 Faith and Trust Needed: At God’s direction, Abram left his hometown of Ur and traveled 600 miles [1,000 km] to Haran along with his wife, nephew, and aged father, Terah. (Gen. 11:31, 32; Neh. 9:7) After Terah died, Jehovah commanded Abram, now 75 years old, to leave Haran and his relatives and travel to a country that God would show him. Abram, Sarai, and Lot “got on their way.” (Gen. 12:1, 4, 5) Of course, Abram did not move in order to serve where there was a greater need for ministers. But his move required something. What?
3 It took faith and trust for Abram to attempt such an undertaking. His thinking and way of living had to change. He had to leave the security of his relatives. But he trusted Jehovah to look after him and his household. Many today have manifested their trust in Jehovah in a similar way.
4 Short-Term Assignments: Have you ever enjoyed the rich blessings that come from working unassigned territory? Last year in the 48 contiguous states, 5,699 publishers covered 163 out of 174 unassigned territories. Another 5,676 publishers assisted 380 congregations to cover seldom-worked territory. For some, this involved traveling great distances. Was it worth the effort?
5 A brother from California who went to Utah wrote: “When I was first approached with the idea of taking a group out in seldom-worked territory, I was hesitant. But I decided to accept the assignment. Not only have I never regretted it but it has changed my life. I thank Jehovah every day for the privilege of being a part of this trip.” A brother from Florida who went to Tennessee said that it was the most memorable experience of his 20 years in the truth! A teenager from Connecticut who went to West Virginia said: “This was the best experience of my life!” Most publishers agree that serving for even a short time where the need is greater has deepened their appreciation for the ministry. Talk to those who have done it. You will find that they were uplifted spiritually and would likely do it again if given the opportunity.
6 Accepting a temporary assignment to serve where the need is greater can serve another purpose. Those doing so can acquire useful information to help them “calculate the expense” of relocating to another part of the country.​—Luke 14:28.
7 Jehovah is determined to have the good news declared “in all the inhabited earth” before the end comes. (Matt. 24:14) Knowing this, if you are able, would you be willing to move to where the need is greater? The need exists in many areas.
8 Moving Where the Need Is Greater: Are you retired? Do you have a steady income? If not, can you arrange for self-employment? Are you able to make a living from any location by means of the telephone or the computer? If you cannot move, could you assist a family member to serve elsewhere?
9 If after prayerful consideration you feel equal to the challenge of relocating to where the need is greater, discuss the matter with your family and the elders in your congregation. Then, prepare a letter and give it to the elders so that they may include their observations and recommendations before sending it to the branch office.
10 What should you include in your letter? Your age, date of baptism, responsibilities in the congregation, marital status, and whether you have minor children. Name the states in which you prefer to serve, according to your personal needs. For instance, can you live where it is hot and humid? Can you endure cold winters? Are you able to live at high altitudes? Do you speak any foreign languages?
11 Do you have zeal and initiative? Do your circumstances permit you to serve where the need is greater? If so, then observe how Jehovah continuously pours out rich blessings upon those who trust in him as they display the spirit of self-sacrifice!​—Ps. 34:8; Mal. 3:10.

