Don’t Hold Back!
1 When we get ready to go preaching from door to door, the most challenging door we encounter may be our own. Feelings of inadequacy may hold us back from getting out to speak the truth to “all sorts of men.” (1 Tim. 2:4) But we should not feel hesitant to preach the good news. Why not?
2 It Is Jehovah’s Message: Jehovah has communicated his word through the Bible. When we take this message to others, we are conveying his thoughts, not ours. (Rom. 10:13-15) When individuals reject the Kingdom message, they are really rejecting Jehovah. Yet, we are not discouraged. We are confident that this message will strike a responsive chord in the hearts of those who long for a change in world conditions and who are conscious of their spiritual need.​—Ezek. 9:4; Matt. 5:3, 6.
3 Jehovah Draws the People: A person who refused to listen to us in the past may now be receptive because his circumstances have changed and his heart condition has softened. Jehovah may now express his goodwill toward that one and ‘draw him.’ (John 6:44, 65) When this happens, we want to be ready to be used by Jehovah and yield to angelic direction in finding such ones.​—Rev. 14:6.
4 God Gives Us His Spirit: Holy spirit enables us to speak “with boldness by the authority of Jehovah.” (Acts 14:1-3) Remembering that we have this powerful backing in our ministry, we will not be reluctant to speak the truth to neighbors, workmates, classmates, relatives, or well-educated or wealthy people.
5 Jesus Taught Us How: Jesus used thought-provoking questions, down-to-earth illustrations, and Scriptural reasoning. He explained the truth in a simple, appealing way, from his heart. These are still the best methods today. (1 Cor. 4:17) The settings in which we preach may vary, but the powerful Kingdom message remains the same.
6 We are privileged to be used by Jehovah to help people in a unique and vital way. Let us not hold back! May we be courageous and allow Jehovah to “open a door of utterance to us” so that we can speak the good news to others.​—Col. 4:2-4.

