Get Ready to Study Isaiah’s Prophecy!
1 “Faithful worshipers can be confident that Jehovah . . . will not allow Satan’s world to exist for one day longer than justice requires.” What an encouraging statement! From where was it quoted? Isaiah’s Prophecy​—Light for All Mankind I. Does the prophecy of Isaiah give us reason to draw such a heartening conclusion? Yes! In that Bible book, the theme of salvation comes through loud and clear. (Isa. 25:9) That is why it will be of great encouragement for us to study this portion of God’s Word at the Congregation Book Study. Will we be there to enjoy it every week? Why should we?
2 At Isaiah 30:20, Jehovah is called our “Grand Instructor.” Each Christian should listen carefully as Jehovah speaks to us through the pages of his Word and through Bible-based publications provided by “the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45; Isa. 48:17, 18) This certainly is true of the Isaiah’s Prophecy I book. How can you get the most out of studying it?
3 Prepare to Participate: Set aside ample time each week to prepare for the book study. Read the assigned material paragraph by paragraph. Think about each of the printed questions. Mark the answers in your book. Verses quoted from Isaiah are printed in bold type. Read them carefully. As for the other scriptures that are cited, look them up to see how they relate to the material. Meditate on what you are learning. Then share the results of your preparation with your book study group.
4 The brother who conducts the book study should help all in attendance to make good use of the Bible and to appreciate the practical value of the material being covered. If you are called on first to comment, give a simple, direct answer. If someone has already done that, you can build on the point under discussion. Perhaps you could show how a key scripture supports the theme. Try to comment in your own words, and enjoy the pleasure of participating in the discussion.
5 Let us eagerly examine together the precious message in the book of Isaiah. It will encourage us to live each day in joyful expectation of Jehovah’s salvation!​—Isa. 30:18.

