Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting July 9
Song 4
 8 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
17 min: April Service Report. Talk and interviews to be handled by the service overseer. Highlight the April field service report for the country and for the local congregation. Interview a variety of publishers who put forth an extra effort in the ministry that month. Have them tell about the joy they experienced from having a full share and what they are doing to stay busy in the ministry.​—See March 2001 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, paragraphs 28-30.
20 min: “Can You Serve Where There Is a Greater Need?”a Include encouraging experiences that local publishers have had in isolated or seldom-worked territory.​—See Our Ministry book, pages 112-13.
Song 42 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 16
Song 10
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: Youths​—Calculate the Cost of Your Career. A father and his teenage son or daughter approach an elder who has practical experience in secular employment. After reflecting on the Service Meeting part two weeks ago about choosing a career, the youth is thinking seriously about entering the regular pioneer service but is uncertain about how to care for his or her material needs. Elder stresses the need for a balanced view. (September 1, 1999, Watchtower, page 11, paragraph 13) It is wise to seek some type of training so as to be equipped to provide for oneself. Many have done well simply by learning basic skills that require a minimum investment of time and money. (February 1, 1996, Watchtower, page 14; Young People Ask, page 178) Together they discuss the March 8, 1996, Awake!, pages 9-11, and some practical suggestions on finding or creating suitable secular work.
20 min: Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Who Are They? What Do They Believe? Audience discussion and demonstration. Examine this brochure, and discuss how it can be used to inform others about us and our work. It identifies who we are (pages 3-5), highlights some of our modern history and activities (pages 6-11), lists beliefs that distinguish us from other religions (pages 12-14), explains the good news that we preach and how we preach it (pages 15-21), shows how our work benefits the community (pages 22-4), gives the international scope of our organization (pages 25-6), and answers questions commonly asked about us (pages 27-31). Demonstrate a publisher using the brochure to answer one of the questions on page 29 that is asked by a curious householder, after which the publisher extends the invitation on the back cover. Encourage all to use the brochure to familiarize non-Witness relatives about us, to develop interest on return visits, and to direct Bible students to the organization.
Song 50 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 23
Song 19
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Get Ready to Study Isaiah’s Prophecy!”b Briefly comment on how we stand to benefit from studying the book of Isaiah. (See chapter 1, paragraphs 10-12, in Isaiah’s Prophecy I.) Encourage all to attend the Congregation Book Study regularly.
Song 53 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 30
Song 22
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for July.
20 min: Youths​—Be Discerning in Planning Your Education. An elder talks to some parents and their teenage children about supplementary education. The elder takes the lead in discussing the September 1, 1999, Watchtower, pages 16-17, paragraphs 11-13, emphasizing the reasons why the full-time ministry should be high on their list of priorities. (December 1, 1996, Watchtower, pages 18-19, paragraphs 13-15) The group then reviews the counsel in the March 8, 1998, Awake!, pages 20-1, stressing the need to exercise discernment in weighing the benefits and the drawbacks of supplementary education and limiting it to what is needed to support oneself while zealously pursuing the ministry. All agree that they should be guided by Jesus’ admonition to put Kingdom interests first.​—Matt. 6:33.
15 min: Good News for All Nations. Audience discussion and demonstration. An increasing percentage of the population in this country consists of people who speak a foreign language. Show how we can witness to such ones using the booklet Good News for All Nations. Summarize “Use of This Booklet,” on page 2, and read the presentation that appears in the language of your congregation. Demonstrate what to do when a person who speaks another language comes to the door. Relate any good experiences of how this has been done in your territory.​—See February 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, paragraphs 9-10.
Song 57 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 6
Song 25
15 min: Local announcements. Invite audience to relate experiences of witnessing informally while traveling to the district convention, vacationing, or visiting non-Witness relatives.
10 min: “New Circuit Assembly Program.” A talk. Announce date of the next circuit assembly. All should make a special effort to invite Bible students. Encourage unbaptized publishers to think seriously about symbolizing their dedication to Jehovah at the next assembly. Urge all to attend both sessions each day.
20 min: “Don’t Hold Back!”c As time permits, relate experiences from the December 15, 1999, Watchtower, page 25.
Song 63 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

