Shining as the “Light of the World”
“TRULY sweet is the light, and pleasant to the eyes.” Apt as are those words regarding the light of the sun, they are even more fitting regarding the spiritual light which shines from the great Sun, Jehovah God, the “Father of the celestial lights.” Spiritual light brings freedom from bondage, hope of everlasting life and comfort, love and joy.—Eccl. 11:7, Ro; Jas. 1:17, NW.
Today, however, more than ever before “darkness shall cover the earth, and thick darkness the peoples,” because Satan “has blinded the minds of the unbelievers, that the illumination of the glorious good news about the Christ, who is the image of God, might not shine through.” And blinded also by their pride, stubbornness and greed, men prefer darkness to light and so they vainly seek guidance from the creeds of Christendom, from its philosophers, from its materialistic science and from the politicians. But there are a few who truly love righteousness and who humbly “seek God, if they might grope for him and really find him.”—Isa. 60:2, RS; 2 Cor. 4:4; Acts 17:27, NW.
For the benefit of such kind of persons God sent his Son Jesus Christ, who is “the true light which gives light to every kind of man.” While on earth Jesus himself directly served as this light, telling the people of his Father’s name, purposes and will for them, but with his ascension to heaven he appointed his followers to serve in his stead as light bearers: “You are the light of the world. A city cannot be hid when situated upon a mountain. People light a lamp and set it, not under the measuring basket, but upon the lampstand, and it shines upon all those in the house. Likewise let your light shine before mankind, that they may see your right works and give glory to your Father who is in the heavens.”—John 1:9; Matt. 5:14-16, NW.
To serve properly as lights of the world our lamps must be filled with oil and their wicks must be trimmed; that is, we must have a good knowledge of God’s Word and present its message effectively. That requires study; it requires attending congregational meetings; it requires taking advantage of ministerial training.
As Christ’s followers we can confidently let our light shine, for it is equal to any tests of reason and honest investigation. Our motives are pure, because “we are not peddlers of the word of God as many men are,” exploiting God’s Word for selfish gain. And in shining forth we do not call attention to ourselves, for we know that this treasure of service as light bearers is in an earthen vessel, all the glory going to Jehovah. It is being done, “not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, saith Jehovah of hosts.”—2 Cor. 2:17, NW; Zech. 4:6, AS.
Do you appreciate your privileges as a light bearer? If you do, you will “keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise but as wise persons, buying out the opportune time for yourselves.”—Eph. 5:15, 16, NW.

