Finding the Way in a Vast Ocean
THE Marshall Islands consist of over 1,200 islands and islets, most rising no more than a few feet above sea level. They drop out of sight from just a short distance out to sea. Yet, ancient Marshallese seafarers in their outrigger canoes were able to navigate from tiny island to tiny island, finding their way in some three quarters of a million square miles [2 million sq km] of the Pacific Ocean. How did they do it? They were guided by the use of simple, yet remarkably effective, “maps” called stick charts.
Through experience, Marshallese navigators learned that the presence of land creates certain wave patterns that reveal the location of an island up to 20 miles [30 km] away. There were dozens of wave patterns to learn, and the stick charts served as memory aids. What were stick charts like? As you can see in the picture, sticks made of strips of pandanus roots or the ribs of coconut leaves were tied together to form a latticework that represented wave patterns. Small seashells were fastened to mark the relative positions of islands.
For many years, navigation by stick chart was kept a secret, revealed only to certain chosen ones. How would a young navigator learn to use a stick chart? Only through training and practice. An experienced navigator privately tutored the young sailor, perhaps taking him on trips to nearby islands. As the apprentice learned to recognize wave patterns, he gained confidence in his stick chart. Eventually, he could set out on the ocean by himself.
In a similar way, God’s Word, the Bible, can serve as our guide on life’s journey. At first, someone may help us to gain a basic understanding of the Scriptures. Then, as we continue to study God’s Word and put its principles into practice, we gain confidence in what it says. Joshua, the leader of the Israelites, was told to keep reading the Word of God in order that he might “take care to do according to all that is written in it.” “Then,” God told Joshua, “you will make your way successful and then you will act wisely.” (Joshua 1:8) Yes, the Bible can map out for us a sure and successful course in life.
[Picture Credit Line on page 32]
© Greg Vaughn

