R758 : page 1 



page 1 



VOL. VI. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JUNE, 1885. 

NO. 10. 



ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF 
CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 40 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 
TAKE NOTICE. 



This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat— yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



R758 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

You know that you have weaknesses; special points upon which 
you are aware by past experience you are specially liable to fail, 
under trial and temptation. It may be the pride of life and love of 
the world, which seem to draw your feet from the narrow way 
oftenest. It may be that business has such an attraction to you that 
you have at times been almost swallowed up with its ambitions and 
cares, and that its demands upon your time and talent have been for 
a season almost overwhelming, and that you found your appetite for 
spiritual things forestalled by the earthly, and your consecrated time 
absorbed in labor for the meat that perisheth. 

Or it may be that your special weakness is a love of approbation, 
which absorbs consecrated time in making your person, your home, 
and your family charming, as well as hinders you from engaging in 
service for the Lord and your fellow-saints in carrying them 
spiritual food, lest some should think you "peculiar," and "strange," 
and should "cut" your acquaintance. 

Or your difficulty may be uncongenial family relationship and 
opposition to study and Christian growth from that quarter. 

Or, it may be that seeming duties and necessities in your 
circumstances demand your time and keep you as they did Martha 
from communing with the Master, and from engaging in and 
enjoying the higher and grander privilege of breaking to others 
spiritual food. No matter in which particular direction your 
besetment lies, rest assured that yours is not an exceptional case. 
Every soul knoweth its own burdens, and before each one Satan is 
permitted to lay obstacles and hindrances in order that each may be 
tried and thus have opportunity of overcoming and proving his love 
and his appreciation of the prize and of the Lord's approval, by 
faithfulness under adverse conditions. 

What is your duty? What shall you do? Give up, because the way 
is not smooth? Why certainly you did not expect to be classed an 
"overcomer" without having something opposing you to overcome. 
No, you knew well when you started, that the Master and 
forerunner on this way, said: "Straight (difficult) is the gate and 



narrow is the way. " You remember he said that every follower in 
his footsteps must expect to endure the crossing of his human will 
and interest all through the "way." You remember how strongly he 
put it that none might deceive themselves, when he said, "If any 
man come to me, and hate not [love less] his father and mother, and 
wife and children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life 
also, he cannot be my disciple. And whosoever doth not bear his 
cross and come after me cannot be my disciple." Luke 14:26,27. 

And do you not know that your temptation on these weak points of 
your besetment are daily becoming more absorbing, more difficult 
to resist? Do you not see that we are living in the "evil day" which 
is evil or full of special danger, because of its increase of 
temptation on every point of weakness to every member of the 
body? that the besetments of the world, the flesh and the devil are 
more subtle and deceptive, and more powerful than ever before? 
Yes, you realize it. To be forewarned is useless unless it leads us to 
action, that we may be forearmed and protected. What are you 
going to do about it? We answer, Break the bondage at any cost; 
though it be dear to your heart as your eye or hand— pluck it out, cut 
it off, cast it from you. Make thorough work of it, strangle it, 
overcome your besetments at once and thoroughly. Lay aside every 
weight and hindrance which impedes your growth in grace, which 
hinders your sacrifice, the fulfillment of your covenant in the 
service of the truth, that you may patiently run the race set before 
you. You must either overcome these besetments by changing your 
course and cutting them off, or they will overcome you, and bring 
you more and more under their control. Hence the Apostle's 
advice, Make straight paths for your feet. Remove from your 
pathway at once every hindrance and stumbling-block which the 
adversary may put in your way, and keep right on, running for the 
prize of the high calling and keeping your eye on Jesus and Paul as 
examples of endurance and overcoming. They endured the 
temptation, but speedily ended it by promptly casting it from them. 
We must do likewise; to parley with besetments is to fail; to 
endeavor to carry them along on the way is impossible —the way is 
too narrow. We must choose at once whether we will be turned 
aside by circumstances and obstructions, or whether we will turn 
them aside and follow on to the end of the way— to glory, honor and 
immortality. 

With time and talents fully on the altar, and with thorough 
determination and work in overcoming the obstacles put before you 
by the adversary, what a power for the truth could be daily 
exercised by the readers of the TOWER. Not that the truth will fail 
without our effort, but that we need to make the effort on behalf of 
truth for our own development in grace, and as proof that we are of 
the overcomers accounted worthy both to suffer the reproach of 
Christ and to share his glory. 

Everyone who possesses these glorious hopes should be a preacher 
of them; should let the light so shine as to glorify our Father in 



heaven. Some can labor in a special manner but one hour a day, 
some more; all can let a general halo of light shine from the daily 
walk before their fellow Christians and the world, but not without 
overcoming the obstacles and besetments with which the adversary 
is sure to attempt to hinder you. Who is on the Lord's side? Let him 
make it manifest. It is the weak and small side in the world now, 
but shall not be so long. Now is the grand opportunity to champion 
truth. Therefore gird up the loins of your mind and fight a good 
fight, and soon palms and crowns of glory we shall wear. 



R759

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Lamar County, Texas, March 30th, 1885. 

BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL: -Please send me a few copies of your 
"Food for Thinking Christians," also a few copies of the TOWER 
for free distribution. My own number of the TOWER comes 
regularly and is read with interest by myself and wife, and then 
carried from one neighbor's house to another till I lose track of 
them entirely: but they shed light enough in every household that 
they pass through to awaken an interest in the minds of the readers- 
-enough at least to make them search the Scriptures to see whether 
these things are so. Several have called on me for the pamphlet 
entitled "Food for Thinking Christians," and also the "Tabernacle." 
I think I will be able to send you some subscriptions soon. 

Your brother in the one hope. 



Manchester, Mass., May 19, 1885. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I herewith send two dollars for the 
WATCH TOWER; I cannot afford to go without it. It is about all 
the teacher I have. There are none in this place that believe with 
me. I was brought up a Roman Catholic. The dear Lord 
enlightened my mind and I joined the Baptist Church; but the light 
grew brighter and I had to come out of the churches or stop 
growing in grace and knowledge of the truth. I praise God that he 
has enabled me to follow him, and now I have Catholics and 
Protestants alike mine enemies, but I realize that he that is for me is 
more than all them that are against me; and like Paul, I rejoice that 
he has counted me worthy to suffer with him. The TOWER has 
been a great comfort to me, and I try to have others read them. The 
word of the Lord will accomplish that whereunto it was sent, and 
his servants will obey his commandments and do his will. 

If you have any tracts that would enlighten those bound by the 
creeds, yet striving to serve God, if you send a few, I will use them 
prudently and be very thankful. 



Yours in the Lord. 



Springfield, Mass. 

BROTHER RUSSELL, Dear Sir:-I have just received this month's 
TOWER. Please let my subscription commence with this year. I do 
not want to lose the reading of any. I feel like one just waking out 
of sound sleep, dazed and bewildered, and yet feeling that I am 
really waking up to the truth. 

Yours, etc., . 

R753 : page 1 



Canton, Ills. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL.-We, that is wife and I, have become so 
much attached to the Watch Tower that we cannot give it up now. I 
know not how you got my name, or how it came to us. It came as a 
light to our minds clearing away the mists of creeds and enables us 
to see the truths of the Bible in a clearer light. We are still reading 
and comparing scripture with scripture. We have the privilege of 
reading the WATCH TOWER "Food" and "Tabernacle," and the 
chart, and think that through a full consecration and an earnest 
search after truth, all will be made plainer still. We hope before 
long to be able to help advance the interests of the work. 

Yours in Christ. 



R759 : page 1 



GRADUALLY, NOT SUDDENLY. 

Some evidently misunderstood our remarks in last issue relative 
to faith healing. We do not wish to be understood that during the 
Millennial age God will limit the methods of restoration to health, 
to prayer and anointing with oil. We are by no means sure that 
medicine and other agencies will be discarded. The methods of 
restitution will doubtless be as varied as were the methods 
employed by Jesus in healing diseases at his first advent. One 
secretly touched the hem of his garment; another stretched forth his 
withered hand; for another he prayed. Some were healed in answer 
to their own faith (Mark 5:34); some in answer to the faith of 
another (Matt. 8:5-13; Mark 5:23,42); some were healed instantly 
(Matt. 8:14,15), and some sent 

R759 : page 2 



away unhealed were cured on the way (Luke 17:14); some were 
healed by means of an ointment and washing (John 9:7), some 
gradually (Mark 8:24,25). Likewise we may expect diversities in 
the operation of restitution now beginning. 

Again, some get the idea that we expect that every one now healed 
by faith, prayer, and anointing with oil, in the name of the Lord, 
would be sick no more, but speedily attain to human perfection. By 
no means; we have repeatedly endeavored to show that the entire 
Millennial age will be a time of restitution, that the work will be 
very gradual, and that perfection will not be attained by the race 
until the close of that age. Those who now experience healing, will 
require healing for other ailments doubtless, and to some extent 
their freedom from sicknesses will depend upon their purity of life. 
(John 5:14, and James 5:15,16.) That none could possibly attain to 
perfection as men yet, is absolutely certain, for the same reason that 
none healed at Jesus' first advent were made perfect. The sacrifice 
of the anointed was not yet completed. The body of Christ will not 
have filled up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ, until 
the last member of that body has drunk to the dregs the cup of 
death. Until then, the "Body" 

R760 : page 2 

will not be complete and perfected in spiritual nature, and hence the 
world's restitution could only have a slight and illustrative 
beginning until then; for they without us shall not be made perfect. 
Heb. 11:40. 

Others write, saying that though some of the present healings were 
undoubtedly of God, yet others were performed by Spiritists and 
were evidently of the devil. We answer, that even admitting this as 
claimed, it would be no argument against our acknowledging that 
which is of God as such. Satan has ever sought to counteract the 
force of truth by counterfeiting it. God sent out the gospel by Jesus 
and the Apostles, preaching peace and reconciliation by Jesus 
Christ and his ransom sacrifice, and straightway Satan sends out his 
ministers as messengers of light (2 Cor. 11:13-15), preaching 
"another gospel" and "perverting the gospel of Christ." (Gal. 1:6,7). 
Jesus promised a kingdom and dominion to his faithful followers, 
and Satan grasping that promise perverted it, and establishing 
Papacy, taught that it was the kingdom of God promised, etc. 

When the apostacy had done its worst, and truth was trampled 
under the feet of Babylon, and the time came for calling the saints 
out of Babylon to a higher realization of truth, and a closer 
communion with God under increasing light from his Word, Satan 
also began to call "come out," and set snares for the truth hungry in 
what he is pleased to have called "Churches" also, chief among 
which are Spiritism and Swedenborgianism, whose bait is "new 
light. " Thus he ensnares some, while he alarms others so greatly 
that they will not even look outside the so-called "Orthodox" sects 
for food or light, and are thus kept in bondage and his object 



equally subserved. But shall we who have the light and food fear to 
show it because of Satan's counterfeits? Satan is an old hand at 
counterfeiting and over three thousand years ago acting through 
Jannes and Jambres he withstood the truth at the hand of Moses, 
deceiving the people by his imitations. But did Moses stop, and 
say, Because others can do to some extent the same things, 
therefore I will cease? Nay, he did his part and presently the power 
of his opponents was swallowed up before him. Of a similar class 
"in the last days" of this age, having "a form of Godliness" Paul 
speaks (2 Tim. 3:1,5-8), saying that from such we should "turn 
away," and he assures us that as Jannes and Jambres withstood 
Moses, so shall these resist the TRUTH. "But they shall proceed no 
further: for their folly shall be manifest unto all men as their's also 
was." 

We are well aware that spirit-mediums have been creating a great 
"talk" about their healing of the sick and their successful diagnosing 
of disease, but we do not know of any actual healing of diseases by 
these. Satan has considerable of "the power of death," including 
disease (Heb. 2:14 and Job 2:7), but we are not informed that he has 
the power of life, which includes health; and if he had the power 
(which Jesus' words rather intimate-Luke 11:14,17,18), he surely 
has not the desire to do good and bless except as a means to delude 
and counteract by counterfeiting the truth. 

With Jesus' words before us, we may safely say, that if Satan has 
turned from being a destroyer to be a restorer, then evidently he is 
reduced to desperate efforts to maintain his power over mankind, 
and we may hail this as another sign of the end of his empire; for, If 
Satan casts out Satan, his kingdom cannot long stand and will the 
sooner fall. 

If Satan and his angels will do good, and heal and bless mankind, 
we certainly will not cast a straw in their way. Let them do all the 
good works they will, and the more the better. Commend their 
good deeds, reprove their evil deeds and false doctrines with the 
word of the Spirit, the Word of God, and as the Apostle said, They 
will not proceed far before their folly and inconsistency will be 
manifest to all. 

It is well that we should remember always Jesus' words to the 
disciples. John said, "Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy 
name, and he followeth not us; and we forbade him, because he 
followeth not us." And Jesus answered that they should not forbid 
or interfere with anyone doing good works. He does not approve 
the man's method, etc., but states, as a general principle which none 
of us should lose sight of, that "He who is not against us is on our 
part." Mark 9:38-40. 



R759 : page 2 



THE FAITH OF CHRIST. 

"Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the faith." 2 Cor. 13:5. 

All must admit that there can be no reliable testimony as to what 
constitutes the faith of Jesus and what are the evidences of its 
possession outside of God's Word. We must conclude therefore 
that he who desires that information with its bearing on his 
relationship to God must seek it there. To do this successfully and 
satisfactorily the closest scrutiny must be observed in examining 
not only the foundation upon which we have built, but also the 
material (truth or error) we have used in building thereon. Faith 
means belief, confidence or trust: these applied to anything would 
be faith; but "the faith" is much more than these. This faith besides 
believing the word of God solely, is productive of and results in the 
life corresponding to the character of him (Jesus) whom it lays hold 
on; induced by promises of God's word. First of all, however, by 
faith in the vicarious ransom-sacrifice of Jesus, we became 
reconciled and at peace with God. (Rom. 5:1-10.) In this way we 
became "justified freely from all things" not because of our faith 
but through faith and because of Jesus work of sacrifice whom we 
thus rely on as our substitute or ransomer. Thus Jesus is made to us 
the only foundation of hope- "other foundation can no man lay." 
The faith of Christ however involves much more than acceptance of 
or belief in Jesus' sacrifice as the at-one-ment between us and the 
Father. This opened the door of favor to us, that he might become 
not only all that to us, but also "wisdom and knowledge and 
sanctification and redemption." In him are hid all these treasures 
which must be received by us if at all, by faith. After we became 
reconciled to God, our increased appreciation of the riches of his 
favor depended on our further progress in presenting ourselves 
living sacrifices "holy and acceptable to God. " In this way we 
became sharers of THE FAITH which Jesus had; the faith of Christ, 
of all those who are joint-sacrifices with Jesus and who are 
promised joint heir-ship, and this is the faith of Christ. 

United with Jesus as sacrificers, we have become by THE FAITH 
sons of God on the divine plane. We were buried with him (Jesus) 
by baptism into death (Rom. 6:4) to self-the human; and as we 
reckoned ourselves dead, we became alive, and are living to God by 
the faith in the Son of God, being "sealed by the Holy Spirit of 
promise." 

Having therefore the same spirit that was in Jesus, the same self- 
sacrificing life that characterized him will also characterize us if we 
abide in him and in the faith. And by this we shall know if we be in 
the faith. "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his, 
and if Christ be in you the body is dead," Rom. 8:9,10. We know 
we have the faith and the Spirit of Christ by its working out in us as 
in him, prompt obedience and willing sacrifice. This is the witness 
of the Holy Spirit to us. "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our 
spirit that we are the children of God (Rom. 8: 16). "By this we 
know ...we love God and keep his commandments, ....and [to us] 



his commandments are not grievous" [so that we rejoice to sacrifice 
in doing his will]. 1 John 5:2,3. This is also manifest to those that 
are without- "We are living epistles known and read of all men." 
"Ye shall know them by their fruits" whether THE FAITH of Christ 
actuates them. 

A false presentation of God's character has been Satan's most 
powerful weapon of attack against the Christian faith. Those who 
have taken the torment plan of making men repent and believe the 
gospel have foiled their own purpose. In this they have shown less 
wisdom than men of the world in blackening God's character to 
create love, and despising the riches of his goodness and 
forbearance and longsuffering, not knowing that the goodness of 
God leadeth men to repentance. Rom. 2:4. This stigma on the 
character of God they endeavor to excuse by saying, He must be 
just. They fail to notice, however, that they make him lest just than 
imperfect man, for in the administration of human justice torture is 
abhorrent. 

Thus by false theories, and neglect of THE faith laid down in the 
Scripture, God's attributes are made at war with each other, and 
such cannot say with Paul, "I am not ashamed of the glad 
tidings... for the righteousness of God by faith is revealed therein in 
order to faith. Rom. 1:6.— E.D. If God therefore declare through 
Paul that his goodness leads men to repentance, and his 
righteousness is revealed for the express purpose of inducing men 
to have faith in him, how say some that the restraints of society 
would be gone if the truth were presented. In this they err greatly; 
God being the judge of what is best. 

S. O. BLUNDEN. 



R760 : page 2 



QUESTION COLUMN. 



Ques.— Some are disposed still to question the necessity of the 
outward symbol of Baptism. Can you tell us whether the apostles 
were ever immersed? 

Ans.— A number of Jesus' disciples were previously the disciples of 
"John the Immerser" and it is scarcely within the limits of reason to 
suppose that while with John and Jesus they would baptize others 
and neglect it themselves. Paul was not a whit less than the chiefest 
of the apostles and he was baptized forthwith by the first of God's 
children he met. (Acts 9: 18.) The Eunuch to whom Phillip 
preached but one sermon caught the force of baptism to such an 
extent that he embraced the first opportunity of sufficiency of water 
to be planted in the likeness of Christ's death. (Acts 8:33-39.) 
When Cornelius and his house believed and after they had received 
the Holy Spirit, Peter commanded the symbolic, water immersion. 
(Acts 10:48.) Is it probable that he commanded others to obey the 



Master's example while he himself neglected it? Do those who now 
question the "necessity" of this symbol, command others to thus 
follow the Master's footprints and fulfill all righteousness? 

But we have never presented this question as one of "necessity," but 
as one of joyful privilege to all who really see its force and are 
really buried with Christ. To treat it as compulsory is the very 
opposite of its spirit. That which is compulsory is not a sacrifice. 
Hence the propriety of this being presented both by the Lord and by 
us as a privilege. 

Another letter inquires whether the fact of the Lord's presence does 
not in some manner relieve them from the necessity of performing 
this symbol. We answer here, that so long as the sacrifice is in 
process, it is certainly proper as it ever was for those who have 
never done so to symbolize that sacrifice. When the sacrifice is over 
and the whole "body" glorified with the head, there will be neither 
opportunity nor propriety for either the actual drinking of the "cup" 
of Christ's sufferings and being "buried" with him, nor will there 
then be propriety in drinking the symbolic "cup" (wine) or 
performing the symbolic baptism, in water. 

No; there is no necessity laid upon you to be baptized, either 
actually or symbolically; neither is there necessity that you should 
be of Christ's Bride and joint heir; neither is there necessity that you 
must sit with him in the throne and share his crown of glory and 
honor and immortality. The Lord will find a sufficient number to 
complete the "little flock" without forcing or urging anyone. But if 
you are in the race at all, "take heed, let no man take thy crown." 
See that you have the spirit of sacrifice burning within you and you 
will not seek what you can avoid, but cry "Lord what will thou have 
me to do." As in the beginning, so it must be now: "They that 
gladly received his word were baptized." Acts 2:41. 



R761 : page 3 



COMING BY-AND-BY. 



A better day is coming, a morning promised long, 

When truth and right with holy might, shall overthrow the wrong; 

When Christ the Lord will listen to every plaintive sigh, 

And stretch his hand o'er sea and land, with justice by and by. 

The boast of haughty tyrants no more shall fill the air, 
But aged and youth shall love the truth and speed it everywhere; 
No more from want and sorrow shall come the hopeless cry, 
But war shall cease, and perfect peace will flourish by and by. 

The tidal wave is coming, the year of jubilee, 
With shout and song it sweeps along, like billows of the sea; 
The jubilee of nations shall ring through earth and sky, 
The dawn of grace draws on apace, 'tis coming by and by. 



Oh, for that glorious dawning we watch and wait and pray, 
Till o'er the height the morning light shall drive the gloom away, 
And when the heavenly glory shall flood the earth and sky, 
We'll bless the Lord for all his works and praise him by and by. 



-Sel. 



R760 : page 3 

CHRISTIANITY DEFINED. 

An Exchange gives the following definition of the word 
Christian: - 

"A Christ-ian is one who has the Christ spirit. This is our 
understanding of the original meaning of the word. We suppose all 
will assent to and accept it as correct.... Men are Christ-ians 
according to the spirit of the Christ which is in them and manifested 
in the flesh. In some persons it is small, in others large. Either 
hidden or manifest this spirit resides in all. Consciously or 
unconsciously it is contained in every man or woman that lives or 
has lived." 

We are well aware that the above passes current for truth, and that 
nearly "all assent to and accept it as correct;" but we shall neither 
by silence nor in any other way, leave the impression that the 
TOWER assents to such a definition. We strongly protest that it is a 
false representation, and a rapidly growing error. One reason 
perhaps for the growing popularity of the above definition is that it 
embraces nearly all mankind under a name which has grown 
popular among civilized people. 

According to this definition, nearly every one outside of prisons, 
gambling dens, etc., and many in them, are Christians; for is there 
not something true and noble in ninety-nine out of every hundred 
people? Our Exchange declares that "consciously or 
unconsciously, it [the spirit of Christ] is contained in every man or 
woman that lives, or has lived." Then it would follow according to 
its idea, that "every man or woman that lives or has lived," has been 
a Christian. Only by following to its legitimate conclusion such a 
definition of Christianity is its absurdity manifest. And yet to this 
absurd definition, as our Exchange asserts, nearly all assent. 

R761 : page 3 

Confucius, Plato and other moral philosophers truly deserve the 
respect and esteem of all who can appreciate their strivings after 
righteousness and truth, but to hold them up as Christians - 
Apostles of Christianity-because they recognized and practiced 
some of the truths which Christianity inculcates, would be as 
absurd and illogical, as to call every stone a diamond, because a 
diamond is a stone. 



Truly "if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of His." 
But this does not prove that because a man possesses some 
elements of character corresponding to some elements of the spirit 
or disposition of Christ, he is therefore one of His followers-a 
Christian. In like manner it would be correct to say, If this be not a 
stone, it is not a diamond; but such a statement would not imply to 
any intelligent mind, that everything that has any of the qualities of 
a stone, is a diamond. 

Those who call morality, Christianity, and who recognize everyone 
possessed of moral qualities as a Christian, have accepted a false 
standard, and all the conclusions they may draw therefrom, must be 
equally false. According to this false standard, the Scribes and 
Pharisees of Jesus' day at whose instance he was crucified were 
very eminent Christians; for certainly a more morally exact people, 
it would be difficult to find on the pages of history. They were 
people of noted piety according to this same worldly moral 
standard. They were noted as such, as highly in their day, as are the 
clergy of the various religious systems to-day; yet if these were 
Christians, the founder of the system, Jesus, did not know it, for He 
said of them "Ye are of your father the devil." (John 8:44.) Not that 
they were utterly devoid of every moral principle, but they were 
under the control of evil in the main as is the large majority of 
mankind to-day, who are no more Christians than were those who 
crucified Jesus. The apostles' estimate of who are Christians differs 
widely from that of our Exchange, but agree with that of Jesus. 
John says (1 John 5:19) "We know that we are of God, and the 
whole world lieth in wickedness." And again (3:1.) "Behold what 
manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be 
called the SONS OF GOD [Christians]: therefore, the world 
knoweth us not, because it knew Him not." 

According to the moralist's estimate set forth by our Exchange, the 
preaching of Christ Jesus throughout the world was unnecessary. If 
preaching be necessary it should be morality and not justification 
and remissions of sins in the name of Jesus through faith in him, 
and a work accomplished on behalf of all by Him. Thus they could 
go among the Chinese and teach morality in the name of Confucius; 
they could go among the Mohamedians preaching morality in the 
name of Mahommet and find what our Exchange calls "Christians." 
Many of these are doubtless as moral as people living in so called 
Christian lands. But Paul knew and taught far differently, and our 
Exchange and all who accept such as its definition of Christianity 
as correct, would do well to carefully consider the teachings of the 
great Apostle and exponent of Christianity. He believed with Peter 
and John that Jesus was the only "door" of access to God, that 
"There is none other name under heaven given among men 
whereby we must be saved." "Neither is there salvation in any 
other." Acts 4:12. 

It was because he believed that faith in Jesus was the only way of 
salvation, that he labored and sacrificed to spread that name; and in 



this light how forcible his argument when he says (Rom. 10: 14): 
"Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved," 
but "How shall they call on Him in whom they have not believed? 
and how shall they believe in Him of whom they have not heard?" 
His argument is that Faith in Christ is essential, and that knowledge 
is a pre-requisite to faith. 

Hence our argument is: No one can be a Christian without first 
having a knowledge of Christ. Not merely a historic knowledge 
that such person lived, died and rose, but a knowledge of the object 
of these, and the results accomplished thereby, for us. All this and 
a grateful mental acceptance of those results, constitutes believing 
in Jesus— believing in Him as our ransom, who in consequence shall 
soon deliver from death those whom he redeemed with his own 
precious blood. 

To such a believer only, is the name Christian at all applicable, and 
in its strictest sense it applies only to those, who heartily believing, 
present themselves joint sacrifices together with Jesus; or as he 
himself expresses it, (Matt. 16:24): "If any man come after me [be 
my disciple, a Christ-ian] let him deny himself and take up his cross 
and follow me." Let him deny all ability to wash away his own 
sins, let him deny his own righteousness and accept of mine, and 
then become my follower. 

"If any man have not the spirit of Christ" in this respect-to sacrifice 
earthly advantages and things highly esteemed among men, for the 
sake of being co-workers with Jesus in the accomplishing of the 
plans of Jehovah— "he is none of His;" (Rom. 8:9.) he is not in the 
true sense of the word a Christian. Beloved think it not strange 
concerning the fiery trial that is to try you, as though some strange 
thing happened unto you, but rejoice inasmuch as ye are partakers 
of Christ's sufferings.... If any man suffer as a CHRISTIAN let him 
not be ashamed; but let him glorify God on this behalf." 1 Pet. 4:12- 
16. 



R761 : page 3 

TO THE ELECT OF GOD (IN A TIME OF TROUBLE.) 

The elect of God exist, although no man can individually identify 
them. They are after a common family likeness, although 
differently situated in the present evil world. They have one faith, 
and one aim, and one mind, though following different occupations, 
and living in different parts of the earth. We greet them in the 
name of the Lord, wishing them and praying for them grace, mercy 
and peace from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Beloved, ye are known of God, though you may not be discerned 
by men. You are scattered up and down the world, in a cloudy and 
dark day, undistinguishable to human eyes, from the common mass 
of mankind. Your divine mark or seal, wherever you are to be 



found, consists of the belief, obedience and love of the truth which 
God has caused to be set forth in the writings of Moses, and the 
Prophets, and the Apostles. Having this mark, you are precious in 
his eyes. Your faith is well-pleasing to him; your obedience, your 
free-will offerings, your sacrifices in his service at a time when all 
the world ignores him ascend before him as the odor of a sweet 
smell, and are acceptable to him through the High Priest of our 
profession. And they will be spoken of again, to your great joy, in 
a day when they will seem to have been all forgotten, and when 
they will seem too small to be mentioned in the presence of the 
world-stirring events that will belong to the coming again of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. I write to you concerning our common 
affliction— common in a large sense. I do not write to you because I 
know you. Some of you I doubtless know; but no man knows you 
as "the Lord knows them that are his." A man cannot even know 
himself in this sense. As our beloved brother Paul has said, "I 
judge not mine ownself; he that judgeth me is the Lord." We know 
the principles upon which men will be saved, because they have 
been revealed; but we are not capable of discerning infallibly where 
these principles have had their effectual work, though we may 
discern where they are set aside and violated. I write to you as 
those whom the Lord loves, and who will be banded together in a 
joyous company when the Lord comes. I write to you as one of 
you, having the same experience and the same 

R762 : page 3 

need. The scorner may mockingly enquire what right I have to 
write to such. I answer, the right of brotherly love, which belongs to 
every man who can rise to his privileges in Christ. Brotherly love 
leads to brotherly concern in all things, but particularly in those that 
relate to our standing in God, our position in the present probation 
and our hope concerning the purpose of God which will surely be 
accomplished. Your present lot is grievous in many respects; and at 
times you are greatly cast down, and nigh despairing altogether of 
the Lord's promised kindness in Christ. I write to remind you of the 
cause you also have for encouragement and joy. 

You feel unworthy of the great salvation to be brought unto you at 
the revelation of Jesus Christ; remember that, though, only those 
whom the Lord esteems worthy will enter the kingdom, yet part of 
that worthiness consists in the very sense of unworthiness which 
oppresses you. God's favor is for those only who rate themselves at 
God's standard; and by this standard we are, as Jacob confessed 
himself to be, "unworthy of the least of all the mercy and the truth" 
that the Lord shows to his people. For what are we at best but 
worms of the earth, fashioned in God's image, made of his clay, and 
permitted to live for a few years on the face of his glorious earth. 
The most righteous man can say with Job, whom the Lord 
approved, "Behold, I am vile. ..wherefore I abhor myself, and repent 
in dust and ashes." If a righteous man could feel this abasement — 
(most reasonable abasement in mortal flesh in the presence of the 



divine glory)— is it a marvel that we who add error to weakness and 
sin to corruptibility should sometimes feel "broken in heart and 
contrite in spirit"? It is right: but be not destroyed by this 
abasement. It is pleasing to God. To such he more than once 
plainly declared he looks with approval. 

But your sins, they distress you: it is right they should; but look 
again and be comforted. There is a sin not unto death. You are not 
callous towards the Lord. You do not run in the way he has 
forbidden. You do not love the present world, and run with it in all 
its "ungodliness and worldly lusts-the lusts of the eye and the pride 
of life." You do not deny God and live in deliberate disobedience of 
his commandments. On the contrary, you love his name and word; 
you believe his testimonies and rejoice in his institutions; you love, 
and look, and long for the appearing of his Son whom he has 
promised to send; and you are striving in all the ways of life, so far 
as in you lies, to do his will as expressed in his commandments. But 
you fail often. You come short of what you would do. You 
frequently do things you would not do; and you are distressed on 
this account. It is right to be so; but do not forget the provision that 
has been made: Christ has taken away our sins. We are washed in 
his blood. He stands in the 

R762 : page 4 

Father's presence, not only as the accepted sacrifice, but as the 
appointed high priest for his house. He ever liveth to make 
intercession for us, according to the will of God. If we confess our 
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to forgive us 
all our iniquity. If we walk in the light, the blood of Jesus Christ 
cleanseth us from all sins. God forgives us for Christ's sake. 

Perhaps you are oppressed with a sense of the unsuitability of such 
persons as you, being promoted to honor and power in the kingdom 
of God. Remember it is God's deliberate plan to make choice of 
such. "Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not 
many noble, are called,. ..but God hath chosen the weak things of 
this world." Jesus spoke of this, and said: "Even so, Father, for so it 
seemed good in thy sight." He even gave thanks to the Father for 
proceeding on this plan. There is a reason in it all. The kingdom is 
to be established for God's honor, not man's; for the Spirit's objects 
and not those of flesh. Hence, it is a necessity that men be provided 
for its administration who are not proud and lifted up in their eyes, 
but who are lowly and who know and reverence God so deeply as 
to find pleasure in his exaltation. The blessing of man will come out 
of it all, but glory to God first. If God made choice of the 
aristocracy, his purpose, ("I will be exalted among the heathen") 
would not be accomplished. They are full of themselves. He 
chooses men who are empty of themselves that they may be full of 
God. Poor men, in the day of evil, are the kind of material out of 
which he can provide the earthen vessels in which his eternal 
treasure can be deposited, "that the excellency of the power may be 
of God and not of man." 



But you say: "Such poor weak people as we, are not fit to be kings 
and priests." True, not as you are now. It is not as you are now that 
you will be elevated to that position. You will be changed from the 
mortal to the immortal, and this change will fit you in every way for 
what you will have to do. It will give you strength and grace and 
capacity and gladness of heart. You will be able to carry 
yourselves as kings, and to sustain yourselves without fatigue, and 
to bring the wisdom of Solomon to bear in the judgment of all 
matters you may have in charge. Qualification of this sort is all in 
God, who will liberally crown his children with the highest gifts in 
the day of their exaltation. The one thing needful is a humble, 
loving, obedient heart and pliant will, which can only be developed 
and put to the proof by the exercise of faith in a day like this; and 
the operation can only be successfully performed, in most cases, in 
circumstances of poverty and self-denial. Consequently your lowly 
position and inefficient state, instead of being a cause of dubitation, 
should help your confidence, as furnishing in your case, the likely 
elements of suitability for the glory to be revealed. 

But in another way, you may feel the cloud return. The time is 
long, and human nature is weak, and power fails, and you feel 
yourselves walking towards the darkness which bounds the horizon 
of all natural life; yea, the darkness will oftentimes steal into your 
inmost soul, and fill you with an indescribable horror, as you 
survey the vastness of the universe, in which God is apparently 
silent, and the almost infinite mass of abortive life that appears 
upon the earth from generation to generation. Be comforted 
concerning this, also: this darkness is inseparable from God's plan. 
Nay more: it is essential to it. Human life on the earth can no more 
reach the glory to be revealed without this experience, than the 
fruits of the field can appear without ploughing and harrowing. It is 
part of the plan. God's wisdom is in it, and his love, for God is 
love. We shall see it. Meanwhile we must exercise faith, without 
which he cannot be pleased. Faith working by love can see a little 
even now-by starlight, as it were. The darkness is prolonged for 
the world as a whole; but it is short for any generation. It has been 
on the earth for ages, but no generation lasts for ages. We knew 
nothing of it last century; our turn had not come. Our turn has now 
come: it depresses, but it will soon be over, and when over, the next 
thing in our experience (apparently the immediate next) if actually 
delayed however long, is the eternal sunshine of the Father's 
manifested presence, power and glory. We shall find then what has 
been done for us by present exposure in the darkness and coldness 
of earth's winter. It is the Father's appointment for us meanwhile. 
What can we say but "Thy will be done?" He doth not willingly 
afflict. Not only so, but he ministers to our need while we pass 
through the darkness. None of the elect of God is left alone. God 
is with him to guide and strengthen in many invisible ways. God 
cares for him: pities him; chastens him; upholds and prepares him 
for the inheritance that is in store for all the sons of light: an 
inheritance in which they will commune with unspeakable joy, after 



the prolonged and bitter fight of faith victoriously waged in their 
several evil days. But remember the end. Remember the joyful 
muster of the Lord's elect. 

This touches another sorrow you have. In your several spheres of 
probation, you are yearning for what you never realise. You hunger 
and thirst for the prevalence of a noble enlightenment among men. 
You love God yourselves with all your heart and souls. You long 
to see others rejoice in him and exalt him in a sincere and 
intelligent way. You have a compassionate regard for the condition 
of mankind, and desire, with even a tearful earnestness, to see them 
in a blessed condition. You sigh and faint for the delights of 
sanctified and intellectual friendship in which the hearts of 
companions should open with a noble warmth to the great and 
noble topics that the universe presents to the mind, instead of 
gravitating heavily to the petty accidents of animal life. Ah, and 
you are afflicted with your own incapacities that blur the sight and 
enfeeble the hands, and drag you into abysses of gloom as dark and 
dreadful as Jonah's habitation in the storm-tost sea.-Now, there is 
comfort concerning all this. It is somewhat negative in its form; 
but, then, it is true, and true comfort wears well, whereas false 
comfort fails you in the long run. The comfort is that these things 
are unattainable in the present condition of human life upon earth, 
but they are attainable and will be realized in their very perfection 
in the kingdom of God. The recognition of this is a help. We 
reconcile ourselves hopefully to our lot, enduring the hardness of 
the desert by knowing that it is a desert, and in the confident 
anticipation of the land of promise at the end of the journey. One 
comfort more. It is not displeasing to the Father that we thus 
hunger and thirst to the point even of misery, after righteousness. 
On the contrary, Jesus said, "Blessed are ye that hunger and thirst 
after righteousness; for ye shall be filled." 

Finally, you are troubled and distressed by dissensions in the 
household of faith. Many of you have been plunged into deep grief, 
even unto many tears. "Beloved, think it not strange concerning the 
fiery trial." It is nothing new. It is the modern form of a very 
ancient and 

R763 : page 4 

frequent experience, resulting from the fermentation of diverse 
elements brought together by the knowledge of the truth. We must 
trust to God's wisdom in permitting of the admixture of these 
elements. He has done so from the beginning. Do not be too much 
distressed by it. The results that come of it do not alter things; they 
only prove, and try, and manifest things. The word of the Lord 
standeth sure amid all the chafes, and changes, and corruptions of 
men. The Lord Jesus, from the serene exaltation of the heavens, has 
for centuries beheld the confusions, and commotions, and wars that 
have wrought havoc among men in his absence. He has beheld 
them without surprise. He foresaw them and foretold them. He 
said there would be strife and division; that iniquity would abound; 



that the love of many would wax cold; that the trial would be too 
severe for some, but he that should endure to the end would be 
saved. Can we imagine that such things are permitted without a 
purpose? The apostolic age was rife with them; is it a marvel if we 
have our share? There is but one answer on the part of enlightened 
reason, and that answer will help us to stand in the midst of the evil 
and to hold fast unmoved the hope of the gospel, looking to Christ, 
who lives, distrusting ourselves, who die. Our life is fleeting away; 
the battle will soon be over. Be strong and of good comfort. Stand 
fast; quit you like men. Keep close to the word in daily reading, 
and the peace of God will rule your hearts and minds and preserve 
you amid all chafes and tumults, unto his glorious kingdom, which 
will heal all sores, and chase all darkness for ever away. 

Your fellow-sufferer, fellow- soldier, fellow-pilgrim and fellow- 
suppliant of the mercy of God unto eternal life. 

-Robert Roberts. 



R763 : page 4 

THEN, THE END. 

"Then, the End, when he shall give up the kingdom to the God 
and Father; when he shall have abrogated all government and all 
authority and power. For he must reign till he has placed all 
enemies under his feet." 1 Cor. 15:24,25. 

It is a blessed privilege which the Church of Christ may now 
enjoy, to trace the plan of God for human salvation clear through to 
its consummation, and then to read with joyful satisfaction -Finis. 

So we find it foretold. Six thousand years of man's suffering and 
dying experience is ended, and we are in the beginning of the 
seventh (thousand year) day of human existence. This seventh 
millennium is to be the most marked and eventful day in the history 
of the race, a day to be specially remembered throughout the 
multiplied ages to follow. For six thousand years death has been 
swallowing up the human race as fast as it came into existence. 
The elements of decay, both physical and moral, are at work at the 
heart of every opening bud of human life. But the now dawning 
seventh day shall witness the reversing of this order, the undoing of 
all this work of destruction. 

It is variously designated in the Scriptures as the Day of Judgment, 
the Times of Restitution, the Resurrection Day, and the Day of 
Christ. In the dawn of this day the kingdom is to be set up, and so 
thorough will be its work that when this seventh day shall close, no 
force or governmental power will be necessary to secure obedience 
to God's will; for his will shall then be done on earth as it is done in 
heaven, without compulsion, freely, and from choice. 



The great work of Christ during this age is Resurrection, 
Restitution. Few can believe that such a work is possible, even 
with God; and in order to exercise faith in the promise of a 
resurrection, and at the same time to help themselves over the 
difficulty of a seeming impossibility, the majority of Christians 
ignore the true meaning of death, and claim that after death the 
being is more alive than ever. But admitting the true significance 
of death as the Scriptures so clearly define it, viz. : extinction, 
annihilation, we ask, with Paul, "Why should it be thought a thing 
incredible with you that God should raise the dead?" Acts 26:8. 

It is not presumable that we should be able to fully comprehend the 
philosophy of the resurrection or re-creation. The work of creating 
a living intelligent being is a work which we find it impossible to 
understand. Many men have great inventive genius, and have done 
many wonderful works, yet not one knows the secret of creative 
power: it is superhuman, beyond both our power and our 
comprehension. But to re-create an intelligent being who had once 
been utterly destroyed, so that it and others will recognize its 
identity, is a still greater work; but why should it be thought beyond 
the scope of divine power? It is not surprising that the world does 
not believe it, but the child of God led by the Spirit should find no 
such barrier to his faith. The world will, in due time, be convinced 
of the truth by actual demonstration, while the Church is taught by 
a different, yet equally convincing method; if we continue under the 
Spirit's leading, and turn not back to the darkness of unguided 
human reason. 

The awakening from death will be one of the early events in the day 
of Christ, though not one of the first. As we have learned, the 
living nations must first be brought to a degree of readiness for such 
an event. The dead shall not be awakened until surrounding 
circumstances, etc., are more favorable for their discipline and 
development. The great "day of his preparation," "The Day of the 
Lord," the Day of Wrath upon the Nations, must first do its work in 
overthrowing the oppressing kingdoms of this world, in casting 
down great Babylon with its deceptions and snares, and in binding 
Satan, the great enemy. 

The new, the heavenly kingdom, must be fully established, and its 
power and authority recognized by all the living, and the work of 
reformation among them be under way first. We do not presume 
that any of the dead will be brought back to be subjected to the 
same temptation and snare which now make shipwreck of the virtue 
of so many. There will be no licensed evils, and allurements to vice 
will not be permitted under that reign. 

When the angry nations, worn out with their own vain endeavors to 
adjust human affairs, shall realize that only 

R763 : page 5 

anarchy is the result, and shall learn to be still and to know that 
Christ is Lord (Psa. 46:10), and shall recognize His authority and 



power, then the preparatory work will be accomplished, and the 
proper work of the new kingdom may begin— the glorious work of 
restitution; bringing mankind back to their "former estate" of 
human perfection and Godlikeness. Gen. 1:26,27. 

The awakening from death, as well as the healing of those who 
have not completely died, are only the beginnings of restitution or 
resurrection, which will not be complete until the original 
perfection of mind and body, lost for the race by Adam, and 
redeemed by Christ, shall have been restored to all who would 
come to the waters of life and drink freely. 

The awakening will find men morally and intellectually as they 
were when their existence terminated; hence the raising to 
perfection will require training, discipline, etc., etc.; and we are told 
that Christ shall reign until the work shall be fully accomplished- 
"He must reign till he has placed all enemies under his feet. Even 
death, the last enemy, will be rendered powerless," [or, Death shall 
finally be rendered powerless]. Vs. 25,26. When sin is completely 
eradicated; when sickness and pain are no more; when all sorrow 
and sighing and tears are forever banished; then, and not until then, 
will death be destroyed, Adamic death, the great enemy, will be 
rendered powerless, destroyed, blotted out completely under the 
reign of him who obtained this authority and power by the sacrifice 
of himself. The object of Christ's reign is to bring about the grand 
results for which he died. The world redeemed by his death shall 
be saved by his life. Rom. 5:10. We are assured by the prophet, as 
well as by the Apostle, that he shall not fail, but shall come off 
victorious over death. Isa. 25:8; Hos. 13:14; 1 Cor. 15:25,54-57. 
Jesus shall not fail to accomplish his great mission. He must reign 
until he has accomplished it, when he will deliver up the restored 
empire to "God even the Father." Were we to guess how long a 
time this restitution would require, we would probably estimate 
differently, some longer, some a shorter period; but we are not left 
to conjecture. We are informed that it will be fully accomplished in 
a thousand years, during which time Satan and evil will be under 
restraints, and the saints, with Jesus their Head, shall live and reign. 
Rev. 20:3,4. And how fitting, six days of evil and degradation, and 
one day of restitution, ushering in the countless ages of everlasting 
righteousness and happiness on earth as in heaven, among men as 
among angels. 

It follows then, that the thousand years of Christ's reign shall 
complete the great work of salvation, and beyond it there is no 
probation for any; all will have had a full opportunity, with every 
favorable advantage. In the end or closing period of that age Satan 
is to be loosed for a little season for the final testing of mankind, 
and at its close he and those who follow his spirit and leadership 
shall be destroyed. That will be the "second death," from which 
there is no recovery. Rev. 21:7,8. 



Jesus ransomed no one from the second death; the ransom he gave 
was in settlement of the first or Adamic death only (Rom. 5:17-19), 
and it is it, that 

R764 : page 5 

he shall destroy during his reign, by releasing from its dominion, all 
whose liberty he purchased with his own precious blood. All Jesus' 
enemies shall be subjected to his power, and every person and 
principle wilfully opposed to his and the Father's righteous law 
shall be destroyed. The second death is not Christ's enemy, but 
becomes a servant of righteousness in the permanent removal of 
everything opposed to righteousness. Nothing will be left to mar the 
perfectly restored creation. Then Christ shall present his finished 
work to the Father-a work whose perfection and glory will highly 
honor both the Father's plan and the Son's execution of it— a work 
which will make manifest the wisdom, power, justice, and love of 
God to all his intelligent creatures, and which will lead men to 
honor the Son who executed the plan, even as they honor the Father 
who arranged it. 

When the work of restoration is complete and mankind has 
regained the image of God obliterated by sin, there will no longer 
be necessity for coercion. Obedience will be cheerfully and joyfully 
rendered when God's law is written in every heart. Hence, when 
Christ shall deliver up the kingdom to God even the Father, his will 
shall be done on earth as it is done in heaven-freely and from 
choice-joyfully. The language of every heart will then be, "I 
delight to do thy will O my God; yea, thy law is within my heart." 
The perfect human nature will then be as it was at first, a law 
inscribed nature. (Jer. 31:33.) There is no necessity for the exercise 
of compulsory power where knowledge and ability are perfect, and 
where love reigns supreme in the heart. 

To deliver up mankind to Jehovah's government before they have 
been perfectly restored, would be to deprive them of the protection 
of the precious blood before they had obtained all the blessing it 
was designed to afford them. To deliver them over imperfect to 
God's government, would be to deliver them to sure destruction; for 
God's law is perfect and approves only those who are absolutely 
perfect, and condemns all others as it did Adam, for even one sin. 
Therefore as Paul expresses it (Heb. 10:31), when speaking of some 
who would ignore and deny Jesus' ransom and protection: "It is a 
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God." It is fearful 
because of the absolute perfection of God's law, and the fact that 
His only allowance for imperfection is through Jesus, until the 
imperfect ones have been restored. But when at the close of the 
Millennial reign the whole world shall be delivered up to God, even 
the Father, it will no longer be a fearful thing, because having been 
perfectly restored by the Redeemer, all will then delight to do God's 
will perfectly. 



It has been suggested and publicly taught by some that the ages to 
follow the Millennium will afford opportunity for the perfecting of 
such as during the Millennial age will not submit to the authority of 
Christ; and that by repeated endeavors, through ages if necessary, 
the incorrigible shall all be brought to obedience to God; and that 
thus, not one of God's creatures shall ever be destroyed —even 
Satan not excepted. 

This idea is regarded by its advocates as a marked evidence of their 
superior generosity, love, and good will toward all. But leaving this 
out of the question for the present, let us consider briefly if the 
suggestion has any real foundation. 

First, we have seen that the reign of Christ is foretold to be of a 
thousand years' duration (Rev. 20:4), and that at the end of that time 
he gives up the kingdom. (1 Cor. 15:24.) From this we must 
conclude that if there is to be any probation, or reconciliation of any 
beyond that time, it must be accomplished through some other 
agency than that of Christ. 

Secondly, we have seen that the object of Christ's reign is stated to 
be the restitution of all things, the resurrection work Acts 3:19-24; 1 
Cor. 15:20-26. 

If the above suggestion were true, if it could be proven from the 
Scriptures, then it would follow that Christ shall fail to fully 
accomplish the work assigned to him, and that he will give it up at 
the end of the thousand years because of his inability to complete it, 
and that some other agency shall accomplish it. 

But is this true? We answer unhesitatingly and emphatically, No. 
We are sure that the entire work of reconciliation -restoration, is to 
be accomplished through Christ, because it is written, that God 
"hath committed all judgment unto the Son," that "He shall not fail 
nor be discouraged until he have set judgment in the earth" (Isa. 
42:4), and that "He must reign till he hath placed all enemies under 
his feet,"— in subjection. 

We are not left in doubt that the work of reconciling the world will 
be accomplished within the limits of Christ's reign (Rev. 20:4), 
because this is the very object of that reign. And beyond doubt God 
is able to undo in one thousand years, the work which Satan has 
accomplished in six thousand years. 

There is absolutely no ground for believing in a probation for any 
beyond that time, because it is expressly stated, that in the end of 
that time, Satan and those who follow his leading shall be 
destroyed, and that Christ shall have put all enemies under his feet. 
(Heb. 2:14; Rev. 20:15). 

On the strength of these scriptures we consider it clearly proven 
that God can and will make a thorough end of evil, and of evil 
doers who prove themselves incorrigible, and that speedily; and that 
the ages following the Millennium shall be ages of eternal 
blessedness, without the least alloy of sin. The righteous shall 



flourish and "evil doers shall be cut off"-"in His day"-the 
Millennial day. 

Generosity, benevolence, and good will, are beautiful and 
commendable traits of character when centered on proper objects, 
but if extended towards the enemies of God, they become 
obnoxious in his sight, and worthy of condemnation. When the law 
of God condemned a guilty criminal to death, all Israel was 
commanded to stone him, thus expressing their acquiescence and 
approval of God's judgment. (Deut. 13:9.) 

To claim a generosity and benevolence beyond that expressed in the 
Word of God, is to assume superiority to God, and is very un- 
Christlike. He who sympathizes with the evil doer whom God 
condemns, is partaker of his evil deeds. (2 John 11; Psa. 15:4.) 

Let us seek God's will in God's way and it will speedily reprove and 
correct the vanity of frail humanity, should it attempt to be either 
wise or benevolent above and beyond what is written. "The meek 
will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach His way." 
Psa. 25:9. Let all the meek answer with assurance, "Great and 
marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy 
ways." 



R764 : page 5 

"BEFORE honor is humility; and before exaltation is humiliation. 
Pride is a besetting sin of this age, and spiritual pride is one of the 
devil's strongest snares. Beware of these pitfalls." 



R764 : page 5 

EVERLASTING DESTRUCTION. 

"It is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to 
them that trouble you: and to you who are troubled, rest, [together] 
with us; when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with 
his mighty angels [agencies], in flaming fire, taking vengeance on 
them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord 
Jesus Christ: Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction 
[aionion— not limited, i.e., upon which destruction no limit has been 
placed,] from the presence of the Lord and the glory of his power: 
When he shall [have] come to be glorified in his saints and to be 
admired in all them that believe (...) in that day." 2 Thes. 1:6-10. 

This passage positively contradicts two classes of theorists. 
Those who claim that all will be saved eternally, are contradicted 
by the Apostle's statement that a class will merit and receive 
destruction, in harmony with Jesus' statement relative to the same 
"goat" class in Matt. 25 :46. The large class which claims on the 
contrary that the punishment of the wicked is everlasting torture, 
are equally contradicted by the Apostle. He declares that the capital 



punishment which God will inflict upon the finally impenitent is 
DESTRUCTION, and that a class will receive this punishment or 
wages of sin— death. 

But we notice the above passage specially, because some have 
thought it to teach that the class "who know not God," will be 
destroyed immediately when the Lord shall become "present," and 
thus fail to share in the Millennial blessings. 

Aside from the saints who shall rest, the Apostle refers to two 
classes: the ignorant, who know not God [do not appreciate God's 
character and plans] and obey not the gospel," and "all them that 
believe" in that [Millennial] day. 

First the Lord comes— is present; next comes the revealing of his 
presence. Until the revealing or manifesting of the Lord's presence, 
none will know of it except his saints, his "friends," (John 15:14) to 
whom it is revealed by faith through the testimony of the Scripture. 
Presently comes the revealing to the world which will be in flaming 
fire; trouble, judgments— consumingly destructive to evil and 
ignorance, and wrongs of every sort; taking vengeance, visiting 
tribulation upon evil systems and all wrong-doers. 

This flaming fire, or punishment of wrong doing, with stripes and 
penalties, will continue to burn during the entire 

R765 : page 5 

Millennial age against wrong-doers, for Jesus reigns in order to "put 
down" all evil and the final result is stated to be the development of 
the two classes above referred to. 

Those "who believe in that day" when the knowledge of the Lord 
shall fill the whole earth, and who come into harmony with him 
who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life shall be blessed; and He 
shall be "glorified" in the final perfection of all such in the end of 
the Millennial age-"all them that believe— in that day." On the 
other hand those who shall continue to be of the class who 
appreciate not God's character and obey not the good tidings of 
restitution shall be then accounted wilful sinners against full light 
and opportunity; and as such meet the specified and just reward: 
they shall "be punished with everlasting destruction from the 
presence of the Lord and from the glory of his power." For these 
there is not a further gleam of hope in either reason or Scripture. 
The object of Jesus' reign is to permit all who desire life on God's 
conditions, to obtain it. That reign will not close until its object 
shall have been fully accomplished every redeemed son of Adam 
shall have 

R765 : page 6 

full opportunity of proving himself worthy to retain the life which 
the great Restorer redeemed with his own. With the full end of trial 
must come a full end of evil: Neither sin nor sinners can go beyond 
the Millennial age and with its close all such shall be destroyed. 



Seven thousand years of mingled evil God sets before us as the 
limit. "The Lord preserveth all them that love him, but all the 
wicked will he destroy." Psa. 145:20. 



R765 : page 6 



GOD'S ORDER. 



But I would have you know that the head of every man is Christ; 
and the head of the woman is the man; and the head of Christ is 
God. ICor. 11:3. 

The Apostle Paul here uses the human body as an illustration of 
God's order and arrangement among his intelligent creatures. The 
symbol is an apt one, and suggestive of perfect harmony. The head 
is the director and care-taker of the body; every interest of the body 
is taken into consideration by the head, and every possible 
provision made and applied to meet those interests. And in turn, 
the members of the body are always at the prompt and willing 
service of the head. And such is the sympathy between the various 
members that if one is disabled the other members are ever on the 
alert to execute the plans devised by the head for its recovery. 

The headship of Jehovah was expressed to Adam in his perfect 
condition in Eden, when God said: "Of every tree of the garden 
thou mayest freely eat; but of the tree of the knowledge of good and 
evil, thou shalt not eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest thereof, 
dying, thou shalt die (Gen. 2:16,17,- margin). Here was an 
expression of Jehovah's rightful authority, his loving care and his 
generous provision-his headship. Man in turn should have 
expected to reverence, respect and obey the authority, to reciprocate 
the love and to gratefully accept and enjoy Jehovah's bounty. In the 
obedience expected, the idea of base servility was absent. Love 
commanded and love should have delighted in obedience. 

Even Christ Jesus, highly exalted as he is, delights to acknowledge 
the headship of Jehovah- "My Father is greater than I"; "I came not 
to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me." And again: 
"I delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, thy law is within my 
heart" (Psa. 40:8). In harmony with this thought of the headship of 
Jehovah, the prophet Isaiah represents Christ as the "Arm of 
Jehovah" (Isa. 53:1; 59:16), and in obedience to Jehovah's will he 
was active, prompt and willing, even unto death. Thus our Lord set 
us an example of the true relationship which should exist between 
himself the head and the members of His body. 

Since Christ has redeemed mankind from death, all judgment, 
authority and power is given unto him; the office of the head is now 
vested in him; hence Paul declares: The head of man is Christ. And 
whatever is implied by this term in expressing the relationship 
between our Lord Jesus and Jehovah, his head, is also implied in 
that relation between Christ and man. He, then, who would be 



perfect, must find his chief delight in learning and doing the will of 
Christ, even as Christ Jesus delights to do the will of Jehovah. It 
should be his constant aim to bring "into captivity every thought to 
the obedience of Christ." 2 Cor. 10:5. 

The next step in God's order indicated by the Apostle, is man the 
head of woman, or as shown in Eph. 5:23, the husband the head of 
the wife. Many who see clearly the headship of Jehovah, and the 
headship of Christ, fail to see the headship of man in the domestic 
relation. Prejudice, public sentiment and the abuse of power, have 
made this and similar expressions of the faithful Apostle quite 
unpopular. And this is not surprising, in the fallen and disordered 
condition of humanity. The Apostle Paul is variously charged with 
being a despiser of women, and as speaking without divine 
authority; and this even among Christians. But when rightly 
viewed, Paul, as usual, is found to give faithful expression to the 
divine order dictated by unerring wisdom for the highest good and 
happiness of all. 

If the husband is the head of the wife, it implies exactly the same 
responsibilities on the part of each as named above. The husband 
should be the protector, provider and director in the affairs of life, 
and the wife the cheerful, willing co-worker in harmony with his 
will. He, therefore, who would assume the relation of head, should 
see that he is capable and willing to fill it after the divine pattern; 
and she who would become a man's partner in life, should see that 
she is ready to fill such position according to the divine 
arrangement. 

Yes, says some one, that would all do very well if men were 
perfect, but we know that it not unfrequently happens that the wife 
has more ability and judgment to act as head than the husband. 
Very true, but that should be considered before such contracts are 
made. If unhappily it has not been considered in time, such wives 
should make the best of the situation and quietly assist in the office 
of head, with as much modesty, and as little appearance of doing 
so, as the circumstances will admit. It also happens, says another, 
that the husband's will often runs counter to the Lord's will; how 
then? We answer, If the husband is consecrated to the Lord, and 
yet his will appears to be out of harmony with the Lord's will, he 
will be very ready, either to prove his course to be in harmony with 
the Lord's will or to change it. And here we see the wisdom which 
dictates that we should not be unequally yoked with unbelievers (2 
Cor. 6:14). But if such contracts have been formed before we 
became consecrated believers, we must bear in mind that our first 
responsibility is now to our Lord our Heavenly Bridegroom. The 
worldly husband is not the head of his wife as a "new creature" 
espoused to Christ. Her first allegiance, is, therefore, to her real 
though invisible Lord, and in so far as may be consistent with this 
new relation, she should endeavor to fulfill the old also-a thing not 
possible in every respect. For one of those consecrated to God as 
living sacrifices to thereafter become unequally yoked with one of 



the world's children, is to violate the direct command of God (2 
Cor. 6:14), and to take a long step towards ignoring union with 
Christ, "for what communion hath light with darkness"? The 
children of this world strive for the things of this world and delight 
in the world's approval, while the consecrated child of God has 
renounced all these and should be striving only to obtain those 
things which are beyond and entirely unknown to the world. But if 
both are united in the Lord, and walking after the Spirit, to do the 
will of the husband is to do the will of Christ. 

The Christian wife sustains the same relation to the Christian 
husband that the Christian husband sustains to Christ, and that 
Christ sustains to God who is head over all. Should submission on 
the part of any be regarded as mere servility? By no means. Christ 
did not so regard it; why should we? There is neither servility nor 
tyranny where love rules. Love is neither boastful of its authority 
nor ashamed of its submission. 

This order of headship we believe will still be God's order when all 
things are brought to perfection; and although there is much friction 
and lack of harmony now, because of human imperfection, there 
will be none whatever then. When Christ having finished his work 
delivers up the kingdom to the Father, he shall still be "subject to 
the Father. " The wife will then be subject to the husband because it 
will be her delight to do his will, for the woman was made for the 
man; and the husband will delight to honor the wife, because she is 
the glory of her husband. 

Ah, says Mr. Ingersol, when God said: "Thy husband shall rule 
over thee," he established domestic slavery. Truly domestic slavery 
has followed, but did God establish it? Not at all. Sin established 
it. It is a part of the wages of sin. Man, created to bless by his 
power to rule, too often falls into the error of tyrannical misrule, 
and the desire of the wife which is toward her husband, alas, often 
ends in bitter disappointment -just as God had said. And not until 
the remedy is fully applied will the curse be lifted. And when that 
remedy is fully applied, man will recognize his true position and fill 
it, and woman likewise. The husband will delight to honor the wife 
as the weaker vessel, and the wife will see that she reverences her 
husband. The wife will look up with a lawful pride in her 
husband's 

R766 : page 6 

manly strength and glory, while he will regard with admiration and 
affection her womanly grace— not equal and alike in all respects, but 
each possessing those qualities of heart and mind which make them 
companions for each other. 

If the relationship between husband and wife in the divine order 
stands thus, it cannot be true as some teach, that man and woman 
are exact equals in every respect. God never makes one the head 
over another exact equal. Jehovah is superior to Christ, Christ 
superior to man and man superior to woman the weaker vessel. 



Man's superiority consists in his greater strength, both physical and 
mental. These various steps are in God's order. True, in the present 
mixed and imperfect condition, many women are superior to many 
men, but such women should be very sure not to become wives of 
such men; for in so doing they must either violate the divine order 
(Eph. 5:22), or else submit themselves to an inferior which is also 
out of harmony with the Lord's design. 

In view of these considerations, let us note the instruction of the 
Apostle Paul, and see that its very object is the same as that 
contemplated in the union of the first perfect pair in Eden: "Wives 
submit yourselves unto your own husbands as unto the Lord; for the 
husband is the head of the wife even as Christ is the head of the 
Church, and he is the Saviour [preserver, care-taker] of the body. 
Therefore, as the Church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be 
to their husbands in every thing. Husbands love your wives even as 
Christ also loved the Church and gave himself for it, that he might 
sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word. That 
he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or 
wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without 
blemish. So ought man to love their wives as their own bodies" 
(Eph. 5:22-28). Children may then obey both parents, since each 
will be in harmony with the other and with the Lord. 

In recognition of the same principle, the headship of man, Paul 
further states: "I do not permit a woman to teach or to assume 
authority over man, but to be quiet" (1 Tim. 2:12). Surely Paul 
does not mean that a woman's lips must be forever sealed that she 
may not declare the good tidings of great joy to others. Does not 
the same Apostle say: "There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is 
neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all 
ONE in Christ Jesus." And does not the prophet Isaiah teach that 
all the anointed, are anointed to preach the good tidings. It is in 
harmony with these, then, that we must understand the above words 
of the Apostle. 

The Apostle's idea seems therefore to be, that in no case, however 
important the truth we are commissioned to bear, is woman to 
assume a position of authority and command. She may tell the 
blessed tidings of great joy anywhere and everywhere, and to 
whomsoever she has opportunity; but always with becoming 
modesty, stating the truth so clearly that of itself it may carry 
conviction with it and her own individuality be lost sight of. This 
element of character is one which naturally belongs to woman, but 
is generally very soon lost by those who attempt to work in a public 
way. The work for the majority of women, is the individual, quiet 
and none the less effective work. Her greatest influence is that 
exerted strictly within her divinely appointed sphere. If opportunity 
and ability should point out a more public sphere of usefulness, she 
may fill it as long as such opportunity lasts, if in so doing, she bears 
that modest, quiet demeanor, in action, word, and apparel, which 
becometh woman professing Godliness. 



Again, we see that in this relationship of husband and wife, is 
prefigured the beautiful relationship between Christ Jesus and the 
church. And as in the type, so in the antitype, the church, the bride 
of Christ is to be subject unto him in everything; earnestly seeking 
at all times to know, and then delighting to do his will. As the 
woman is not to assume authority and direct the man, so the church 
is not to assume authority and to attempt to direct in the Lord's 
work, but is to be "quiet," searching diligently to know his plan and 
methods, and then endeavoring faithfully to execute them. 

When God's plan shall be brought fully into execution, we see that 
loving authority and joyful submission will fill the universe with 
blessed peace and everlasting joy-and "God shall be all in all" (1 
Cor. 15:28). Head over all -his will done in earth as it is done in 
heaven. Seeing this to be God's ultimate design, it should be our 
endeavor now, so far as it is in our power, to carry out and illustrate 
that purpose now. It can only be fully illustrated, however, by 
those who are "united in the Lord." 

The Apostle's high regard for woman and woman's work is shown 
by his mention of several faithful co-laborers and helpers among 
them— see Rom. 16:1-6,13; 

R766 : page 7 

also Phil. 4:3: "I entreat thee.. .help those women which labored 
with me in the gospel.... whose names are in the book of life." And 
Acts 1:14: "All continued with one accord in prayer and 
supplication with the women." And 1 Cor. 11:5: "Every woman 
that prayeth or prophesieth (teacheth)." 

These scriptures teach, that women did a work in the Apostles' days 
which was approved and appreciated by them and by the Lord. Yet 
women usually spoke only at the smaller gatherings; and when Paul 
said, "Let the women keep silence in the congregations," he 
probably had reference to the public gatherings at which it was the 
custom to have more or less debate. In these public debatings, Paul 
thought a woman's voice would be out of place, and this is the 
opinion of most thinking men and women to-day, though it has by 
many been carried to an extreme, forbidding them to pray or teach 
on any occasion, even in more private assemblies of Christians; this 
we regard as an error. 

God has arranged that the man and woman are representative of 
Christ and his Bride, the Church, and this rule by which the 
husband is the head of the wife is always maintained in the 
Scriptures. And probably this is one reason that men have always 
been given the more active and public work of the ministry, and 
women more the work of assisting and more private teaching, yet 
equally as acceptable to God. So Christ is the active agent in 
carrying out his own plan. He is the great minister of all, and we as 
his Church are permitted to be helps meet for his use; to do a lesser 
part and yet an acceptable part, well pleasing to God. 



These remarks are suggested as answers to many inquiries from 
beloved sisters in Christ who love to tell the blessed story of God's 
wonderful plan, who yet doubted the propriety of so doing lest they 
might be in conflict with the inspired teaching of our Brother Paul. 

We hope that all such will thus be aided in clearly reading their 
commission, to declare the glad tidings in such manner as becometh 
women of the anointed body. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R766 : page 7 

"THE LORD YOUR GOD PROVETH YOU." 

"And many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many." 
"There shall arise false Christs and false prophets, and shall show 
great signs and wonders; insomuch that if it were possible, they 
shall deceive the very elect. Behold I have told you before." Matt. 
24:11-24. 

"If there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams and 
giveth thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign or wonder come to pass 
whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, let us go after other gods which 
thou hast not known, and let us serve them; thou shalt not hearken 
unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: for the 
Lord your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the Lord your 
God with all your heart and with all your soul." Deut. 13:1-3. 

When the disciples came to Jesus inquiring what should be the 
sign of his presence and of the end of the age, before answering 
their question [See art. "The Sign of His Presence" in our January 
issue.] he took occasion to give some important information as to 
events which should transpire before that time. Among others he 
foretells the rise of many false prophets and false Christs, and of 
their power to deceive. Then he adds, "Behold I have told you." 

To be forewarned is to be forearmed, if we heed the warning. But 
forgetting the warning and instruction, the many, as Jesus foretold, 
are deceived by these pretenders, and because iniquity abounds, the 
love of many of God's children waxes cold. Standing where we do 
to-day, in "The Time of the End," and looking back, we are able to 
discern many false Christs and false prophets, and can see how 
Jesus' words have proved true, that many have been deceived 
thereby. 

The word Christ means anointed, and is applicable not only to the 
anointed head, but also to the anointed body of Christ, all who as 
followers of Jesus have made a covenant with him by sacrifice: 
hence those systems pretending to be the anointed body, and who 
are not really such, are false Christs. The various great religious 
systems each claim to be the anointed body, the church, the body of 
Christ, though each regards its founder as its head. Though these 



systems contain members of the true church whom they have 
blinded and enslaved, yet as systems they are false— false Christs 
and being deceitful ensnarers of the true they are really anti-Christs. 

R767 : page 7 

The chief and greatest of these systems is the great "Mystery of 
Iniquity," the Church of Rome, whose head is the Pope. Its "lying 
wonders" have truly deceived many, and out of this system have 
sprung the various minor systems, each claiming to be the church, 
the body of Christ, and each acknowledging and following others 
than the true head of the true Church-Christ Jesus, though all 
assume his name. 

Not only have these great false christs anti-christs arisen, 
flourished, and deceived many, but many individual false prophets, 
or false teachers have also arisen; and through the combined 
influence of all these, iniquity (erroneous faith and practice) 
abounds. The truth has been covered, and error has been advanced, 
accepted, and acted upon. In the significant language of the prophet 
(Isa. 59:14,15), "Truth is fallen in the streets, and equity cannot 
enter. Yea, truth faileth; and he that departeth from evil maketh 
himself a prey." 

Since inquiring minds begin to weary of the confusing errors 
presented by the various and conflicting false christs and false 
prophets, it is becoming quite a popular method with all of these, to 
silence inquirers with the assurance that what they believe is really 
of little importance, that the all important thing is to live a virtuous 
life, and to give their influence and support to some one of the 
many false christs or false prophets, and to work in harmony with 
them and under their direction. 

But let us consider for a moment what has been the effect of some 
of the false doctrines which have been advanced, and see if this 
idea, which has now become so common, is a correct one. Take for 
example the dogma of inherent immortality. This idea was first 
advanced as a fundamental doctrine of Christianity by the apostate 
church of Rome, and has been held and guarded with special care 
by all denominations of so-called Protestants. From this as a root 
principle, have grown the dogmas of eternal torment, of purgatory, 
of death as a mere transition period, an instant of change with no 
cessation of life, for say they, man is immortal, and cannot die. If 
man must live forever somewhere, they argue that such everlasting 
existence must be in torment if not in bliss. In harmony with this 
idea, death cannot be regarded as an enemy, nor as the punishment 
of sin; nor can any blessing be seen in the scripture teaching of a 
resurrection. And further, if death be not regarded as the 
punishment of sin, the logical inference is, that the death of Christ 
as man's Redeemer or Substitute, availed nothing. This logical 
inference has not yet been drawn by the masses of those who 
compose these great systems, simply because of their drowsy 
lethargy; but for centuries the false idea of inherent immortality has 



been strengthening its roots, and shooting out and building up its 
branches, and soon the sure fruit will be a general denial of the 
redemption secured through Jesus' death. Already, prominent 
thinking ones in these various systems, reasoning, not from the 
Scriptures, but from the so-called orthodox standpoint, are boldly 
declaring their conclusions, and with no little effect upon others. 

This is the logical effect so far as faith is concerned, of that one 
single item of error firmly rooted. This error and those which have 
grown out of it, have also deterred the church from pursuing the 
most important part of her work, viz.: the building up of each other 
in the truth as presented in the Scriptures, from which alone come 
the highest and purest incentives to a holy life and to untiring zeal 
in the divine service. Furthermore, by inculcating ideas of God 
which represent him as cruel and vindictive, encouragement has 
been given to those base qualities of man's depraved nature, and as 
a consequence, the most cruel persecutions and pitiless and 
revolting crimes that the world has ever witnessed, have been 
perpetrated in the name of Christianity, and by those claiming to be 
the followers of Christ. 

Take another dogma which is held and guarded with the utmost 
jealousy by all these systems, viz.: the dogma of The Trinity, an 
idea so absurd that its very absurdity is taken as proof of its divine 
authority, though not a text of scripture can be quoted in its support, 
save a single spurious clause (1 John 5:7-8. Without the 
interpolated words it reads plainly as follows:-"For there are three 
that bear record, the spirit, and the water, and the blood; and these 
three agree in one" testimony), introduced for this express purpose, 
now generally known and admitted to be an interpolation. This 
dogma teaches that God is three separate and distinct persons, equal 
in power and glory; that the Father is a person, the Son is a person, 
and the Holy Spirit is a person, yet all three are one person. In this 
confusion of ideas none can form a clear conception of God, and all 
their thoughts of him must be very mixed and cloudy. It tends also 
to mystify their comprehension of the sacrifice which Jesus made 
for our redemption; for, if the three persons are one person, then 
when one died all must have died, and the universe was left without 
God for three days, and mere chance must have raised him up from 
death if the true idea of death be accepted; or if death be considered 
but a period of transition from one nature to another, then this must 
have been the case with Jesus also, and consequently if he was of 
the divine nature before death, he must be a different nature now. 

And so one absurdity leads to another, and leaving the principles of 
the doctrine of Christ as set forth in the Scriptures, the various false 
bodies of Christ have built themselves up into systems of great size 
and influence in the world. Their great claims and apparent success 
have deceived very many of God's children; repressed their zeal for 
the truth, left them in almost complete ignorance of the Gospel 
hopes, both for the world and for the little flock of overcomers, led 
them to worldly conformity, and prejudiced them against the truth 



and against all true truth seekers. And as the prophet said, the few 
remaining truth seekers become a prey-a prey to the hatred, 
opposition and persecution of the church nominal. Ah, yes, what 
we believe makes a very great difference. Our FAITH has a most 
potent influence in moulding both our character and our destiny; 
and every child of God should beware of any system or person that 
seeks to guard its theory against thorough examination and 
criticism by underrating the importance of a correct faith. 

True to Jesus' words, because iniquity (erroneous doctrine and 
consequent erroneous practice— worldliness, etc.) abounds, the love 
of many waxes cold. The Lord seems afar off, incomprehensible 
and almost unknown. How can they delight in his word who are 
ignorant of it? or how rejoice in his promises who do not 
comprehend them? or how strive for the offered prize who do not 
discern it? 

The elect of God cannot be thus deceived; they have walked and are 
walking with God in the midst of a crooked and perverse 
generation, searching, believing and trusting his word, walking in 
its light and striving to fulfill the conditions for the attainment of its 
exceeding great and precious promises. This fixedness of purpose, 
and adherence to it, not only designates such to be the elect of God, 
but it shields them from the deceptions and snares of false christs 
and false prophets (teachers). Though many such have doubtless 
lived and died in those false systems, they overcame their influence 
through faith and loyalty to God. We should not forget that the 
separation of the wheat from the tares was not commanded until the 
"harvest." Matt. 13:30. It was the Lord's design to let wheat and 
tares grow together until the harvest; but in this harvest time it is his 
will that all such should come out and be separate when his truth 
makes manifest the true character of these systems. 

But even after coming out of these anti-christ or false-christ 
systems, there are many false prophets who assume authority to 
direct the consecrated, who teach theories subversive of the truth 
and pervert the Scriptures to support them. Such false prophets 
always have been and always will be found, so long as Satan has 
power in his hands; that is, until he is bound. 

And our Heavenly Father permits it so to be: why? To prove his 
people: "For the Lord your God doth prove you, to know whether 
ye love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your 
soul." The Lord would prove whether we have received the truth in 
the love of it and of its Author. It is very often the case that truth is 
received by some because of their love for those who bear it, and 
without personal searching to prove that it is from God. Such have 
not received the truth in the love of IT, and sooner or later some 
circumstances will unsettle them. If the prop falls into error such 
will surely fall with it; or if love for the prop grows 

R767 : page 8 



cold, the love for truth thus received grows cold with it. But love 
for our brethren in Christ, and special love for those who serve us 
most, will never overthrow the faith of those who receive the truth 
in the love of it. 

Should controversy arise because the way of truth is evil spoken of 
even among those through whom the blessed Gospel has been 
received, and who have been greatly loved for their work's sake, it 
will only impel those who are wholly the Lord's, to a more diligent 
searching of the Scriptures, and thus more earnest inquiring of the 
Lord to make very plain the way. 

Peter reminds us that there were false prophets in Israel, even as 
there should be false teachers among us; (2 Peter 2:1) and Moses 
declares that it was permitted to prove Israel. If faithful to God, no 
consideration of a personal character, should lead them to turn 
away from God's truth after these false teachers. When we 
remember that these things happened to Israel as types for our 
instruction, the words of Moses become very significant:-"If thy 
brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the 
wife of thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own soul, entice 
thee secretly, saying, Let us go and 

R768 : page 8 

serve other gods... thou shalt not consent unto him, nor hearken unto 
him, neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou spare, 
neither shalt thou conceal him. But thou shalt surely kill him; thine 
hand shall be first upon him to put him to death and afterwards the 
hand of all the people." (Deut. 13:6-9.) 

Thus the Lord proved Israel's determination to obey him at the 
sacrifice of any earthly friendship if need be. And in this Israel was 
a type of both the world in the age to come, and also of the church 
in the present time. Temptations even from dearest friends to 
depart from the living God and serve idols, whether those idols be 
self-exaltation, or any other thing, must be resolutely met with a 
fixed purpose to follow the Lord wholly. Such suggestions may not 
be harbored nor consented to by those fully consecrated to God, 
even though they come in the most deceptive disguise, and by 
dearest friends. And not only so, but deceptive errors and 
influences must be put to death; they must be pelted to death by the 
stones of truth. Our weapons are not like those of fleshly Israel- 
not carnal but spiritual, and mighty in pulling down the strongholds 
of error. 2 Cor. 10:4. 

Ever bearing in mind that the Lord your God doth prove you, to 
know whether ye love the Lord your God with all your heart and 
with all your soul, and whether your love to him is paramount to 
every other love, however strong, we may meet the trials of 
severing friendships and dissolving earthly ties, with firm 
unflinching confidence in God, who will crown with everlasting 
joy, the faithful overcomer who has fought to the end the good fight 
of faith. 



R768 : page 8 



CHRISTIAN UNION. 



I exhort you therefore... to walk in a manner worthy of the calling 
wherewith ye were called; with all lowliness of mind and 
meekness, with long suffering, bearing with one another in love, 
giving diligence to keep the oneness of the spirit in the uniting bond 
of peace: one body [church] and one spirit [aim- mind] according 
as ye were also called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one 
Faith, one Immersion, one God and Father of all he who is over all, 
and through all, and in all.... 

"And he gave some indeed [as] apostles, and some [as] prophets, 
and some [as] evangelists, and some [as] shepherds and teachers; 
with a view to the fitting of the saints for work of ministry, for an 
up-building of the body of Christ; until we all advance into the 
ONENESS of the faith, and of the full knowledge of the Son of 
God; into a man of full growth, into a measure of stature of the 
fullness of the Christ; that we may no longer be infants, billow- 
tossed and shifted around with every wind of teaching, in the craft 
of men, in knavery, suited to the artifice of error; but pursuing truth 
in love, may grow into Him in all things who is the head, Christ; 
out of whom all the body fitly framing itself together and 
connecting itself through means of every joint of supply, according 
to an inward working in measure of each single part, is securing the 
growth of the body unto an up-building of itself in love. Eph. 4:1- 
16. Rotherham's Trans. 

Christian Union is an end greatly to be desired and sought for 
among God's children, yet it is of great importance that we have 
union on the true and Scriptural basis. Union on any other is as 
detrimental, as true union is advantageous. 

In the above exhortation of the apostle, we have christian union 
presented as a possibility, as a thing to be desired, and as a 
necessity to the healthy growth and development of the body of 
Christ. He presents also the conditions under which it may be 
attained, and by which it may be perpetuated. 

Let us notice first the character of that union of which Paul speaks. 
He says it is a union in which all so united acknowledge the one 
Lord, are inspired by the one faith, are baptized with the one 
baptism, begotten of the same Father, filled with the same spirit, 
and discerning and striving to attain the same high calling, 
recognizing one another as fellow members of the same body, and 
fellow-heirs of the exceeding great and precious promises. Being 
in the world yet not of it, walking separate from it, misunderstood 
and despised by it, how natural it would seem for those of such 
common hopes and experiences, to feel bound together by an 
almost indissoluble tie of love and sympathy. 



To a very great extent this union is felt and is strengthening among 
the consecrated ones; yet we apprehend that its necessity and 
advantage are not fully appreciated by all the body. Frequently we 
hear such expressions as the following among christians:-"Of 
course we cannot all see alike; the Lord permits you to see some 
things which he will not show to me and vice versa." "Of course 
our minds being differently constituted, some portions of truth you 
or I must fail to comprehend, while others may enjoy them." And 
so they think it impossible to be in fullest accord and sympathy; and 
if any two or three do agree perfectly, it is counted by them as an 
evidence of weakness on the part of some of the number; for surely 
say they, "Independent thought and study must develop 
differences." And with this belief pride often steps in and suggests 
the desirability of a little difference, lest too close an agreement be 
understood by others as an evidence of weakness. We doubt not 
that this very suggestion is the prime cause of much of the division 
which arises among saints; and that it is the special danger of those 
who having escaped from the confusion of Babylon, are seeking 
independently to prove what is truth. Let us beware of this little 
root of bitterness, so small at first as scarcely to be discerned in our 
hearts; yet if not plucked up, it will soon grow and crowd out the 
truth, as well as the love of it. 

Christian Union is a possibility. The same Spirit is promised for 
the guidance of the entire church-every member of it, and it is 
impossible to conceive that the Spirit would lead some into truth, 
and others into the exact contradiction of it. One member is not set 
to building up the body, and another to tearing it down; and where 
such work is being done, it behooves each one to see to it that he is 
not of the latter class, nor in the slightest sympathy with it. With 
such opposing sentiments we find the various denominations of the 
great Nominal Church attempting to form a certain kind of union, 
and then calling it "Christian Union." This union is effected not in 
the manner Paul indicates -through a common faith, hope, and 
experience; but by ignoring doctrine, agreeing to disagree and that 
each one shall speak well of and advance his own denominational 
interests without opposing what he believes to be error in the other, 
and so each one tells the world that the other is all right, that 
somehow, in some way, (inconceivable) these different roads are all 
so many different pathways to heaven, and they may please 
themselves as to which one they take; and though the most extreme 
discord exists among them, they claim that it is of utmost 
importance to be identified with some one of them. But this is not 
the kind of union of which Paul speaks. 

If as Paul teaches true christian unity is a possibility, let us note the 
conditions under which it may be attained:-First, he suggests that 
in all so united there must be lowliness of mind, meekness, a 
mutual bearing with one another's weaknesses and frailties covering 
all such things with the mantle of love; and then a constant 
watchfulness lest we grow weary in so doing. But the one Lord, 



one faith, one immersion, and one hope must be there as the primal 
basis of union. 

The plan which the Lord has adopted for building up and cementing 
the body of Christ, is by the appointment of various members to 
various offices for the general good of all: He gave some apostles, 
and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and 
teachers, not that the other members should receive their teaching 
without investigation, but in order to aid them in that work. Every 
thought suggested and every exposition of Scripture advanced by 
these must be brought to the test of the Word; and the testing may 
be of great service, if the assemblings of the saints be largely 
devoted to this important work, not in the spirit which so often 
marks controversy, each more anxious to maintain and establish his 
own opinions than to discover truth, but in the spirit of meekness 
which totally ignores such base considerations, in an all-absorbing 
desire to discover the Lord's will and plan. 

Controversy, and the closest scrutiny and criticism, under such 
circumstances and in such a frame of mind on the part of each 
cannot fail, under the promised guidance, to bring all such into a 
blessed unity, into oneness of faith; and to strongly cement the 
uniting bond of love and peace. He whose privilege it is to teach, 
will not be offended by such criticism if filled with this meekness 
and lowliness of mind, but will desire and encourage it so long as it 
will be satisfied by a Thus saith the Lord, as proof. But vain 
babblings and strife about matters of no importance should be 
avoided. A realization of the importance of truth, and a hungering 
for it, will find no time for "babbling." 

Those so united and harmoniously working together for the 
upbuilding of the body, must of necessity advance, and that rapidly 
in knowledge and fitness for the work of ministry. We should not 
forget that every member of the anointed body is anointed to preach 
(Isa. 61:1), called to the ministry [to the service of Christ, head and 
body,] and all our assemblings together, either personally or by 
means of the press and mails, are so many ministerial conferences 

R769 : page 8 for the purpose of enabling each to do more efficient 
service for the upbuilding of the body itself, fortifying the various 
members against the attacks of error and strengthening in each the 
comprehension and love of the truth. 

Thus all the members of the anointed body in communion with the 
Lord, filled with the same spirit, and being baptized with the same 
baptism [See article "Baptism" in TOWER of October, 1884,] may 
together advance into the oneness of the faith and of the full 
knowledge of the Son of God," being firmly bound together by the 
uniting bond of peace— love. 

Let us then no longer hinder our oneness of faith by the vain and 
sinful idea that we must not see things exactly as others do, but 
must be "independent." He that is independent of the body is 
independent of its head also, and is not a member of the body, for in 



it each member is made dependent on others. So surely as we are 
living in the "Day of the Lord," so surely as the bringing back of 
Zion is in progress, so surely we are living in the time when the 
"watchmen shall see eye to eye," with clearness and harmony of 
vision; all should be of one faith and enabled to point out the 
waymarks and bulwarks so clearly that every earnest member of the 
body may see light in God's light. 


