From Our Readers
Memorizing Comes Easy
I am writing to you about the article “When Memorizing Comes Easy.” (July 22, 1987) There is one aspect of the subject that should have had a good effect but was barely mentioned. That is to keep children from getting puffed up with pride because of being able to memorize easily. I say this from my own experience. When I was four years old, I memorized Bible texts; at five I was going from house to house in the ministry; and at six I was giving talks in the ministry school. I kept boasting about it, and I thought I was the best. Today I see how ridiculous I was. There is a young boy in our congregation who does the same things, and he is insufferable! Please alert parents not to let their children get puffed up so that what happened to me won’t happen to them.
F. R., Brazil
We surely appreciate the importance of Christian parents’ doing all they can to develop in their children the qualities of humility, modesty, and reasonableness. (Proverbs 11:2; Micah 6:8; Romans 12:3; James 3:17; 4:6, 10) The article did state: “The important thing is, after all, not that your child impresses others but that you and he have a warm, loving time learning what God’s Word says.” But we are pleased to enlarge on that thought here. The main thrust of the article was that children can learn at an early age and that Christian parents should capitalize on this ability by beginning early to teach them worthwhile matters, especially those taken from the Bible, which can bring lasting benefits to the children as well as their parents.​—ED.
A Salty Drink That Saves Lives
Thank you very much for that marvelous article “A Salty Drink That Saves Lives!” (September 22, 1985) Our dear son began to have frequent diarrhea and in the afternoon vomiting and exhaustion. His eyes were sunken, and the skin of his belly was losing its elasticity. We thought we should take him to the hospital, but then my husband remembered that article, and we located it in our file. We prepared the drink according to the article and gave it to our son. It was unbelievable how he started to improve. The next day he was almost well. We are most grateful for this information.
M. S., Brazil
We are pleased to see that the simple remedy was a help. Of course, we would like to emphasize that the suggested treatment was not intended as a substitute for needed professional medical care.​—ED.
Many thanks for your article “A Salty Drink That Saves Lives!” Recently our dog had serious spinal surgery. Following surgery, complications in the form of severe diarrhea set in because of a reaction to the painkillers prescribed. Nothing the veterinarian tried succeeded in controlling her worsening condition. My husband recalled the above-mentioned article. After locating it, we immediately filled her water dish with a batch of the solution and watched her gulp it down eagerly. Overnight the condition cleared up, and she is now well on the road to recovery. Your article is a real lifesaver for all, humans and animals alike.
S. M., United States

