Announcements
SUBJECTION TO SUPERIOR AUTHORITIES
Law-abiding, orderly men and women heed the commands of the Supreme Authority of the Universe and his King and thus come under “subjection to the superior authorities”. (Rom. 13:1, NW) Their command governing the personal conduct and worship of all creatures desiring life is set forth in these words, ‘Love Jehovah your God with your whole heart, soul, mind and strength, and your neighbor as yourself.’
During the month of May, Jehovah’s witnesses will demonstrate their subjection to the superior authorities, by obeying the command to love and serve their neighbors by offering them the knowledge so necessary to gain the way to life and approval from the supreme authorities by means of the book “This Means Everlasting Life” and a self-covered booklet. You too, dear reader, will want to obey the superior authorities; and this is the opportune time and occasion. Join in with Jehovah’s witnesses. Tell your friends and neighbors, acquaint them with this life-giving message by simply telling them what the book contains, and ask them to read it for themselves. Feel free to write in and ask any question you may have in this regard, then send us a report on the results of your efforts to assist others to gain everlasting life by being in subjection to the superior authorities. The accepted contribution for the above book and booklet is 35 cents.
1951 DISTRICT ASSEMBLIES—U. S. AND CANADA
Chicago, Ill., May 18-20, International Amphitheatre, 43rd and South Halsted Sts.
Dallas, Texas (White & Col.), May 18-20, Fair Park Automobile Bldg., State Fair Park.
Minneapolis, Minn., May 18-20, Minneapolis Armory, 6th Ave. S. and 6th St. S.
Toronto, Ont., May 18-20, Varsity Arena, 275 Bloor St. W. and Maple Leaf Gardens, Carlton and Church Sts.
Denver, Colo., May 25-27, City Auditorium, 14th and Curtis Sts.
Montreal, Que., May 25-27, The Auditorium, 4110 Lasalle Blvd., Verdun.
Winnipeg, Man., May 25-27, Amphitheatre Rink.
Atlantic City, N. J., June 1-3, City Convention Hall.
San Francisco, Calif., June 1-3, Cow Palace, Geneva Ave. and Rio Verde St.
Saint John, N. B., June 1-3, Curling Rink, Lansdowne Ave.
Vancouver, B.C., June 1-3, Forum Building Pacific National Exhibition.
Atlanta, Ga., June 8-10, Atlanta Municipal Auditorium, Courtland and Gilmer Sts.
Atlanta, Ga. (Colored), June 8-10, Sunset Casino, 690 Magnolia St. N. W.
Edmonton, Alta., June 8-10, Edmonton Gardens, Exhibition Grounds.
The time and place for the 1951 district assemblies are listed above. Be sure to attend and partake of Jehovah’s bountiful blessings.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of May 20: In Defense of Marriage; also “Let Marriage Be Honorable Among All”, ¶1-3.
Week of May 27: “Let Marriage Be Honorable Among All,” ¶4-26.

