European Assemblies
AS WAS announced some time ago, the Society is arranging for an international assembly in the British Isles. The dates will be August 1-5, 1951. Many persons in places outside of the British Isles are making their arrangements to travel to Europe this summer to take in the London Assembly and other assemblies. The Wembly Stadium, site of the 1948 Olympic Games, has been engaged. It is at an ideal location for the International Assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses, set amid spacious surroundings away from the city bustle, but well served by travel facilities, both underground and bus.
The president of the Society, along with other members of the Brooklyn Headquarters staff and servants from other countries, will be present at this international assembly. All sessions will be held in the English language.
This is an exceptional year for London because of the Festival of Britain, which is being staged during the summer months. It is expected that this festival will attract thousands of foreign visitors, and big plans are being made to welcome visitors in England this year. It seems quite appropriate that Jehovah’s witnesses should have selected London for their big assembly of 1951. This international assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses in Britain promises to be the greatest event of all time in the forward march of the Theocracy’s increase in the British Isles, and it is hoped that all persons who can possibly so arrange their affairs will put forth an effort to be present and share in the blessings. Watchtower readers in Britain are invited to attend all sessions at Wembly Stadium; admission is free and there will be no collections taken.
ROOMING
For the guidance of foreign visitors, the London office reports that normal rooming rates in both hotels and private homes will be in effect. It is reported that luxury hotels are all booked up; however, good-class hotels are available at 20/-to 30/- ($2.80 to $4.20) per person, bed and breakfast included. Small boardinghouse hotels run from 12/6d ($1.80), bed and breakfast. Private homes are from 7/- to 10/6d ($1.00 to $1.50), bed and breakfast. All rooming inquiries should be addressed to the Watch Tower Convention Rooming Committee, 36 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England. Delegates living in America can write to Convention Desk, Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn 2, New York, and those in Canada can direct letters to 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, for information on rooming or travel accommodations. Those in all other countries should write direct to London about rooms. Special room request forms have been printed and all conventioners should use these forms when requesting accommodations. The forms may be obtained by those in Britain from company servants and all others may write to one of the addresses given above.
The brothers plan to operate a cafeteria under canvas in the immediate vicinity of the stadium. Snack bars will also be available.
PARIS, FRANCE
The following week at Paris there will be another assembly, August 9-12 inclusive, at the Palais des Sports. All talks will be given in French. Those speakers who understand no French will talk through interpreters. It is expected that French-speaking brothers from Belgium and Switzerland will attend this assembly, along with British and American visitors who want to attend an assembly in another tongue. The Palais des Sports, Boulevard de Grenelle, Paris 15 (Metro. Bir Hakim), has seating accommodations for 12,000 and it is reported that excellent sound equipment is installed, making it ideal for the assembly. It is easily accessible by bus and the underground railway known as the Metro. It is beautifully situated in a very pleasant section of Paris. Only one block separates the Palais des Sports from the River Seine. Immediately facing the building and dominating the whole of Paris is the famous Eiffel Tower, rising nearly 1,000 feet. A cafeteria will be set up nearby.
The brothers in Paris are looking forward to having many visitors from other countries attending their assembly. The Paris office reports that there will be no difficulty in finding rooms for all conventioners. August is excellent for the assembly because during this month many students and Parisians are away on holidays and ample hotel accommodations are available at reasonable charges. First-class hotels, one or two single beds in a room, $3 to $5 per person, bathroom included; double bed in a room, $2.50 to $3 per person. In other hotels the price of rooms varies considerably, depending on the class of hotel and the number in each room. Excellent accommodations are to be obtained at $1.50 to $2.50 per person for a single bed in a room. For a double bed in a room the cost varies from $.75 to $2.00 per person. These prices do not include meals. It seems impossible to get accommodations for visiting brothers in the homes of French brothers, because this space is very limited. It is hoped that most of the visitors can be accommodated near the convention grounds in reasonably priced hotels. Most hotels have attendants that speak English. For information or room reservations write in English or French to Comité du Congrès des Témoins de Jéhovah, Boite Postale 23-16, Paris 16, France.
It is reported that the weather in Paris in August is generally very warm, thus it is suggested that you bring along cool summer clothes. (This is not necessarily true of Britain, where it may be cooler.) A light raincoat is recommended for European travel.
The one-way train-boat fare from London to Paris (via Calais) is: first class, $18.29; second class, $14.91. Reservations can be made upon arrival at London.
THE NETHERLANDS
The following week end, August 17-19, 1951, a convention will be held in Rotterdam. A sports arena known as The Ahoy has been booked. It is a new building and the main hall holds 10,000 people. There will be a cafeteria, as at the other assemblies. The brothers are looking forward to having visitors from other countries. Rooming inquiries may be sent to Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, Koningslaan 1, Amsterdam-Zuid, Netherlands, written in English or Netherlandish.
GENERAL INFORMATION
American travelers may find it very interesting to go to Britain, France and the Netherlands, traveling through Belgium on the way. Some may wish to visit Switzerland and Italy while in Europe. At the moment no visas are required for these countries of those with American passports. It is our suggestion that passports be obtained early. (United States application forms may be obtained from the Department of State, Passport Division, Washington 25, D.C., or through the clerk of a United States District Court.) The conventioners can arrange their schedules to please themselves. A similar convention program will be put on in each country.
Other European assemblies will be held during the late summer. The week end following Rotterdam’s, there will be an assembly in Germany; the meeting place has not yet been secured. Thereafter conventions will be held on week ends in Denmark, Finland, Sweden, Norway and Austria, all of which the president of the Society and some traveling companions are to attend, by Jehovah’s grace. Convention dates for each country will be announced later. After such announcement you may, if you are interested in attending assemblies in any of these countries, write to the Society’s branch office in the country regarding accommodations. This will be a big year for assemblies of the Lord’s servants in Europe. In other parts of the world there will be district assemblies, and it is hoped that all of Jehovah’s witnesses will this year be able to arrange their affairs to attend at least the nearest assembly, to enjoy a “feast of fat things” that the Lord will surely pour out upon his people. Now is the time to make the plans, especially for the European gatherings.

