From Our Readers
Pollution’s Many Victims
When I read your issue entitled “Pollution’s Many Victims,” I wept. When the abuses against our earth are listed all in one place, the criminality and tragedy of it all becomes overwhelming. What a blatant lack of gratitude mankind has shown toward the generous Owner of this wonderful home!
D. B., Florida
Heart Attack
Thank you for your article “Coping with Heart Troubles” some time back. On a Sunday morning some weeks ago a 40-year-old man suddenly had a heart attack. While everyone was shouting and no one knew what to do, I recalled the good advice brought out in your article on CPR (cardiopulmonary resuscitation). No one having the courage to help me, I put that excellent advice into practice alone. After just a few seconds his heart started to beat again. By the time medical aid arrived, the patient’s pulse had come back to normal. I went out of the room, and the neighbors and his wife said to me: “What courage!” Another asked: “Have you ever taken a first-aid course?” I answered: “No, but through ‘Awake!’ I was able to learn this and many other useful things.” The man who was revived continues to enjoy excellent health.
F. M., Italy
Airport X-Ray Machines
In a recent issue you referred to a news item indicating that airport X-ray machines are safe for film. As a professional photographer I have had occasion to read several articles recently that have come to the opposite conclusion. I have no personal experience to verify problems and cannot contest the results of the particular machine mentioned in “Awake!” But I hope that your readers will not be induced to feel too free to expose their film repeatedly to X-ray machines and then be disappointed to find their film damaged.
B. S., Texas
The news item referred to newer X-ray equipment. However, caution is in order.​—ED.
Robots
I am 11 years old and I really liked that article about the robots. I like robots so I decided to read it. I just want you to know that even 11-year-olds like the magazines you print. Please never stop printing those magazines.
P. B., Florida
Poverty
Your article on ‘improving your lot in life’ meant so much to me, I can’t tell you how much I appreciated it. My circumstances are somewhat similar to those of Carmen. Had it not been for the help of such ‘visitors’ to my home I dread to think what condition my life would be in now.
P. N., New Jersey
Thank you for the articles on poverty. I myself have experienced some poverty some years ago and wish I could have read the articles then, because it would have helped me.
E. M., Maryland

