VOL. XV. OCTOBER 15, 1894. NO. 20. 

BISHOP FOSTER'S NEW GOSPEL, NO. 2. 



WE do not find fault with the Bishop's sympathy 
for heathendom, nor with his rebellion 
against an injustice which would consign 
them to an eternity of woe, mental or physical. 
Nay, we rejoice that he can see that such procedure 
is so unjust that it cannot possibly be 
the truth: it cannot possibly be God's plan. 
We rejoice that the Bishop is so free from the 
errors of Calvinism that he cannot believe that 
the 1,200,000,000 of heathen now living, and 
the fifty times that number who have died without 
the knowledge of the only name given under 
heaven and among men whereby they can 
be saved, were predestinated by God to their 
present ignorance and to an eternity of woe 
hereafter. 

We rejoice also that he has gotten free from 
the idea of his own Church, viz., that the power 
of God for the help of the heathen is confined 
to this present life and to the present missionary 
efforts of his children, and that the vast multitudes 
not so reached and blessed will suffer untold 
agonies to all eternity;— not because God 
predestinated that it should be so, but because 
God and his faithful people are doing all they 
can for the poor heathen, and can do no more. 

All this indicates a breadth and freedom of 
thought and a sympathy of heart on the part of 
the Bishop which we greatly appreciate. But 
we fear for the Bishop and for his flock, because 
his freedom and sympathy are not begotten by 
the teachings of God's Word. His lengths and 

R1717: page 323 

breadths, and heights and depths of good desire 
for the heathen are not those inspired by 
God's revelation of his plan. Consequently, the 
more the Bishop and his followers progress 
upon these lines, the farther they will get from 
the true plan of the ages— the lengths and 
breadths, the heights and depths of the love of 
God, which surpasses human understanding.— 
Rom. 11:33-36. 

This tendency to depart from God's Word is 
markedly manifested in other parts of the same 
discourse, and cannot fail to lead many of the 



"blind" "into the ditch. "--Matt. 15:14. 

For instance, we quote as follows from the 
report of the same discourse, as it appeared in 
the Pittsburg Commercial Gazette. 

"Why did not Christ come immediately after 
the fall of man? Why was not Revelation made 
at once? Simply because it could not be.... 
In Eden language took form, but it was not sufficient 
for Revelation. Adam probably knew 
very little, and God treated him accordingly. 
He did not give him such a law as he gave to 
Israel at Sinai, but he treated him as you would 
an infant." 

Here we see the effect of the Evolution theory, 
in which the Bishop is evidently a believer. 
Since that theory is the very opposite of the 
Bible theory, conflicts at every point are unavoidable. 
The Bishop looks at our civilization, 
then backward along the aisles of history, noting 
the ignorance of the past upon every subject. 
He, with all others who lose confidence 
in the Bible, jumps to the conclusion that Adam 
was an infant, with whom language began to 
take form. He, however, states the matter more 
agreeably and more Scripturally than to say that 

R1717: page 324 

Adam was an ape of a high order of development, 
and that in him the ape chatter began to 
take form, or to become a language. 

The Bishop is right in supposing that his 
words were more acceptable to his hearers than 
if he had put the matter bluntly, as Darwin and 
others have done. The Bishop's language, however, 
is the more dangerous; for it sugar-coats 
the doctrine and hides its true unscriptural 
character from some of God's children who 
would resent, as unscriptural, the idea that 
Adam was an ape and that his race has "fallen 
upward" for the past six thousand years. 

The Scriptural position, briefly stated, is that 
God, instead of creating Adam down at or near 
the brute level, created him in his own image 
and likeness, and pronounced him, Very good! 
God does not, however, pronounce the natural 
man of to-day, Very good. On the contrary, 
he declares that all have sinned; all are out of 
the way; all are fallen; there is none righteous, 
no, not one; and that only under cover of the 
imputed righteousness of Christ can any be acceptable 
with God or have communion with 
him. But Adam had fellowship and communion 
with God and was called his "son" (Luke 3:38), 
up to the time of his transgression and 
sentence. 



The Bishop says that Adam's knowledge of 
language was so crude that God could not then 
make a Revelation. The Scriptures tell us, to 
the contrary, that God did make revelations to 
Adam-"talked with him" (Gen. 1:28-30; 
2:15-17,23; 3:8-20);-but God does not 
deign to communicate at all with the modern 
man, except he become a "believer" in 
Christ. The flood of Noah's day has left 
no traces of the early civilization, so far as 
is now known; but we may safely suppose that 
the man whom God called a very good man 
and declared to be in his own image— the man 
who could talk with God and with his wife, and 
who could not only name the animals, but control 
them, and that without brute force, was 
such a specimen of human nature as we do not 
see to-day. It does not follow that they had a 
written language in Adam's day, or that they 
printed books or had the law written upon 
tables of stone. Perhaps they had conditions 
which were preferable. Perhaps they had means 
of communicating thoughts without writing 
and printing. We believe they had. The necessity 
for written language may (we believe 
does) lie in the fact that Adam's race has fallen 
from the original, perfect state in which he was 
created. 

Our present dependence upon language and 
books, etc., and the consequent development 
of these to meet our necessities, may be 
illustrated as follows: Suppose that a racial 
weakness of the ankles had set in as the result 
of the fall, so that none were able to walk without 
crutches. The crutches at first introduced 
would probably be very clumsy; but, as time 
progressed, the shapes and finish and ornamentation 
of articles so useful would surely progress 
also. Then men unguided by the Scriptures 
would probably philosophise thus: "See how 
crude, compared with ours, were the crutches 
in use a few centuries ago;— Adam probably lay 
around unable to walk at all, or merely crawled 
about, pulling himself by the roots and branches 
of trees and bushes. The Bishop, philosophising 
from the same standpoint of thought, might 
have changed the expression above and said, 
"Why did not Christ come immediately after 
the fall of man? Simply because it was in Eden 
that locomotion began, and that in a crude 
form of crawling. The helps or crutches of 
that time would not have been sufficient to enable 
him to go about to preach the gospel." 

Language and books are merely the crutches 
which partially make good the defects of the 
human mental powers incident to the fall— 



lack of mental perception and lack of memory. 

Does anyone suppose that in heaven God and 

the angels are dependent solely upon spoken 

and written language, books, etc., that some of 

the angels are printers, and others binders? 

Neither should we suppose that the perfect man 

needed such helps or crutches, but that these 

developed to meet his wants, and that as 

those wants or imperfections of man disappear 

during the times of restitution— which God hath 

spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets— 

these will be unnecessary. (Acts 3:19-21.) Undoubtedly, 

however, language and books will 

continue among men even after the powers of 

R1717: page 325 

mental discernment and expression have been 
restored to them during the Millennium. 

In full harmony with this is the promise of 
the Lord— "This is the covenant that I will 
make with them after those days, saith the Lord: 
I will put my laws into their hearts, and in 
their minds will I write them." (Heb. 8: 10; 
10: 16.) Here the law written upon tables of 
stone, and given at Sinai, under the typical Covenant, 
is contrasted with the better arrangement 
of the New Covenant, which will ignore a written 
language entirely and write upon the hearts. 
The context shows that when the law has been 
thus written upon the hearts of all antitypical 
Israelites, who make this New Covenant with the 
Lord through Christ, there will no longer be any 
teaching, for none will be ignorant of the Lord. 
-Jer. 31:33,34. 

And this condition, which is to be ushered in 
by the Millennial age or "times of restitution," 
will correspond exactly to the conditions previous 
to the fall. The law to Adam was not in book 
form, nor upon tables of stone, but infinitely 
better: it was written in his heart and brain— in 
his very nature. He knew right from wrong by 
the operation of his perfect brain. Being "very 
good," a likeness of his Creator, he needed no 
reminders as to God's will. And the law given 
at Sinai twenty-five centuries later, instead of 
being a higher expression of the divine will, was 
a very much inferior expression, when compared 
with the perfect mind-and-heart-written 
law bestowed upon Adam. 

The Apostle Paul corroborates all this, and 
tells us that all men have some traces of this 
original and superior law. Referring to some 
of the most degraded members of the race, he 
says, these "show the work [evidences] of the 
law written in their hearts." (Rom. 2:15.) 



And in the preceding chapter the Apostle shows 
how it comes that some of the heathen are so 
very much more degraded than others,— how 
the original nature-written law came to be so 
much more nearly effaced from the hearts and 
brains of some of earth's families or races than 
from others. "Because that, when they knew God 
[in the remote past], they glorified him not as 
God, neither were thankful; but became vain 
in their imaginations, and their foolish heart 
was darkened. Professing themselves to be wise, 
they became fools;. ..wherefore, God gave 
them up to uncleanness....And even as they 
did not like [prefer] to retain God in their 
knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate 
mind."-Rom. 1:21,22,24,25,28. 

The Apostle's explanation of present degradation 
is a fall down from a height; a failure 
to retain God in their knowledge— an effacing 
of the law from their hearts and minds. The 
Bishop, on the contrary, teaches that the race 
begun in the infant Adam, one degree above 
an ape, had not, previous to the coming of 
Christ, progressed sufficiently to be able to receive 
a revelation from God,— human language 
until then being too imperfect. Which is right? 
the inspired Apostle or the Bishop? Evidently 
the worldly-wise theory of the latter 
respecting Evolution is hindering his study of 
and faith in the Scriptures. But we must accept 
the consistent theory of the Scriptures, 
though it separate us entirely from the philosophies 
of the worldly-wise. 

In speaking of the cause of Adam's ejection 
from Eden, the Bishop says "fall;" but what 
does he mean? Evidently, from the general 
tenor of his discourse, he means that Adam and 
his race have been "falling upward" for six 
thousand years. The "infant" Adam, one degree 
superior to an ape, fell up to the present 
civilized manhood;— as the result of disobedience 
to God's commands! Surely any who 
believe this gospel would be justified in saying, 
Let us do evil that good may follow! 

But those who prove the Bishop's words by 
Scripture, and who seek "to the law and the 
testimony," will turn from such inconsistency 

R1718: page 325 

of human reasoning. Such would ask the Bishop, 
Where then would be the room for, or necessity, 
or value of, the ransom for all, given by 
our Redeemer? From what could he redeem 
men, if Adam's course were so beneficial? And 
why should the promise of restitution (restoring 



to Adam's condition) be held out by God at 
the mouth of all the holy prophets? (Acts 3:21.) 
Surely, restitution of even semi-civilized 
peoples to a babe condition, one degree above 
the ape, would be a curse, a retrogression, an injury, 
a most undesirable thing! 

R1718: page 326 

One error leads naturally to another: consequently 
we find the following unscriptural statement 
in the same discourse. The Bishop is 
reported to have said:— 

"We think sin caused death, and we are accustomed 
to say so. It is not true! Death is 
God's normal method of the universe! God 
made the universe for death!" 

The vast majority of Christian professors 
would agree with the Bishop, and could scarcely 
tell why they sometimes have associated death 
with sin; when they knew all the time that they 
recognized no relationship. We suggest a reason 
for this. It is because they sometimes read 
the Bible, and they find it thus stated therein. 
But as they get to believe that the race is falling 
up, and that the Bible was written by well-meaning 
men far down below present development 
—by men who never saw an electric car or 
a bicycle or a telephone— they will get to have 
less and less care for what the Bible says upon 
this or any subject. But let us examine the Bible 
and note how positively it contradicts the Bishop 
—or, as the Bible existed first, we should say, 
how positively the Bishop's expression contradicts 
the Bible. It says:— 

"The soul that sinneth, it shall die."— 
Ezek. 18:4. 

"The wages of sin is death."— Rom. 6:23. 

"By one man's disobedience sin entered into 
the world, and death by [or as a result of] 
sin."— Rom. 5:12. 

"By one man's offense death reigned."— 
Rom. 5:17. 

"By the offense of one judgment came upon 
all men to condemnation [to the wages of sin, 
death]. "-Rom. 5:18. 

"Sin hath reigned unto death."— Rom. 5:21. 

"Since by man [Adam] came death."— 
1 Cor. 15:21. 

"In Adam all die."-l Cor. 15:22. 

"The sting of [or which produces] death is 
sin."— 1 Cor. 15:56. 

"Sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth 
death."--Jas. 1:15. 

In harmony with these words of the apostles 
and prophets was the declaration of God 



to Adam when he placed him upon trial, in 
Eden, "In the day [2 Pet. 3:8] that thou eatest 
thereof, dying, thou shalt die;" and as expressed 
by Eve,— "God hath said, Ye shall not 
eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die." 
It was Satan that declared, "Ye shall not surely 
die," as the result of transgressing God's 
command. How strange that the Bishop and 
so many others place themselves on the side of 
Satan and join in his contradiction of God's 
declaration, and with him join in deceiving 
mankind respecting "the wages of sin."— Gen. 2:17; 
3:3,4. 

The Bishop's confusion respecting the heathen 
millions is largely because he fails to see clearly 
the Bible doctrine of the fall of Adam into 
condemnation of death, and that the terrible 
ravages of death (with its attendant features, 
sickness and pain) which for six thousand years 
have rested so heavily upon the race are God's 
"curse"— the "wages" or penalty for sin. Failing 
to see that hades, the grave, is the penalty for 
sin, and an awfully severe, though just, penalty, 
the Bishop and millions of others have for years 
looked for and imagined a place where devils 
will riot in pleasure to all eternity, enjoying 
the torments they will, by God's will and 
providence, or by his inability to prevent, inflict 
upon billions of the human race. Having 
misconceived the meaning of the words sheol 
and hades, rendered "hell" in our common 
version Bible (Can we really excuse an educated 
man on the score of ignorance as to the meaning 
and Scriptural use of these words?), and 
having outgrown the unscriptural eternal torment 
theories, the Bishop is wandering about 
looking amongst the most fallen-up men for 
some modern theory that will prove that death, 
and pain and sickness are blessings, and that 
the heathen as well as the saints enter by this 
gateway into a heaven where the few developed 
Christians will be perfectly happy, surrounded 
by myriads of characterless heathen, idiots, etc. 

If the Bishop would find the path of life 
which God has provided, for there is no other, 
let him retrace his steps; let him acknowledge 
that God created man upright, but that he sought 
out various contrary devices and defiled himself. 
(Eccl. 7:29.) Then let him admit the fall of 
man downward— mentally, morally and physically. 
Then he will find a place for the ransom 
for all— Christ's death— to redeem man from 

R1718: page 327 

the sentence of death. Then he will find a place 



for the restitution to their "former estate" of 
human perfection of all who will receive Christ 
and obey him. (Acts 3:19-21; Ezek. 16:48-63.) 
Then he will find a use for the Bible doctrine 
of a resurrection of the dead, which would be 
an absurdity if there be none dead. Then the 
Lord's promise that "All that are in their graves 
shall hear the voice of the Son of Man and come 
forth," will have a meaning (John 5:25-29); 
and soon he will see that the hope for the 
heathen of foreign lands, living and dead, and 
the only hope for the vast majority of civilized 
lands, will be the great Kingdom of Christ 
during the Millennium, for which we were 
taught to pray, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will 
be done on earth as it is done in heaven;"~a 
prayer not yet answered. And in connection 
he will find that the Church is the "little flock" 
to which it is the Heavenly Father's good 
pleasure to give this Kingdom— in association 
with Christ her Head and Bridegroom;— that 
the Kingdom cannot come until the Church 
has been completed,— and that not until then 
can "all the families of the earth be blest" with 
the promised Millennial blessings and opportunities. 
-Luke 12:32; Rev. 20:4; Gen. 28: 14. 

One more point before we close. We quote 
again from the report of the same sermon:— 

GOD FORCING MEN TO SIN. 



"God gives impulses to reach out and take 
that which we should not have. But when, to 
indulge these desires, we step over the law with 
which he has hedged us about, we commit sin." 

Here the Bishop is driven by the other errors 
he holds to this almost blasphemous statement 
that God not only places temptations before 
men, but that he actually impels or forces them 
to do sin; for this is the significance of the 
word "impulse." Webster defines it, "impelling, 
or driving onward." To say that God 
impels or impulses or drives mankind to choose 
"that which we should not have," and then 
"hedges us about" with contrary commands 
so as to entrap us in sin, would be to give him 
the character which properly applies to Satan. 

If at the time of his trial Adam was ignorant 
of right and wrong, or if God impelled him to 
do the sin, surely that was not a fair trial. And 
to so teach is to declare God unjust, not only 
as to the trial, but still more so in respect to 
the punishment inflicted because of that failure 



—death, including all sickness, pain and trouble. 
This view would make God the great and really 
the only sinner, his penalty a sham, and the 
Bible doctrine of man's redemption with the 
precious blood of Christ a farce; for if man did 
not do the sinning, he was not guilty and needed 
no redemption, and God, who impulsed or 
impelled an imperfect creature to sin, was alone 
blameworthy, properly deserving of punishment. 

But how inconsistent all this is when compared 
with the simple account— the only inspired account. 
The Bible shows Adam "upright," 
"very good" in God's sight, an "image of 
God" in flesh. It shows his fair trial, his just 
sentence, God's sympathetic love for his creature, 
even in his fallen condition, and his abundant 
provision for him in the gift of his Son for his 
redemption and restitution. The Bible theory is 
consistent with reason: other theories are not so. 

How clearly the Scriptures contradict the 
Bishop, saying, "Let no man say, when he is 
tempted, I am tempted of God; for God cannot 
be tempted with evil; neither tempteth he any 
man."— Jas. 1:13. 

But the Bishop's argument appears in a still 
worse light when its different parts are united. 
For instance, take the suggestion that Adam 
was an inexperienced "infant," with whom 
language only began to take form and was "insufficient 
for revelation;" add to this the statement 
that God impulsed or impelled him to 
take the forbidden fruit and thus to break his 
laws; add, thirdly, the proposition that God 
falsified to the "babe" Adam, and told him 
that he would die for his disobedience, while 
he really meant no such thing (for the Bishop 
says, sin did not cause death: "Death is the 
normal [regular, proper] method of the universe"), 
but intended thus to develop humanity 
and bring it up to perfection. 

Can any one imagine a more nauseating theological 
compound than this? Verily, as the 
Lord foretold through the prophet, "The wisdom 
of their wise men shall perish, and the 
understanding of their prudent men shall be 

R1718: page 328 

hid."— Isa. 29:14. Read also verses 9-13, applicable 
at the present time. 

Such teaching, from such a high dignitary, 
in so popular a church as the Methodist, is sure 
to have much bad fruit, and that quickly, in the 
ranks of the ministers, as well as amongst the 
"laity." Indeed, we were not surprised to 
learn that within two weeks after this discourse 



by the Bishop, an M.E. pastor in our city 

R1719: page 328 

preached about Adam being a big, ignorant baby, 
and that his temptation and fall were necessary 
in order to develop him. 

How needful that God's people see the truth, 
to keep them from following such blind guides 
and stumbling into the pit of unbelief and agnosticism! 
Those whose eyes have been anointed 
by the eye-salve of truth, and who now see the 
real beauty and harmony of God's Word, should 
not be satisfied to rest in the truth and to render 
thanks therefor. They should "preach the 
Word," the gospel of salvation by the cross 
and not by a fall upward (evolution), nor as a 
reward for ignorance. Those who do not get 
the truth speedily, will get the error; for Satan's 
time is short and his deceptive theories are 
many, while the truth is one. 

A sure way to test all theories is to square them 
by the doctrine of the ransom. Every theory 
which asserts that Adam did not fall from perfection 
of life into death, or which says or implies 
that his fall and that of his race has been upward, 
denies the ransom, whether its advocates so admit 
or not; for, if nothing was lost, nothing 
could be redeemed or bought back. If it denies 
that man's life was forfeited by sin, it 
cannot claim the sacrifice of Christ's life as "a 
ransom [a corresponding PRICE] for all." If 
death be the normal or proper condition, and 
not the wages of sin, then Christ's death could 
not pay our penalty; and, indeed, from the evolution 
standpoint, there is no penalty for disobedience, 
but, on the contrary, a reward— of 
civilization and development. There is no necessity, 
no place, for a ransom in any such theory. 
All modern theories thus deny the ransom. 

The most insidious and dangerous "enemies 
of the cross of Christ" are those who, professing 
to be his servants and to preach his gospel, 
attack it on the inside, by denying that God's 
work was perfect when he created man (Deut. 32:4); 
that man fell from that perfection and 
divine likeness; that the right to recover him 
out of sin and death, to "that which was lost," 
was purchased of Justice by "the precious 
blood [shed,— death] of Christ." By whatever 
ways any may attempt to climb into the 
sheep-fold, they are wrong ways, and their advocates 
are pronounced to be "thieves and 
robbers." (John 10:9-11,15.) The keystone 
to the divine plan is that "the man Christ Jesus 
gave himself a ransom [a corresponding price] 



for all, to be testified in due time." (1 Tim. 2:6.) 
Whatever theory does not square with this, 
absolutely and in every particular, is thus proven 
to be a false one.— 2 Cor. 11:13-15. 



We will supply our readers with plenty of 
these criticisms of the Bishop's views, and trust 
they may do good in the way of opening the 
eyes of some of the Lord's sheep to see where 
their trusted, but blind, shepherds are leading 
them. But do not stop with this: sell or loan 
or give them speedily other reading matter- 
especially "The Plan of the Ages." (See second 
page.) We will loan a copy, post free, to any 
who will promise a careful, prayerful reading, 
and to return the book post-paid or twenty-five 
cents instead. 



R1719: page 328 

THE POWER OF FAITH. 

"This is the victory [the conquering power] 
that overcometh the world, even our faith." 
-1 John 5:4.-- 

BLESSED are the overcomers! "To him that 
overcometh will I grant to sit with me in 
my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set 
down with my Father in his throne."— Rev. 3:21. 

What a reward is this which is held out as an 
incentive and inspiration to urge us on to noble 
and heroic effort!— to reign with Christ, to be 
his bride and joint-heir, his beloved and confidential 
companion through all eternity, and 
to be partakers of his divine nature and glory. 
These promises are freighted with an "exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory," which "eye 

R1719: page 329 

hath not seen, nor ear heard; neither hath it 
entered into the heart of man; but God hath 
revealed it unto us [brought it within the range 
of our appreciation] by his spirit." The words 
sound hollow and meaningless to those who 
have no appreciation of spiritual things, but to 
the consecrated children of God who are faithfully 
striving to meet the conditions upon 
which the fulfilment depends, and who have 
therefore a good hope, they are exceeding precious, 
and fill their hearts with a joy unspeakable 



and full of glory. 

But between the present time and the realization 
of the promises there lies the necessity of 
overcoming. The word is strongly suggestive 
of a great conflict, and calls to mind also the 
Apostle Paul's expressions— "Fight the good 
fight of faith;" "Endure hardness as a good 
soldier of Christ;" "Watch ye, stand fast in 
the faith, quit you like men, be strong." To 
overcome requires energy, force of character, 
perseverance and steadfast, patient endurance to 
the very end of the present life. 

In the above text the Apostle John points to 
the only power which can sufficiently energize 
our whole being and nerve to patient endurance 
of tribulation, even to the end. That conquering 
power is faith. "Now," says the Apostle 
Paul, "faith is a basis of things hoped for, a 
conviction of things unseen." Faith is not 
merely belief or knowledge, but is knowledge 
applied, assimilated, appropriated— made a part 
of our habit of thought, a basis for our actions 
and a spur to all our energies. Such a faith is 
the overcoming power which all must have who 
would run successfully the race for the prize of 
our high calling, and be overcomers. 

What is it that is to be overcome? John briefly 
comprehends it all in the expression, "the 
world." Then the whole world is against us 
in this battle. Yes, its spirit, its popular methods, 
its ambitions, ideas, hopes and aims are all 
at variance with the elect Church of God, who 
are not of this world, even as Christ is not of 
this world. The world is taking its own course, 
ignoring God, leaning to its own understanding 
and pursuing its own way. Consequently, 
our course is in direct opposition to that of the 
world, and we must pull hard against the current 
of the world's spirit which is deeply inwrought 
in our old nature, as well as surrounding 
us on every side. Yes, it is a hard pull; and 
we need all the inspiration and energy that 
faith can impart to accomplish it. 

It is important, too, to see that our faith is a 
correct faith; for if the faith be an erroneous 
one, inspiring false and delusive hopes built 
upon sandy foundations, the stronger this impelling 
power becomes, the more surely and 
quickly will it drive its deluded victim to shipwreck 
upon the rocks. Faith, like steam in an 
engine, is a power either for good or for evil. 
Hence the importance of a correct faith. 

It was because of this importance of faith, and 
of recognition of it as the motive power, either 
for good or for evil, that the Apostle Paul was 
so solicitous for the continuance of his converts 



in the faith. (See 1 Thes. 3:2,5,6,7,10.) He 
urged all to examine and prove themselves, 
whether they were in the faith, grounded and 
settled, and not moved away from the hope of 
the gospel, but rooted and built up in Christ and 
established in the faith; and to beware lest any 
man spoil them through philosophy and vain 
deceit, after the traditions of men, after the 
rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. 
(Col. 1:23; 2:7,8.) He was deeply solicitous, 
too, that the faith of the Church should not 
stand in the wisdom (the vain philosophies) of 
men, but in the power of God. And, therefore, 
in his preaching, he did not launch out into 
foolish speculations or follow his own or any 
other men's reasonings, and so pander to the 
popular craving for something new; but he confined 
himself to the expounding of the sacred 
Scriptures and to exhortations, inspired, as they 
were, by the revelations made to himself— a 
prophet, as well as an apostle.— 1 Cor. 2:4,13; 
2 Cor. 12:1-7; Gal. 1:11,12; 2:2; 
2 Pet. 3:15,16. 

Let us see, then, that we have the faith of 
Christ— the faith well founded in the Word of 
God, a faith examined and proved, deeply rooted 

R1720: page 329 

in the heart as well as in the head, and therefore 
established as the motive power of life. 
Such a faith is not nervously looking about for 
something new, and always probing the vain 
philosophies of men to see how skilfully they 

R1720: page 330 

can withstand the Word of the Lord; for those 
who do so show plainly that their faith is not 
of sufficient influence to be the moving power 
in them, impelling them onward to full and complete 
victory over the world. 

Faith, to be a conquering power in us, must 
go deeper than the head: it must go into the 
heart, and thus permeate and energize the whole 
being, bringing not only the outward conduct 
but every thought into subjection to Christ. 
Then indeed will faith impel to action, to works 
which clearly manifest it; for "faith without 
works is dead." A mere intellectual assent to 
the truth of God, which does not lead to activity 
in his service, is not faith, and can never 
overcome the world nor secure the prize of our 
high calling. But this is the conquering power 
that overcometh the world, even our faith. Let 
us examine ourselves and see that we have it 



pure and simple, and deeply inwrought in the 

fiber of our character, and that as an energizing 

principle it is moving us to faithful and persevering 

activity. Let it be the governor and inspiration 

of our lives— a living faith which purges 

and purifies and strengthens to diligence and patience 

to the end of the narrow way to life. 



R1720: page 330 

LETTERS OF INTRODUCTION. 



In our last issue we stated that a different 
wording for the proposed Introductory Letter 
for traveling teaching brethren had been decided 
on; and this we give below. It may be 
well, however, to guard against any misunderstanding 
by explaining:— 

I. These letters are not authorizations to 
preach. That cannot be given by man. All 
true disciples, trusting in the precious blood, 
and fully consecrated to the Lord's service, are 
authorized by God's Word to preach the gospel 
in any and every way they can do so; and according 
to their talents and opportunities such 
should be glad to do all the preaching they can 
do, publicly or privately, by word or pen or 
printed page. (See Matt. 28:19.) The Apostle 
Paul, while assuring us that his authorization or 
ordination as a minister was not of man nor by 
man, but of and from God only (Gal. 1:1), 
nevertheless went forth to his ministry with 
Barnabas under the auspices of the Church at 
Antioch— as the Lord's representative and as the 
representative of the Church at Antioch. (Acts 13:3; 
14:26,27.) He evidently took just such 
a letter; for it was the usual custom to give and 
carry such letters. (Phil. 2:28-30; Rom. 16:1-15,17; 
ICor. 16:3; Acts 18:27.) This is 
intimated in his epistle to the Corinthians— 
"Need we, as some others, epistles of commendation 
to you," etc.? (2 Cor. 3:1.) He 
did not need such a letter to the Church at Corinth, 
because, as he there explains, he himself 
had founded and established that Church and 
few could know him better than they, or them 
better than he. But when first he visited the 
Church at Jerusalem, he did need letters, or 
more, a personal introduction. (See Acts 9:26,27.) 
It is this Apostolic custom and safeguarding 
of the flock that we seek to copy now, for 
the benefit of all concerned. Individual letters 



would serve where the individuals are known, 
or Church letters would serve where the Churches 
are known; but in this case the Tract Society is 
known to you all, and we are confident that its 
introduction will be appreciated by the scattered 
ones everywhere. 

II. ZION'S WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY is 
not a "religious society" in the ordinary meaning 

of this term; for it has no creed or Confession 
of Faith. It is purely a business association, 
whose mission is to serve in a business 
manner the wishes of its beneficiaries, who are 
represented in its officers. How faithfully it 
has served these purposes thus far, its enemies no 
less than its friends bear witness. 

The design of the organization of the Tract 
Society is to keep the affairs and moneys, represented 
by it, quite separate from the individual 
affairs of its managers. This present convenience, 
however, is still less than may be enjoyed 
in the future; for it is hoped that the death of 
any or all of those now managing the Fund 
would not destroy the Society nor totally hinder 
or involve its work, as the representative and 
servant of the household of faith, in economically 
providing tracts, etc., etc., for their use, 

R1720: page 331 

benefit and assistance in missionary work, since 
in its Charter provision is made for such 
contingency. 

III. The issuance of these Letters of Introduction 
means no more than if you or any other 
individual gave such a letter— except that it represents 
the judgment of experienced brethren, 

well informed respecting the character, ability, 
etc., of those introduced.— See Acts 16:2. 

Thus, in this day of "deceivers" (2 Tim. 3:1-13; 
Rom. 16:18; Matt. 24:24; Eph. 4:11-14), 
you may the more readily receive those 
of whom we bear testimony, knowing that we 
will use conscientious care. 

IV. It will be noticed that the eight qualifications 
named in this Letter of Introduction 

are not doctrinal, except as to the ransom— the 
foundation: and we hold that without it 
none are Christians at all. The other qualifications 
are those respecting character, and we 
believe them to be reasonable; and any one 
who could not confess them to be true of himself 
by the grace of God, we could not feel free to introduce 
as a proper person to be a teacher or a 
qualified servant, in the Church of the living 
God. 
It is not to be understood that those making 



these professions of qualification claim to be 

perfected in all those Christian graces and qualifications, 

but that they believe that they have 

them to such a degree as they concede a representative 

of Christ should possess them, in order 

to be a servant of the Church in holy things. 

All possessed of the right spirit, however, will 

desire and strive to continually grow in grace 

and knowledge and love and in every good 

work, and expect to be perfected only when 

they awake in the resurrection, in the likeness 

of their Lord.-- 1 Cor. 15:42,43. 

This Introductory Letter expires December 
31, 1895, and should be returned at that date, 
with application for renewal, if a new one is desired. 
The holder agrees to return this letter 
to the Society upon demand of the Society 
through its Board of Directors, at any time. 

Copy of the— 

LETTER OF INTRODUCTION. 



FROM ZION'S WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY, 
ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

To the Church of the living God, whose names 
are written in heaven (1 Tim. 3:15; 
Heb. 12:23), Greeting! 

We hereby commend to your Christian fellowship, 
and to your acceptance as a helper and 
counselor, our beloved brother and co-laborer, 



He is a brother beloved in the Lord, well reported 
of by brethren who know him, and one 
whom we recognize as a child of God and follower 
of Christ (with all that this implies respecting 
good moral character); and we believe 
him to possess the following qualifications for 
SPECIAL SERVICE to the household of faith: 

I. Unexceptional moral character, polished 
by the truth. 

II. Meekness— that he may not become 
puffed up, and thus be injured himself, while 
seeking to help you. 

III. A clear conception of the Lord's great 
plan, and large participation in its spirit. 

IV. Ability to impart the truth to others in 
its own power and simplicity (not necessarily 
an orator). 

V. Known fidelity to the doctrine of the 
ransom in its only true sense— a corresponding 
price or substitute for the forfeited life of Adam 
and his race, which inherits death through him. 

VI. A humble mind, seeking to preach not 



himself, but Christ— not to air his own knowledge, 
but to present God's Word in its purity 
and simplicity. 

VII. A student of the Word, of cultivated 
thought, well founded and settled— not a wondering 
novice; not a teacher of speculations and 
fancies, nor of Anglo-Israelism, Socialism, Politics, 
Astronomical theories, or other questions 

not of spiritual profit, but to the subverting of 
the hearers (2 Tim. 2:15-17; 1 Tim. 4:7; 6:20,21); 
but- 

VIII. He comes to you seeking to establish 
the faith and character of the Church, presenting 
the One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism— 

the one gospel, authorized by and based upon 
the one sacrifice, given once for all. 

He has affirmed to us, in writing, that, by 
the grace of God, he already possesses these 
qualifications, and that he is striving daily to 
perfect them in his actions, words and thoughts; 
and, in showing this Letter to others, he thereby 
makes the same confession to them. 

He comes to you under the GENERAL ORDINATION 
AND COMMISSION of our Lord's Word, applicable 
to all fully consecrated believers in the 
precious blood (Matt. 28:19,20; Isa. 61:1-3); 
but is particularly commended by us to you, because 
of the above eight special qualifications,— 
for your upbuilding in knowledge and practice of 
the truth, to help you over difficulties, and to help 
you to stand, in this evil day, against all the wiles 
of Satan and his multiplied, deceptive errors. 
We hope also that he will be able to water and 
bring forward to perfection some of the good 

R1721 : page 331 

seeds of truth which you have been patiently 
sowing amongst your neighbors for years, by 
word of mouth, and by the printed page;— answering 
their remaining questions, and convincing 
and confirming such in the knowledge of 

R1721 : page 332 

the truth; and to aid all in the great life-work 
of "perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord." 
He has full authority from the Lord (as above 
cited) to administer symbolic baptism, according 
to all and singular the commands and 
teachings of the Holy Scriptures; and to take 
a leading part in gatherings of the "household 
of faith," either for commemorating our Lord's 
death, or for worship, or for Bible study; but 
he has no more authority, under the above commission, 
than has any other consecrated believer, 



except such authority as special qualifications 
for this service would give. His coming 
to you with this our letter of introduction and 
commendation will, we doubt not, secure to 
him the leadership of any meetings held during 
his stay,— even though the local leader should 
hold a similar letter of commendation. Receive 
him in the spirit of love and Christian fellowship, 
and aid him by your prayers and cooperation 
(Col. 1:7; 4:7-9; Phil. 4:3); nevertheless, 
PROVE (1 John 4:1-3) critically, by the 
Word of the Lord, his every presentation. Hold 
fast that proven to be good.— 1 Thes. 5:21. 

In the love and service of the King of kings 
and of Christ Jesus, the Lord, Redeemer and 
Head of the Church, we remain 

Your loving servants, 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY. 

{ Corporate } President. 

{Seal. } Secretary. 



R1721 : page 332 

"LET PATIENCE HAVE HER PERFECT WORK. 



"Let patience have her perfect work, that ye 
may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing." 
-Jas. 1:4.-- 

THE term "patience" carries with it the 

thought of meek, uncomplaining endurance 

of suffering with humble resignation and perseverance. 

It is a trait which indicates strength 

and self-discipline. It cannot be predicated 

of inexperienced persons, but only of characters 

which have been subjected to trials of affliction, 

pain or loss; and it always shines brightest 

when manifested under the glowing heat of severe 

affliction. This trait takes a very prominent 

place in the galaxy of Christian virtues; for without 

it the heart would grow faint, the head weary; 

and the steps would soon falter along the narrow 

way in which the Church is called to walk. 

"In your patience possess ye your souls," said 

the Master, implying the danger of losing our 

souls, our existence, if we fail to cultivate this 

grace which is so very necessary to our continuance 

in well doing. 

The Apostle James does not overstate the 
matter when he intimates that the perfect work 



of patience will make its subjects perfect and 
entire, wanting nothing; for the Apostle Paul 
assures us that God, who has begun the good 
work of developing character in us, will continue 
to perform it until the crowning day— the 
day of Jesus Christ. (Phil. 1:6.) All his children 
will be subjected to just such discipline as they 
need for the correction of faults, the implanting 
and development of virtues, and for their training 
and establishment in righteousness, so that 
they cannot be moved. "If ye be without 
chastisement [discipline and correction], whereof 
all [true sons of God] are partakers, then are 
ye bastards, and not sons; for whom the Lord 
loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son 
whom he receiveth. If ye [patiently] endure 
chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons; 
for what son is he whom the father chasteneth 
not?"-Heb. 12:8,6,7. 

This great work of developing and training 
character is necessarily a slow and tedious one, 
and not infrequently it is a painful process; 
and the patience that cheerfully submits to it 
is begotten of a high appreciation of the ends 
to be attained by it. It is begotten of a love 
of righteousness, truth and godliness, and is 
therefore most noble and praiseworthy. 

But how can we let patience have her perfect 
work? Just by meekly doing the best we can 
each day, and doing it cheerfully and well; 
making the best of every thing and going forward 
daily with true Christian fortitude to act 
the noble part in every emergency of affliction, 
pain or loss. To-day's trial may be a light 
one, perhaps almost imperceptible; or to-day 
may be one of the sunny days in which God 
bids our hearts rejoice in his overflowing bounty. 
To-morrow may bring its cares and its 
petty vexations that irritate and annoy. Another 

R1721 : page 333 

to-morrow may witness the clouds gather 
above our heads, and as the days follow each 
other the clouds may grow darker and darker 
until we are forcibly reminded of that strong 
figure of the Psalmist—"I walk through the 
valley of the shadow of death." Yet never will 
the valley grow so dark that the patient, trusting 
one cannot triumphantly exclaim, "Though I 
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, 
I will fear no evil; for thou [my Lord] art with 
me: thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me." 
Yes, there is comfort in the "rod" (of chastisement), 
as well as in the "staff" (of providential 
care); for both are designed for our 



ultimate profiting. 

The Apostle Paul tells us plainly that tribulation 
is necessary for the development of patience 
—"Tribulation worketh patience; and 
patience, experience; and experience, hope." 
(Rom. 5:3,4.) Consider how your own experience 
has verified this, you who have been 
for some time under the Lord's special care and 
leading. How much richer you are for all the 
lessons of experience, and for the patience that 
experience has developed in you! Although, 
like the Apostle, you can say that "no chastening 
for the present seemeth to be joyous, but 
grievous; nevertheless, afterward, it yieldeth 
the peaceable fruits of righteousness unto them 
which are exercised thereby." (Heb. 12:1 1.) 
In the exercise of patience the lessons of experience 
have made you stronger. They have 
increased your faith and drawn you into closer 
communion and fellowship with the Lord. 
They have made you feel better acquainted with 
and to realize more and more his personal interest 
in you and his care and love for you. And 
this in turn has awakened a deeper sense of gratitude 
and an increasing zeal to manifest that 
gratitude to him. This also deepens the sense 
of fellowship with God, and gives confidence to 
the hope of final and full acceptance with him 
as a son and heir, worthy through Christ. 

"Wherefore lift up the hands which hang 
down and [strengthen] the feeble knees"— 
"Let patience have her perfect work, that ye 
may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing." 

The Apostle James urges that we take the 
prophets who have spoken in the name of the 
Lord for an example of suffering affliction and 
of patience. Then he cites the example of Job 
and the manifest end or purpose of the Lord in 
permitting him to be so sorely tried: how the 
Lord was really very pitiful and of tender mercy, 
although the pity and mercy were not manifest 
except to the confiding faith that said, 
"Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him" 
—until the long and painful discipline had 
yielded the peaceable fruits and the subsequent 
rewards of righteousness. 

There is little virtue in the patience that endures 
merely from motives of worldly policy, 
though even that often has much advantage in 
it. Men in business dealings with fellow-men 
well know that an impetuous, turbulent disposition 
is greatly to their disadvantage, while patient 
consideration, temperance in judgment, 
and good self-control are of immense value, 
even from a worldly, business standpoint. But 
the patience that is begotten of deep-rooted 



Christian principle is the kind that will endure 
all trials and shine the brighter for every affliction 
through which it may pass. 

Job, the servant of God, was accused of selfish 
policy-motives for his remarkable patience 
and faithfulness; and it was boldly affirmed that 
if he were tried by adversity his mean motives 
would be manifest— that he would curse God 
to his face. But God knew better; and it was 
in Job's defence that he permitted him to be 
tried to the utmost that the loyalty of his heart 
might be manifest. Some of his poor comforters 
viewed Job's afflictions only in the light of 
chastisements, failing utterly to comprehend the 
divine purpose, and this only added stings to 
his afflictions; but through them all the Lord 
brought his servant and most fully vindicated 
him in the eyes of all the people. 

Thus will he ever do with all who patiently 
maintain their integrity and trust in God under 
affliction. If any man recognize affliction as 
a chastisement of the Lord for the correction 
of some evil way in him, let him be quick to 
learn the lesson and repent; or if it be refining 
discipline, let patience under the tedious process 
have its perfect work. 

The Apostle Paul (Heb. 11) calls up a long 
list of patient, faithful ones who endured cruel 

R1721 : page 334 

mockings and scourgings, bonds and imprisonment, 
who were stoned, sawn asunder, were 
tempted, were slain with the sword, who wandered 
about in sheep-skins and goat-skins, being 
destitute, afflicted, tormented; of whom the 
world was not worthy; who wandered in 
deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and 
caves of the earth. All this they endured patiently 
for righteousness' sake, looking by faith 
to God for the reward of their patience and 
faithfulness in his own good time. Then again, 
says the Apostle (Heb. 12:3), "Consider him 
[Christ] that endured such contradiction of sinners 
against himself, lest ye be wearied and 
faint in your minds." Yea, consider him, "who, 
when he was reviled, reviled not again; when 
he suffered, he threatened not; but committed 
himself to him that judgeth righteously." He left 
us an example that we should follow his steps. 
While we see the great necessity for pruning, 
cultivating and discipline in the development 
of character, it is manifest that none will be 
able to endure it unto the desirable end of final 
establishment in righteousness who do not from 
the beginning diligently devote themselves to 



the exercise of patience. "He that shall endure 
unto the end, the same shall be saved." 
"In your patience possess ye your souls." 



R1722: page 334 

A SABBATH IN CAPERNAUM. 



IV. QUAR. LESSON III., OCT. 21, MARK 1:21-34. 

Golden Text— "He taught them as one that had 
authority, and not as the scribes."— Mark 1:22. 

The opportunities of the synagogue and 
the Sabbath day were eagerly embraced by 
our Lord, affording, as they did, very favorable 
circumstances for the presentation of 
the truth. The habit of calling upon suitable 
persons in the congregation for the 
reading and expounding of the law and the 
prophets opened wide this door of usefulness. 

Our Lord's dealing with the unclean 
spirits (verses 23-26,34) shows three things 
—(I) the actual personal existence of invisible 
evil spirits. This one manifested his 
power to act, think, speak, and to hear and 
obey; and the Lord recognized and addressed 
him as a person, and commanded his obedience. 
(2) The power, and limit of power, 
in such beings. They can do nothing except 
as God permits them; nor can they invade 
the mind or heart of any man, save as he submits 
his will to their power. (3) The circumstances 
manifested the fact that the Lord's 
authority and power are known and recognized 
by the evil spirits. A very similar expression 
to that of verse 24 is found in Matt. 8:29 
—"Art thou come hither to torment us 
before the time?"— showing that they know 
of an appointed time for the judgment of 
angels as well as of men. "Know ye not 
that ye shall judge angels?" said the Apostle, 
addressing the Church; and the fallen angels 
seem to have found it out.* 

The Lord's wonderful power and sympathy, 
manifested in the healing of multitudes 
of the sick and afflicted, in casting out devils 
and in preaching the blessed gospel of the 
coming Kingdom, were but a faint illustration 
of his mighty power to be exerted at 
the time appointed, and now at hand, for the 
blessing of all the families of the earth. 



*See TOWER, July 15, '94. 



R1722: page 334 

A PARALYTIC HEALED. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON IV., OCT. 28, MARK 2:1-12. 

Golden Text— "The Son of man hath power 
on earth to forgive sins."— Mark 2:10. 

The healing of the sick was one of the 
distinguishing features of our Lord's earthly 
ministry— doubtless for several reasons, 
which are very manifest— (1) It foreshadowed 
the great work of his Millennial reign 
—the healing of the nations and the wiping 
away of all tears from off all faces. (2) His 
miraculous healing of the sick and raising of 
the dead attracted wide attention, drew the 
multitudes to see and hear him, and established 
his authority as a teacher sent from 
God. (3) It manifested his love and sympathy 
for the afflicted and suffering. 

Quite a difference will be observed between 
the work of the Lord during the three 
and a half years of his ministry and that of 

R1722: page 335 

the Apostles. Jesus taught mainly the surface 
and introductory truths of Christianity, 
and beyond these he opened his mouth only 
in parables and dark sayings which could 
seldom be understood by those who heard, 
while the Apostles brought forth the deeper 
things of God and did very little healing, etc. 

This was because the time had not yet 
come for opening up the deep things of 
God, and consequently the people were not 
yet prepared to receive them. It was as 
our Lord said upon one occasion,— "I have 
yet many things to say unto you, but ye 
cannot bear them now: howbeit, when he, 
the spirit of truth is come, he will guide you 
into all truth.. .and he will show you 
things to come." (John 16:12,13.) At Pentecost 
the holy spirit came upon the early 
Church, and has been in the hearts of all 



God's truly consecrated people ever since, 
enabling all such to hear the deep things 
with appreciation and gladness and some 
to teach it with power and unction. 

After the first introduction of Christianity, 
the miracle-working power gradually left 
the Church (1 Cor. 13:8), because no more 
needed as an introduction, and because the 
times of restitution— of healing and refreshing 
the world— had not yet come, and were 
not designed to be inaugurated for eighteen 
hundred years. But the deep and glorious 
truths of God's Word, the "exceeding great 
and precious promises" now made manifest 
to his saints, are the many things which the 
Lord had to tell, but which none were able 
to receive prior to the day of Pentecost. 

We understand our Lord's words, "Greater 
works than these shall he do" (John 14:12), 
to refer to the spiritual work of the 
Church during this Gospel age,— opening 
the eyes of men's understanding and, as 
God's ambassadors, calling and perfecting 
the saints for the great work of the Millennial 
age. We can conceive of no greater or 
grander work than this: it is certainly far 
superior to the curing of the physically 
blind and lame and deaf. Our Lord could 
not engage in this greater work himself, 
because the world could not be "called" 
or accepted to divine favor and anointing 
with the spirit of adoption until provision 
had been made for the forgiveness 
of their sins. That provision was our Lord's 
death as a "ransom for all" and his ascent 
"on high, there to appear in the presence 
of God for us [on our behalf]." Thus the 
"greater" work was left to his followers 
under his direction, but made possible for 
them by his previous work— his sacrifice of 
himself. The partial offer, favor to fleshly 
Israel, was by virtue of their typical justification 
and typical acceptance with God 
by the typical merit of their typical atonement 
sacrifices. 

When the Lord perceived the faith of the 
afflicted one and his friends, his reply, "Son, 
thy sins be forgiven thee," implied that restoration 
to the divine favor which guaranteed 
healing and full restitution to health and 
life in God's appointed time. Apparently 
the Lord was going to let him wait the 
appointed time, with the simple assurance 
of the present favor of God, thus to test his 
faith and the measure of his satisfaction in 
the assurance. 



His object in subsequently granting the 
immediate cure, as stated in verse 10, was 
to manifest his authority to forgive sins— 
"That ye may know that the Son of man 
hath power on earth to forgive sins (he 
saith to the sick of the palsy), I say unto 
thee, Arise, and take up thy bed, and go 
thy way into thine house. And immediately 
he arose, took up the bed and went 
forth before them all." This was the divine 
testimony to the power of Jesus to forgive 
sins and to bring to pass in God's own time 
all the blessings that forgiveness of sins implies; 
viz., full restitution to human perfection. 
Praise the Lord for the good tidings 
illustrated and emphasized in the miracles 
of our Lord! 



R1722: page 335 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT." 



DEAR FRIENDS :-Coming out of a gospel 
meeting, a copy of your publication, entitled 
"Do You Know?" was handed to 
me. I have read it eagerly, and fully realize 
the facts revealed therein to be the real 
truth, and of the utmost importance for 
every Christian to know. 

In the last paragraph of the above mentioned 
publication I have noticed your kind 
solicitude for the poor in spirit and for the 
hungry after righteousness; and, being one 
of them, I hasten to write to you and respectfully 
ask you to supply me with some food. 

I am one of the lost sheep of the house 

R1722: page 336 

of Israel. Recently the Lord opened my 
eyes, and I saw my Good Shepherd afar 
off. I ran to him over cavities and mountains, 
through thick forests and heavy walls, 
until I came near him, that I need only 
stretch my arms to embrace my dear Lord 
and Savior; and, O Lord! there is still another 
mighty obstacle obstructing my way: 
one which I am not able to remove myself, 
nor know I of a strong friend near me who 
would offer me aid. I am therefore rejoicing 
over your proposition, and hasten to 
apply to you for assistance, and trust that 



through your superior theological knowledge 
I will be able to embrace my dear Lord 
and Savior freely and consciously, and attach 
myself to him for ever. 

I am now reading the New Testament 
thoughtfully the second time. Every word 
makes a deep impression upon my mind. I 
am fully convinced, and heartily believe, that 
our great Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, is 
the Son of the living God, the authorized 
ruler of earth and the direct Mediator between 
the mighty Father and the sinful 
world, and that only through believing in 
him, and by his precious blood, can our sins 
be cleansed away, and we become white as 
snow. These facts came to me partly from 
the New Testament, but mostly from the 
Old Testament and from the fiery Law. 

The obstacle that now obstructs my way 
is Matt. 28:19, and the general Christian 
doctrine of "Trinity," which conflicts very 
much with the first and most important 
commandment of our mighty Father. In 
the first commandment, the Lord said, I am 
(perfect in himself) the Lord thy God, and 
thou shalt have no other gods before me. 
He also emphasized this very important 
commandment by placing a heavy punishment 
upon disobedience to it. (Exod. 20:2,3,5.) 
Now, if a Christian must believe in 
"Trinity," that the godhead is composed of 
three persons, the Father, the Son, and the 
holy spirit, it is in my judgment (I fear to 
utter it) a violation of that very commandment. 
I would therefore be exceedingly 
grateful to you, dear friends, if you would 
be so kind as to give me a plain and explicit 

R1723: page 336 

explanation on the above subject, that I 
and my family, and perhaps many others 
whom the Lord may privilege me to bring 
under his shelter, may live in the beauty of 
truth and holiness. 
Awaiting your reply, I am, Yours faithfully, 
C. S . L (a Hebrew). 



GENTLEMEN:-Please accept heartfelt 
thanks for the three volumes of DAWN. We 
pray that their light may be brought unto 
all people, as they are, veritably speaking, 
a key to the Bible. Heretofore the Scriptures 
were very dark to me; but since reading 



the DAWNS, they are being opened up 
to me in their true light. May the Father 
of Heaven add his richest blessings to the 
effort put forth in their circulation, is the 
prayer of your humble servant, 

A. E. KERSTETTER. 



page 336 

DEAR BRETHREN:--About two months 
before having seen or known of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN and its wonderful and glorious 
Bible teachings, I had solemnly given myself 
to God in consecration, earnestly seeking 
to know and to do his will. When I 
began to investigate the DAWN, seeing that 
it was somewhat different from other religious 
books, I read critically and prayerfully, 
going to the Father, through Christ (John 14:6), 
and leaning on his promise to give 
wisdom to them who ask, seek and knock; 
and so I was ready to search its pages 
according to the will of God— whether it 
were truth or error, "strong meat" or 
simply the theory of man. 

Hungering and thirsting after truth, I 
continued to read, searching the Scriptures 
daily, drinking in the refreshing truths from 
the eternal fountain of all love— God. With 
the knowledge of these things in my heart, 
my experience is one of joy and real satisfaction. 
Nevertheless, since I began to walk 
in the path of light, and to appreciate the 
exceeding great and precious promises, I 
noticed the way was not smooth and easy, 
but rough, difficult and narrow, with many 
obstacles to overcome. I saw I must be 
tested and tried (to prove my love for, and 
appreciation of, the truth), not only during 
my first lessons, but at all times afterward. 
So I realize that I must overcome, and "press 
toward the mark for the prize," walking by 
faith, while the way becomes more narrow 
and steep, even until the end, when the 
blessed goal is reached, and the crown of 
life received. 

I have endeavored to carry the good news 
to others; and it is my purpose to "continue 
in the word," and let the light shine, 
"holding forth the word of life," no matter 
what it may cost me. 

Yours in the precious faith, 

JAS. McFARLAND. 



page 338 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



TO NEW subscribers for 1895, we will give 
gratis this double number and the December 
issues. 



THE PRICE of this double number is ten cents; 
but subscribers desiring extra copies will be 
supplied at the rate of 6 for 25 cents or 25 for 
$1.00. 



R1723 : page 338 

A WONDERFUL THING IN RELIGION. 



"Our enterprising Jewish contemporary, the 
Tidings, prints a report of the ceremonies at the 
dedication of the new and grand synagogue in 



Cleveland, and we are not going too far when 
we say that some of the things told of in the 
report are wonderful. Is it not a wonder that 
a half dozen of the Protestant ministers of 
Christianity united with the rabbi of the synagogue 
before the Jewish shrine in delivering 
discourses of exultation at the dedication of the 
edifice erected for the service of the Congregation 
Tiffereth Israel? 

"We do not remember ever hearing of any 
other incident just like it. 

"The six denominations of Protestant Christianity 
were represented by the six clergymen, 
who took part in the proceedings of the occasion. 
One of these clergymen was an Episcopalian; 
and the others were a Presbyterian, a 
Methodist, a Congregationalist, a Disciple, 
and the pastor of the Epworth Memorial 
Church. The Rev. CHARLES S. MILLS (Congregationalist) 
was, as we are told by the Tidings, 
'generous in his congratulations,' and 
exclaimed: 'As Jews and Christians worshiping 
one GOD, the GOD of ABRAHAM, ISAAC and 
JACOB, we should unite for the spreading of the 
truth in America, and for the solution of the 
problems which confront us.' The Rev. 
HARRIS R. COOLEY (Disciple), in addressing 
Rabbi GRIES, asked these significant questions: 
'Is there, after all, such a difference 
between us? Have we not one GOD?' 

"The clergymen judiciously refrained from 
making any allusion to the Gospel in that 
place. We guess they were more shrewd than 
the Apostle PETER or the Apostle PAUL would 
have been under the circumstances. Their 
conduct, as one of them took occasion to remark, 
gave evidence of the progress of liberal 
thought in the community. The conduct of 
Rabbi GRIES, also, in inviting the ministers, 
gave evidence of this new kind of progress 
among the Jewish people. 

"It seems to us that the thing here told of 
deserves to rank among the wonders of the 
nineteenth century."— N.Y. Sun. 



R1723 : page 339 
