Let Us Keep Our Place of Worship in Good Repair
 1. What purpose does the Kingdom Hall serve?
1 Worldwide there are more than 94,000 congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Most congregations assemble for Bible study and Christian association at a Kingdom Hall, which serves as a local center of pure worship.
 2. Why is it important to keep the Kingdom Hall clean and presentable?
2 Regularly Scheduled Cleaning: The work performed in maintaining the Kingdom Hall is a vital part of our sacred service. The Our Ministry book states on pages 61-2: “The brothers should consider it a privilege not only to support the Kingdom Hall financially but also to volunteer their services in keeping it clean, presentable and in good repair. Both inside and out, the Kingdom Hall should be a proper representation of Jehovah’s organization.” With the Kingdom Hall in use several times each week, there is a need for regular cleaning and maintenance. Usually volunteers from the congregation(s) meeting in the Kingdom Hall care for these matters. As in Bible times, Jehovah’s servants today should be diligent in “mending and repairing” our place of worship.​—2 Chron. 34:10.
 3. How is the cleaning of the Kingdom Hall organized, and who may have a share in this privilege?
3 A schedule for the weekly cleaning of the Kingdom Hall should be posted on the information board. All book study groups should take turns in cleaning the hall each week, following a list of things to be done. All who are able need to share in the weekly privilege of keeping the Kingdom Hall clean and presentable. With parental supervision, children can be included, thereby teaching them to show appreciation for this privilege. Especially when more than one congregation uses a Kingdom Hall, good cooperation is essential so that caring for this important aspect of our worship does not fall on just a few.
 4. What should be done so that the congregation knows what to do when cleaning the Kingdom Hall?
4 A list of things to be done may be posted, possibly where the supplies are kept. This list should explain duties to be performed weekly, including vacuuming, cleaning windows, dusting countertops, emptying wastebaskets, mopping floors, and cleaning mirrors. Some jobs may need to be done less regularly, such as polishing any wood furniture and thoroughly cleaning chairs, draperies, and light fixtures. All chemicals used in cleaning should be kept out of the reach of children and should be clearly labeled. A brief explanation of how each chemical is to be used should be given.
 5. How important is safety, and what matters need to be checked periodically? (See box on page 4.)
5 Safety at the Kingdom Hall is of paramount importance. (Deut. 22:8) In this regard, the box on page 4 lists some items that need to be checked periodically so that accidents can be prevented.
 6. How is the work of maintaining the Kingdom Hall coordinated?
6 Maintaining the Kingdom Hall: The body of elders has the responsibility to supervise the maintenance of the Kingdom Hall. Generally, an elder or a ministerial servant is appointed to coordinate the work. He organizes the day-to-day operation of the Kingdom Hall, making sure that it is kept clean and in good repair and that there are sufficient supplies on hand. It is important that no hazardous conditions exist in the hall or on the grounds. When two or more congregations use the same hall, the bodies of elders appoint an operating committee to organize the arrangements for the care of the building and property. This committee works under the direction of the bodies of elders.
 7. (a) What is done each year to ensure that the Kingdom Hall is kept in good repair? (b) What matters require periodic attention? (See box on page 5.)
7 A detailed inspection of the Kingdom Hall is made annually. The elders follow through by setting up arrangements to care thoroughly for any matters needing attention. The publishers may be invited to assist with needed repairs and maintenance. All should be alert to care for details and should be quick to expedite matters needing attention.
 8. When might the elders contact the Regional Building Committee on maintenance matters?
8 If the elders feel a need for advice or assistance in caring for maintenance of the Kingdom Hall, they may contact the Regional Building Committee. This might include such matters as carpet care, the servicing of heating and air-conditioning units, and the remedying of moisture problems in the building.
 9. What procedure should be followed if there is a need to hire a contractor?
9 Using Congregation Funds Wisely: Most of the work on the Kingdom Hall and the grounds is performed by volunteers. Their self-sacrificing efforts are a fine expression of love and aid greatly in reducing costs. If it becomes necessary to hire a contractor to care for some work, such as pest control or snow removal, the elders seek competitive bids for such work. They do this by first preparing a detailed written description of the work to be performed and any materials to be supplied. A copy of this list is given to a number of competing suppliers so that all bid with the same understanding of the requirements. After receiving written bids from several prospective providers, the elders can then select the best offer. This procedure should be followed even if a brother has offered to do the work or supply the needed materials at a specified price.
10. What is done to ensure that congregation funds are used appropriately?
10 The elders also take appropriate steps to obtain property- and sales-tax exemption, where this is available. When more than one congregation uses the Kingdom Hall, the operating committee maintains a separate checking account and shares monthly written financial reports with each body of elders, thus keeping the elders advised of how the funds are being spent. The elders are responsible for proper disbursement of congregation funds.
11. What should be done if extensive maintenance or renovation is necessary?
11 Extensive Maintenance and Renovation: When the operating committee feels that something major is needed in connection with the Kingdom Hall’s operation or maintenance, the committee refers the matter to the bodies of elders for direction. If it is determined that extensive maintenance or renovation will be necessary or that help will be needed from outside the congregation(s) meeting at that Kingdom Hall, the elders contact the Regional Building Committee. These qualified, experienced brothers provide helpful suggestions and oversight in directing the work. If a major expense is involved, it will be necessary to obtain accurate cost estimates and prepare a resolution for congregation approval.​—See the February 1994 Our Kingdom Ministry Question Box.
12. How can we demonstrate our appreciation for the privilege of attending meetings at the Kingdom Hall?
12 How greatly we appreciate our privilege of meeting together at the Kingdom Hall! Never would we want to neglect our meetings or take them for granted. All can contribute to the success of this provision for our encouragement by sharing fully in the care of our Kingdom Hall. This magnifies pure worship and brings honor to Jehovah’s name. Let us be determined to keep our place of worship in good repair.
[Box on page 4]
Safety Checklist
□ Fire extinguishers should be easily accessible and serviced annually.
□ Any sprinkler systems should be inspected in compliance with local law.
□ Exits and stairs should be clearly marked, well-lit, and freely accessible, and the handrails should be secure.
□ Storage rooms, restrooms, and coatrooms should be clean, orderly, and free of highly combustible materials, personal items, and trash.
□ Roof and gutters should be inspected and cleaned regularly.
□ Sidewalks and parking area must be lighted and kept free of conditions that might cause slipping or falling.
□ Electrical, heating, and ventilation systems should be checked and properly serviced.
□ Any leaks should be fixed quickly to prevent serious moisture problems.
□ The building should be locked when there is no one on the premises.
[Box on page 5]
Care of Building and Property
□ Outside: Are the roof, siding, paint, windows, and Kingdom Hall sign in good condition?
□ Grounds: Are the grounds well maintained? Are the sidewalks, fences, and parking lot in good condition?
□ Interior: Are the carpets, curtains, chairs, fixtures, wall covering, literature cabinets, and coatroom presentable?
□ Equipment: Are the lighting, sound system, heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning in proper working order?
□ Restrooms: Are these clean and functioning properly?
□ Congregation documents: Are corporation or trusteeship documents up-to-date and accurate? Where required, are property-tax-exemption forms being filed annually?

