Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting August 11
Song 101
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Using the suggestions on page 8, have two separate demonstrations of how to present the August 15 Watchtower and the August 22 Awake! In each case, both magazines should be offered as a set, even though only one is featured. In one of the presentations, demonstrate how to handle the potential conversation stopper “I’m busy.”​—See Reasoning book, page 19.
15 min: “Imitate Jehovah’s Goodness.”a Invite the audience to relate brief experiences showing how acts of kindness have opened the way to give a witness. Commend the congregation for the efforts made to assist fellow believers.
20 min: “The Blessings of the Pioneer Ministry.”b Use the questions that are provided. Invite one or two pioneers to comment on the blessings they have received from pioneering. Mention that anyone interested in pioneering can obtain an application from the secretary.
Song 11 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 18
Song 82
12 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Discuss “New Special Assembly Day Program.” Announce the date of the next special assembly day, and urge all to attend. If the assembly will be held within the next few months, mention that those desiring to be baptized should inform the presiding overseer.
15 min: “Work That Refreshes.”c Arrange in advance for two or three to comment on how the Christian ministry refreshes them.
18 min: “Let Us Keep Our Place of Worship in Good Repair.”d (Paragraphs 1-5) Use the questions that are provided. When discussing paragraphs 3 and 4, review local arrangements for cleaning the Kingdom Hall. Address any matters that need attention. Commend the congregation for their efforts in maintaining a suitable place for true worship.
Song 114 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 25
Song 175
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 8, have two separate demonstrations of how to present the September 1 Watchtower and the September 8 Awake! In each case, both magazines should be offered as a set, even though only one is featured. Show a parent and a teenage son or daughter having a practice session in preparation for magazine work. They briefly review each suggested presentation before demonstrating it.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: Muster Up Boldness to Preach. (1 Thess. 2:2) A talk with audience discussion. Explain why many are apprehensive about approaching others with the Kingdom message. This is true even of those who have been active for many years. Relate some of the experiences found in the December 1, 1999, Watchtower, page 25; the December 15, 1999, Watchtower, page 25; and the April 1, 1996, Watchtower, page 31. Invite audience to comment on how they were able to muster up boldness to share the good news on occasions when they felt fearful. Conclude with encouragement to draw strength from Jehovah, based on the December 15, 1999, Watchtower, pages 23-4.
Song 125 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 1
Song 84
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for August. Mention literature offer for September. Arrange in advance for one or two to relate upbuilding experiences they had while witnessing informally in connection with the district convention, during a vacation, or on other occasions during the summer months.
15 min: Do You Keep Your Promise to Return? A talk and audience discussion based on September 15, 1999, Watchtower, pages 10-11, under the heading “Other Ways to Keep Our Promises.” When we find people in our ministry who show interest, we usually arrange to continue the discussion at another time. Do we faithfully return as promised? Review the Bible principles that should motivate us to keep our promise. Invite audience to relate experiences that show how they were blessed by returning promptly.
20 min: “Let Us Keep Our Place of Worship in Good Repair.”e (Paragraphs 6-12) Use the questions that are provided. Emphasize the importance of properly maintaining the Kingdom Hall, highlighting the box on page 5. Include a brief report on the condition of your Kingdom Hall, and mention any plans to make repairs or improvements.
Song 41 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

