The Blessings of the Pioneer Ministry
1, 2. What blessings are closely associated with the pioneer ministry, and why?
1 “I know that no other work could have brought me the satisfaction that has come from sharing the truth with others,” said one pioneer. Another stated: “At the end of each day, my sleep is sweet, and my heart is full of joy.” These pioneers speak for brothers and sisters everywhere who have tasted the blessings of the pioneer ministry.​—Prov. 10:22.
2 Helping others to acquire the lifesaving knowledge of God’s Word brings genuine satisfaction. (Acts 20:35; 1 Thess. 2:19, 20) “It is exciting and faith-strengthening to see how powerful God’s Word is in motivating people to make changes in their lives,” wrote a longtime pioneer. Yes, by making themselves available to help people and conduct Bible studies, pioneers put themselves in line for blessings like these.
3, 4. How does pioneering teach one to rely on Jehovah, and how does this help one to grow spiritually?
3 Relying on Jehovah: Daily relying on God’s spirit as they carry out their ministry helps pioneers to cultivate “the fruitage of the spirit” and serves as a protection for them. (Gal. 5:16, 22, 23) In addition, since they use God’s Word constantly, pioneers are often adept at using the Scriptures to defend the truth and to strengthen others. (2 Tim. 2:15) A brother who has pioneered for decades commented: “Pioneering has helped me to acquire a deep knowledge of the Bible, a knowledge I have used to help many people to get to know Jehovah and his purposes.” How rewarding!
4 Regular pioneers must also rely on Jehovah in many other ways. Their faith is strengthened as they see how he blesses their efforts to provide for their material needs. A 72-year-old regular pioneer of 55 years stated: “Jehovah has never let me down.” Furthermore, by keeping their lives simple, pioneers safeguard themselves from many anxieties of life. Does this appeal to you?​—Matt. 6:22; Heb. 13:5, 6.
 5. How does pioneering help one to draw close to Jehovah?
5 Drawing Close to God: Our relationship with Jehovah is a most precious possession. (Ps. 63:3) When we share fully in the ministry out of love for Jehovah, that relationship grows closer. (Jas. 4:8) A pioneer of over 18 years said: “The pioneer service allows us to ‘taste and see that Jehovah is good,’ day after day knitting an ever stronger relationship with our Creator.”​—Ps. 34:8.
 6. What must pioneers have, and who besides the pioneers themselves benefit?
6 In addition to having the necessary circumstances, pioneers must have strong faith, genuine love of God and neighbor, and a willingness to make sacrifices. (Matt. 16:24; 17:20; 22:37-39) However, as the beaming faces of pioneers everywhere testify, the blessings of the pioneer ministry are surpassing. (Mal. 3:10) These blessings are not limited to just the pioneers, but their families and the congregation also greatly benefit from the fine spirit the pioneers show.​—Phil. 4:23.

