VOL. XIII. OCTOBER 15, 1892. NO. 20. 

THE NATURE AND METHODS OF GOD'S ELECTIONS. 



We have heretofore shown that election as 
taught in the Scriptures is not in opposition to, 
but in harmony with, the free moral agency of 
the elected classes. We have endeavored to 
show that, while during the Jewish age there 
was an election or selection of a "house of 
servants," as, during the present Christian age, 
an election or selection of a "house of sons" 
(Heb. 3:5,6) is in progress, yet neither of these 
selections was or is arbitrary so far as individuals 
are concerned. God did arbitrarily fore-ordain 
and determine that these two classes 
should be selected, and arbitrarily set apart a 
limited period of time for the selection of each; 
and for aught we know to the contrary, he arbitrarily 
and unalterably fixed the number of 
each of these classes, so that not one more, nor 
one less, shall complete each of these elect 
classes, fore-ordained in this plan. But he did 
not, and in harmony with his own justice he 
could not, arbitrarily fore-ordain and elect that 
certain individuals must be of these classes regardless 
of their wishes and endeavors, and 
regardless of the operations of his own arrangements 
and regulations governing these 
elections. 

But before any are able to look at the subjects 
of Election and Reprobation intelligently, 
they must first of all get rid of the false and 
blinding idea that election implies "selected 
to go to heaven," and reprobation, "selected 
to go to eternal torture." No such significance 
attaches in any way to the words. God not 
only applies justice to his creatures in the laws 
governing them, but he applies the same to 
himself; hence it would be as unjust and impossible 
for God to choose, select or elect an 
unworthy person to heaven as it would be for 
him to torture a righteous person. Furthermore, 
to be unchosen to a particular office or 
position does not imply that the unchosen one 
is wholly undesirable, but merely that he is not 
chosen to the particular office or position for 
which choice is being made. 

Since God is good and all his plans are wise 



and beneficent, it follows that to be selected by 

him to perform any part of his plan is an 

honor and a favor. Thus God, having purposed 

in himself the redemption of mankind 

from the curse, and the consequent lifting up 

or restoration of all things (Acts 3:19,21), not 

only foretold it, but began preparations for 

that restitution. Accordingly, having also determined 

that this restitution should be accomplished 

by means of a "Kingdom of God" or 

a government of earth in harmony with his 

laws, and having predetermined that this Kingdom 

should be of two parts, a human and a 

spiritual, he began his preparation by selecting 

first the natural or human portion of the proposed, 

and as yet future, Kingdom. 

Mark well that God fore-ordained these two 
classes, and the work for which he intended 
them, long before the individuals composing 
them had any existence. But how has this 
predetermined will of God operated in selecting 
the predetermined classes for the predetermined 
service of honor? Infinite wisdom 

R1457 : page 308 

made choice among the families of earth and 
chose Abraham and his family. Arbitrarily, 
and without reason for such a choice? Probably 
not: in all probability Abraham's family 
was best suited to the divine purpose, the best 
adapted to the execution of the plan God had 
in view. 

It was part of Israel's difficulty that they 
supposed God's election of their nation an arbitrary 
one, and thought it a sufficient guarantee 
of God's exclusive favor to be able to say, Abraham 
is our father— we are, through him, the elect 
people of God. (Luke 3:8.) But this was a 
mistake; for though God had chosen Abraham's 
family for a special service, and separated them 
by his law and favors from other nations, this 
was the extent of the favor they enjoyed— 
"To them were committed the oracles of God." 

But by reason of this national favor each individual 
of that nation had special knowledge 
and opportunities beyond those of other nations; 
and their faithfulness or unfaithfulness, obedience 
or disobedience, to this knowledge and 
favor decided which individuals of that called and 
chosen and favored nation were worthy of the 
position of future honor and service as members 
of the human or earthly phase of the Kingdom 
of God, which is to be established in ruling 
and blessing power "under the whole heavens." 

Which individuals, because of faith and obedience, 



were accepted as making their election 

sure to that future honor and service, we know 

only in part. The names of some of the most 

notable only are given by the Apostle. (Heb. 11:17-39.) 

These evidenced their worthiness 

of the favors of God held before them, by the 

sacrifices which they made of present honors 

and comforts, to obtain the future and lasting 

honors of heavenly promise. Therefore God 

will in due time honor them by manifesting 

them as his elect to the position and service to 

which he called them, and will give them a 

portion or share in the "heavenly city;" i.e., 

in the heavenly government or kingdom which 

he will establish— the portion promised them 

and to which they and all Israel were called or 

invited, but for which the great majority were 

unworthy. Yet the rejected Israelites are not 

to be cast off from all favor of God; rather, 

they will be blessed by and under the righteous 

dominion which Christ will establish, and 

in which their fellows are granted the earthly 

portion. They shall see Abraham, Isaac and 

Jacob and all the prophets in the Kingdom of 

God, and they themselves unworthy of that 

honor.*-Heb. 11:16; Luke 13:28. 

The election of the full number for the human 
portion of the Kingdom ended about the 
time of Jesus' baptism and anointing, when he 
began to bring life and immortality to light. 
Then began the selection of the class which 
God had predetermined he would select from 
among men for exaltation to the "divine nature," 
and to constitute the spiritual phase of 
the Kingdom which will restore and bless the 
world. Of these Jesus was the first, the "forerunner," 
the chief or captain. In the selection 
of this spiritual class, Abraham's literal 
descendants, the Hebrews, have not been so 
exclusively favored as they were in the previous 
election; for instead of the light of truth (the 
"oracles of God"), through which the call is 
made, being confined to Israel, it has by God's 
design and arrangement gone out into all the 
earth— calling all who have "an ear to hear" 
to justification, through faith in the blood of 
Christ as their redemption price, and, further, 
to sacrifice and glory— the "high calling." 
The only pre-eminence given to Hebrews under 
this last call is that it commenced with them. 
(Luke 24:47.) The previous call was confined 
to them. 

Nor should we overlook the fact that, though 
in the process of selecting these two classes 
certain individuals were elected or chosen to do 
a service in connection with the calling of these 



classes, this in no way implied their election to 
one of those classes. Thus Jacob, like Abraham, 
was chosen to be a father of the favored nation, 
and Moses, Samuel and others were chosen to 
a service in the first selection, as Paul and the 



*Our Lord does not mention himself and the apostles as 
seen with Abraham and the prophets; because, though he 
and the apostles and all the overcomers of the Christian 
age will be in and of the same Kingdom, they will not 
be of the human phase or portion of it, but of the spiritual; 
and, like angels, invisible to mankind. Men will 
see only the earthly or human department of that glorious 
dominion. 

R1457 : page 309 

other apostles, and others since, have been 
chosen and selected for special service as God's 
agents in the selection of the spiritual class; 
yet their being elected to this service was in 
no way an infringement upon their free moral 
agency, and in no way decided for them the 
question of their final election to the class to 
which each was called. 

Thus Paul, after telling us that God chose 
him and prepared him for this service in early 
life (Gal. 1:15), also assures us that he knew 
full well that the call to this service, and the 
fact that he was used as a servant in announcing 
the "heavenly calling" to others, by no 
means proved that he would attain the prize of 
his high calling. 

To be called to such special service as Paul 
and the other apostles were called to was a 
special honor which they must appreciate to 
use; to have a call to the heavenly and the 
future service is a still greater honor; and the 
worthiness of the apostles, and of all who will 
attain it, is, during this age, being tested by 
the measure of their love and gratitude to God, 
as shown in their obedience, and proved by 
their self-denials. 

That Paul understood that obedience or unfaithfulness 
to the present opportunities was to 
prove whether he was worthy or unworthy to 
be a member of the already elect or predetermined 
spiritual class— the "body of Christ" 
—is clearly evident from his many statements 
to this effect. For instance, he says, "I keep 
my body under, and bring it into subjection [I 
do not allow my human appetites, or ambitions, 
or hopes, to govern my course, but I permit 
the new mind, begotten of God's promises, to 



rale], lest that by any means, when I have 
preached to others [of the great prize for which 
we ran and sacrifice], I myself should be a 
castaway"* [rejected as unworthy a place in 
that choice company which God has predetermined 
shall be composed of "overcomers"]. 
(1 Cor. 9:27.) "Brethren, I count not myself 
to have apprehended [or grasped the prize to 
which God called me, and for which I, with 
you, am running]; but.. ..I press along the 
line towards the prize of the high calling." 
(Phil. 3:11-15.) And in the preceding verses 



*"Castaway," here, is from the same Greek word elsewhere 
translated "reprobate," and signifies rejected— not 
accepted. 

R1458 : page 309 

he tells us in what way he was running or pressing 
along the line to win this great prize which 
God has already predetermined to give to the 
class whom he would select for it. He tells us 
that he was casting away former hopes, and 
ambitions, and honors, as though they were 
worthless and vile, and spending every effort 
to win a place in the body of Christ, and to 
secure a share in the chief resurrection (to spiritual 
being). 

He well knew that, because redeemed, "all 
in their graves" would in due time "come 
forth:" but he knew, too, that only the elect 
"little flock" would be raised spiritual beings 
like their Captain and Forerunner; and he was 
willing to sacrifice everything (as Christ also 
did) to obtain a place in that elect class. The 
Apostle knew also that from the moment of 
consecration he was reckoned a member of that 
chosen "body" or "bride" of Christ, and 
that his name was "written in heaven" (Heb. 12:23); 
and though he had full assurance of 
faith each moment, because of full knowledge 
that he was daily a living sacrifice, yet he also 
knew that for him to turn back, or even to 
"look back" (or desire to recover that which 
he had sacrificed), would prove him unworthy 
of the kingdom position. He well knew that 
he who wrote his name in heaven, when he consecrated 
and started to run, could blot it out; 
and that the condition upon which it would 
not be blotted out was, faithfulness to the end 
of the race. (Rev. 3:5.) And not until his 
faithful course was closing with martyrdom 
did he write, "I have fought a good fight; I 



have finished my course; I have kept the faith; 
henceforth there is laid up [reserved securely] 
for me a crown of righteousness, which the 
Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that 
day; and not to me only, but unto all them 
also that love his appearing."— 2 Tim. 4:7,8. 

Yet, while remembering that God has made 
the deciding of the matter, whether or not we 
shall be members of the elect company to 
which he called us, to depend upon our faithfulness 
to the end— "unto death"— we should 

R1458 : page 310 

ever bear in mind, as Paul did, that the prize 
is not offered to us because of our worthiness 
of it, but of God's grace or favor; and that 
our running is acceptable only because of God's 
"mercy" in imputing to us the merits of Christ, 
our Redeemer, as the covering of our inherited 
weaknesses and imperfections.— Rom. 9:16. 

R1458 : page 310 

SOME TEXTS OF SCRIPTURE 

SHOWN IN THE LIGHT OF THE FOREGOING. 



(1) "Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed 
lest he fall. "-1 Cor. 10:12. 

(2) "Give diligence to make your calling and election 
sure; for if ye do these things ye shall never fall." — 

2 Peter 1:10. 

(3) "Whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye 
are fallen from favor." "Christ shall profit you nothing." 
-Gal. 5:2,4. 

(4) "For it is impossible for those who were once 
enlightened,... if they shall fall away, to renew them 
again unto repentance."— Heb. 6:4-6. 

(a) "Him that is able to keep you from falling 
[stumbling], and to present you faultless."— Jude 24. 

(b) "I am persuaded that neither death, nor life,... 
nor things present, nor things to come,. ..shall be able 
to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ 
Jesus our Lord."— Rom. 8:38,39. 

(c) "My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and 
they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life. And 
they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out 
of my hand. My father which gave them me is greater 
than all; and no one is able to pluck them out of my 
Father's hand. "-John 10:27-29. 

In the light of the foregoing statement of the 
doctrine of election as deduced from Scripture, 
the above and similar texts cease to seem 



contradictory, and become clear, harmonious 

and reasonable. To show the harmony we have 

selected some of those apparently most contradictory 

and positive, which will serve to illustrate 

how all similar statements are in harmony. 

The first four show the possibility of 

falling from grace or favor; the last three seem 

to many to teach that to fall from God's favor 

is an impossibility. 

It is a mistake to suppose that favor and love 
are synonymous, for though the favor of God 
always implies his love, yet the withdrawal of 
favor does not imply hatred. To illustrate: 
When God created our race representatively in 
Adam, he placed it in a position of favor, and 
when it afterward fell from that favor by disobedience 
to the conditions, God so loved the 
race (fallen from his favor), while yet sinners, 
as to provide a ransom for all, that thereby he 
might in due time restore all to the original 
favor, thus giving another or second opportunity 
to enjoy life as his favor, everlastingly. 

Every act must be in harmony with his justice, 
love and wisdom: not with one alone, 
but with all of these divine attributes must 
every act of God conform. Hence in dealing 
with us, should we fall from his favor, whatever 
happens to us will be in full harmony with 
God's character— whatever his justice, wisdom 
and love indicate to be best. Let us keep this 
well in mind. 

To fall from favor implies that those who fall 
had first been lifted up, given a vantage ground 
for present or future possibility and advantage. 
The seriousness of the loss by a fall from favor 
depends upon the greatness or amount of the 
favor spurned or left. 

Two of the three above-mentioned texts (a,b,c) 
assure us that God will not withdraw from us 
any favor he ever bestows; he will never cast 
us off or cause us to fall. And, more than this, 
his love is so great that he will not permit 
others to separate us from his favor contrary to 
our own will. And since his love is so great 
and his power all-mighty, we have full confidence 
that no power in earth or heaven can 
forcibly separate us from his love and the favors 
granted us in and through our Redeemer. 
Here rests our full assurance of faith— none can 
pluck us from our Father's favor and protection: 

"In God I have found a retreat, 

Where I can securely abide; 
No refuge nor rest so complete, 

And here I intend to reside. 



"Oh! what comfort it brings, 

My soul sweetly sings, 
I am safe from all danger 

While under his wings." 

But is there then no danger? There is no 
danger of others plucking or forcibly separating 
us from God's favor, or turning his love 
away from us: the only danger is in our own 
doings. We can despise or lightly esteem the 
favors of God, and thus forfeit our privileges 
under those favors, and fall from them; but 

R1458 : page 311 

we cannot forfeit all favor, except by direct 
and open apostasy. God will not force his 
favors upon any, but decides that those who 
do not appreciate the favors, when made fully 
aware of them, are not worthy of them. 

Text number 1 guards us on this very point. 
Our safety is in a vivid realization of our own 
helplessness and dependence upon God's favor. 
To realize our own imperfection and inability 
to justify ourselves is the safeguard against that 
self-righteousness which spurns justification as 
the favor of God, through the ransom given 
by our Lord Jesus. True humility and dependence 
upon God accepts his favor of justification 
in the way he provides it— through Christ's 
ransom— and thus prevents its possessors from 
spurning, and counting a common or ordinary 
thing, the sacrifice of Christ— "the blood of the 
covenant." (Heb. 10:26-29.) In harmony with 
this is the text marked a. God is able to keep 
us from falling or even stumbling over his favors; 
and he is so willing to aid us and keep us, that 
he has in his Word made every provision for 
our assistance, and assures us that the Scriptures 
are able to make us wise regarding his 
favors, so that we shall be able to avoid falling 
from them, and to obtain them. 

Here text number 2 applies, and shows that 
while God has supplied every necessary aid to 
keep us from falling, he has left the matter in 
such a way as to make our earnest desire for 
the promised blessings a condition of our not 
falling from or failing to secure the favors offered 
us. We must give diligence and attention to 
the assistance and directions he has provided. 

A difference in the extent of the fall and the 
seriousness of the consequences is shown in 
texts 3 and 4. The former shows a Jew who 
had trusted in his ability to keep the Law, who 
afterward came to see in Jesus his Redeemer, 
and became his follower, and thus reached and 



laid hold of justification, God's favor granted 
through the ransom. Under false teaching he 
had been led to the erroneous conclusion that 
though Jesus was a good example of holy living, 
yet all must still be justified, if at all, by 
perfect obedience to the Law. Paul addresses 
this one and all such in this text (3), and assures 
them that by such conclusions they renounce 
and reject God's favor, and place 
themselves again just where they were before 
they heard of Christ— under the Law, which 
could never justify them.— Rom. 8:3— margin. 

Their conclusion that Jesus was merely an 
example and teacher was fallacious. There 
were, and had been, many noble exemplars and 
good teachers, and in thus regarding Jesus they 
were rejecting all that was specially valuable 
in him. Our Lord's example and teachings 

R1459 : page 311 

could never give us everlasting life, unless his 
Ransom-sacrifice had first justified believers. 
Regarding Christ as an "example" would be 
of no everlasting profit or advantage: nothing 
could thus advantage them until past sins were 
canceled, and they reckoned justified through the 
shed blood (the death) of Christ— Rom. 5:9. 

This fall from grace, though serious, in that 
it would hinder their progress and keep them 
on the level of the Jew and the unjustified 
world, would not necessarily be an everlasting 
loss or fall, because, if they perceive not their 
error sooner, the time will come when "every 
hidden thing shall be made manifest." Then 
a correct knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
whole earth, and "none shall need to say unto 
his neighbor, Know thou the Lord! [or understand 
thou of the ransom for sin] for all shall 
know him from the least to the greatest;" and 
then, if not sooner, these and the prejudice-blinded 
Jews and all others shall see clearly and 
enter gladly upon the favor from which the 
Apostle tells us these were falling. 

But the other text (4) tells of a fall from 
favor that is a far greater loss, and one which 
can never be regained in this or any other age. 
The Apostle assures us of those who thus fall 
away, that "it is impossible to renew [or restore] 
them again." Why is it thus— why the 
difference in these fallings? We answer: Because 
those of the class here referred to (Heb. 6:4-6) 
have had fuller knowledge; and by having 
gone along from favor to favor, their fall is 
without excuse and indicates deliberation, a 
wilfulness, wholly inconsistent with their knowledge. 



While the others (text 3) were but deceived 
"babes," these (text 4) were matured 
and advanced in knowledge beyond first principles. 
And any who have not advanced to 

R1459 : page 312 

the point of favor here indicated could not fall 
from it; and from such state of favor only is 
it possible to fall so utterly as to be beyond 
hope— in the second death. 

But notice carefully the conditions of such a 
fall— the height of the multiplied favors, from 
which if any fall it is impossible to restore or 
renew them. They must have been "once enlightened,' 
brought to discern sin clearly, its 
penalty, and the ransom price given for the 
sinner. They must have "tasted of the heavenly 
gift:" not merely heard of Christ's sacrifice, 
etc., but tasted in blessed experience the results 
of that ransom in realizing sins forgiven, 
and communion and fellowship with God restored, 
through "the blood of the Lamb." 
They must have been "made partakers of the 
holy Spirit," coming into heart fellowship 
with God's plans, and for a time at least being 
co-workers with him— begotten by the Spirit 
to fuller appreciation of the truth and to new 
hopes and aims. They must "have tasted of 
the good Word of God," by experiencing the 
pleasures of the appreciated fulfilment of some 
of the statements and promises thereof, and by 
recognizing a grandeur and beauty in the as 
yet unfulfilled portions. These must also have 
tasted, experienced or come to appreciate "the 
powers of the coming age," realizing from the 
good Word of God the blessings and powers 
that will then be brought into exercise for the 
blessing and restoring of mankind, all as the 
fruit and result of the ransom. 

Should such as have seen, tasted, experienced 
and enjoyed all these favors then fall away to 
the extent of "denying the Lord having bought 
them" (2 Pet. 2:1— Diaglott), denying the 
ransom— the very foundation of all those hopes 
and blessings seen and experienced— they would 
be treading under foot the Son of God, in rejecting 
the blood of the covenant, wherewith they were 
sanctified (and in which they had trusted, and 
on account of which they had been privileged 
to grow in grace and knowledge). If they thus 
count that blood an unholy (ordinary) thing, 
and despise the favor of God in providing the 
sacrifice for our sins (Heb. 10:25-29), there is 
no forgiveness for them further; no restoring 
from such a miserable fall from such heights of 



favor and knowledge. And who, except those 
who thus "fall away," would dispute the righteousness 
of this, our Father's decision? The 
expression of his justice and wisdom, in full 
harmony with his character of love, is that such 
shall "be as though they had not been" born. 
The prolongation of such lives could not be a 
profit or a pleasure to God, to themselves or 
to their fellows. 

The sentence is manifestly just. It is wise, 
because if these have thus seen the grand outline 
of God's plans, and despise and repudiate 
the divinely-appointed foundation of it all, then 
moral force, the force of truth, is seen to be 
unavailing upon them, and God sees that thereafter 
it would be impossible to renew them or 
to make them recognize the beauty of his way. 
Therefore divine wisdom has decided that all 
thus out of harmony, without possibility of 
reformation, shall be utterly destroyed as thorns 
and briers are destroyed, and for the same 
reason.— Heb. 6:7,8. 

And this same principle will obtain in the 
next age as well, when the full opportunities 
of that age of favors are enjoyed by all the 
world. Those who wilfully reject and despise 
the precious blood, spurn forgiveness through 
it, and thus crucify Christ afresh, will thereby 
fall hopelessly; because, after having enjoyed 
the blessings secured by the ransom, they spurn 
and reject it. Christ dieth no more. The 
one sacrifice once fully appreciated and wilfully 
rejected leaves the rejectors in the same 
state as though no ransom had ever been given. 
It remands them again under the original penalty, 
death, extinction. And, because they had 
once been redeemed from it as the Adamic penalty, 
and had thus again come under it of their 
own will and act, it is called the second death. 

Thus may not all see clearly God's election 
of classes for future service, and of nations and 
individuals for present service, and yet recognize 
that God leaves his creatures free to exercise 
their own wills in accepting or rejecting 
his arrangements and favors? He seeks such to 
worship and serve him as serve from the heart- 
in spirit and in truth; and such preeminently 
are the classes selected in this and in the preceding 
age for the Kingdom's positions and honors. 



R1459 : page 313 

THE PRODIGAL'S RETURN. 



[LUKE 15:ll-32.-EXAMINED BY REQUEST.] 



Many have applied this parable to Jews and 
Gentiles, assuming that the Gentiles are illustrated 
in the prodigal son. To us, this interpretation 
is not consistent with facts and 
Scripture; for up to the time of the giving of 
the parable, and for years afterward (three years 
and a half after Pentecost), the Gentiles were 
not recognized as sons of God, but as "strangers," 
"aliens," "foreigners," "having no 
hope, and without God in the world." (Eph. 2:11,12.) 
From the time of the fall none but 
the one line of Adam's children had divine 
favor— the line of which Noah and Abraham 
and Israel and Christ came— the line of 
Seth. (Amos 3:2.) All of this line, as the 
record shows, were accepted through the mediation 
of typical sacrifices of atonement for 
their sins— except Christ, whose life was from 
another father than Adam, and who himself 
became the true antitypical sacrifice of atonement 
for Adam and all who lost life in him. 

Gentiles, consequently, cannot have been 
meant or illustrated by the prodigal son of the 
parable, for they had never been sons, and 
could not have left the father's house when 
they never were in it. We must look elsewhere 
for the class represented. 

Others have suggested that the two sons represent, 
the elder the "overcomers" and the 
younger the "great company" of the Gospel 
Church: that those who fail to live up to their 
covenant are represented in the prodigal and 
may be said to be wasting their spiritual privileges, 
with figurative publicans and harlots, 
in the enjoyments of worldly favor, and in 
immunity from the reproaches which fall upon 
the faithful covenant-keepers who are "dying 
daily" in the service of the Master according 
to their covenant. But it should be noticed 
that this exposition reverses the order of the 
parable, makes of the prodigal the one free from 
the reproaches and opposition of the world, 
and represents those who suffer with Christ for 
righteousness' sake as the elder son who suffered 
nothing. In the parable it was the elder son 
that had the good things, the plenty of food 
and clothing and every comfort; and it was 
the prodigal son who was ragged and hungry 
and barefoot and suffering and outcast with 
the swine. 

The application of the parable most reasonable 
and most fitting, all phases of the parable 



and the facts considered, is as follows: 

In the parable the elder brother represented 
the Pharisees, and the younger brother the 
publicans and sinners. The context shows 
that our Lord's willingness to receive the 
"lower classes" of the Jews, those who were 
living sinful lives regardless of God's laws and 
of their covenant, had excited the anger of the 
Pharisees. The latter were strict observers of 
God's Law, and in this respect commendable; 
but they were blameworthy in that they were 
proud of their religion, and boasted of their 
goodness; and because they despised and 
spurned and would not recognize, nor speak 
to, nor eat with, the irreligious class; and the 
more so because in their pride they failed to 
acknowledge the fact that, when doing their 
best to fulfil God's law, they came far short of 
perfect obedience. 

Our Lord's strict observance of the Law [for, 
being born a Jew, born under the Law, he was 
bound to and did respect every legal requirement 
up to the day of his death— which ended 
that Law covenant] no doubt made him at first 
a favorite with the Pharisees: accordingly we 
find him occasionally the guest of some of them. 

R1460 : page 313 

(Luke 7:36; 5:17; John 3:1,2.) But when 

they found that he received sinners and ate 

with them, they began to realize that his righteousness 

was of a different sort from theirs, and, 

as darkness is opposed to light, they hated him. 

Moreover, soon they began to see that his 

teachings reflected against them, severely reproving 

their claimed and yet very imperfect 

sanctity. So it was in this parable and the 

others of the same discourse: they were spoken 

to the Pharisees as a reproof, because they had 

murmured at him for teaching or having anything 

to do with the disreputable backsliders.— 

See Luke 15:1-3. 

R1460 : page 314 

Originally all the Jews entered into covenant 
relationship with God, and thus became, 
typically, his sons. Although they were a 
"house" of servants as contrasted with the 
Christian Church, called the "house" of sons, 
yet we must remember that they typified the 
house of spiritual sons, and that as Adam was 
a human son of God before he sinned, so all 
who obtain forgiveness and return to harmony 
with God are again sons, either of the earthly 



or the spiritual family. So, then, as in this 
parable, all Israelites under the Jewish covenant 
were treated as (human) sons of God. 
The beginning of this relationship dated from 
the Covenant at Sinai. 

At first all sought to abide in God's favor at 
"home," fulfilling the relationship of obedient 
sons— the original or eldest son of the parable, 
represented most prominently in our Lord's 
day by the Pharisees. But another class developed, 
who, after having received God's favors, 
wandered off into the ways of sin and forgetfulness 
of God, and his love and care, and into 
dissipation— the younger son of the parable, 
represented in our Lord's day by the publicans 
and sinners. 

Sin always brings misery in some form, and 
often in many forms: and one can fancy that 
the publicans and sinners, as they heard the 
story of the young prodigal beginning to feel 
his lack, would realize their own miserable 
condition therein pictured. Before the Master 
had finished telling how the prodigal "came 
to himself," and how the father "saw him a 
long way off" and ran to meet and greet him, 
no doubt many of the hearers' eyes were wet 
with tears, and many of their hearts swelling 
with emotion and sympathy and the desire 
similarly to get back from the service of the 
devil to God's favor and love. 

And how true to facts was the picture of the 
Pharisees standing around and objecting to his 
telling those poor prodigals anything about the 
love of God and his willingness to forgive 
them, and to welcome them back home again. 
The elder son of the parable was "angry, and 
would not go in:" the self-righteous Pharisees 
were angry, too, and refused to enter the Kingdom, 
then nigh at hand, and first offered to 
their nation according to divine promise. Our 
Lord said to them upon another occasion, 
"Woe, unto you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, 
for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven 
against men; for ye neither go in yourselves, 
neither suffer ye them that are entering to go 
in" (Matt. 23:13); and again he said, "Verily, 
I say unto you that publicans and sinners 
shall go into the kingdom before you." (Matt. 21:31.) 
Poor, self-righteous Pharisees! To 
this day they are jealous and will "not go in." 
As a class they refused the Kingdom on the conditions 
offered, until the offer and opportunity 
were taken from them entirely (Matt. 21:43), 
and given to a class whom they esteemed still 
less than the publicans and sinners— even to the 
Gentiles whom they esteemed as "dogs," from 



among whom, strangers and aliens and not 
then sons, members for the Bride and Kingdom 
of Christ are being selected. 

We who have been accepted by God from 
among the Gentiles to be his sons— joint-heirs 
with Christ— can perhaps enter as fully into 
the spirit of this parable as did the publicans 
and sinners who heard the gracious words from 
the Redeemer's lips. We, who were strangers 
and aliens, learned that the Father prepared a 
great sacrifice for the sins of all condemned in 
Adam. We have heard and tasted of his loving 
welcome into his family— we who were 
dead in trespasses and sins, but who are now 
alive toward God through Jesus Christ, our 
Lord. We received the "best robe," the robe 
of Christ's righteousness, replacing the filthy 
rags of our unrighteousness; we received the 
ring, representing the witness of the spirit 
that we are sons and heirs; we received the 
sandals, preparing us for the sharp contact 
often to be experienced from the beggarly elements 
of the present evil world; and above all 
we received the kiss, the seal of our reconciliation, 
the mark of our adoption into the divine 
family. Nothing in this parable shows the 
necessity for the ransom as other Scriptures 
show it. This, however, is not out of harmony 
but consistent with our interpretation of the 
parable; for Israel as a whole had been typically 
atoned for in the typical sacrifices by which 
their covenant was introduced and renewed 

R1460 : page 315 

yearly. It is therefore evidently a picture of the 
return of a backslidden son, and not that of the 
redemption of a condemned stranger and alien. 

The lesson of this parable to the Pharisees 
is one widely applicable in its principles— viz.: 
that all who are in harmony with God should, 
nay, all who have the spirit of holiness will, 
rejoice to see sinners returning to divine favor. 
Any other spirit will surely work injury, as it 
did to the Pharisees, who, as a class, were unfit 
in their selfishness to share the blessings 
God had or ever will have to offer. Thank 
God, the time for removing blindness will soon 
be here. (Isa. 35:5.) Let us trust that under 
the new conditions many more will learn and 
practice the spirit of love, who now are ruled 
by selfishness. How hardly shall a selfish man 
enter the Kingdom ! Let us beware of selfishness, 
and embroider our wedding-robe with 
flowers of humility and love. 



PRODIGAL RETURN! 



"Return, return!" thy Father's voice is pleading, 

"Tho' far astray, I bid thee turn again! 
Thy robe is rent, thy tender feet are bleeding, 

Thy heart is faint and sick with famine pain: 
Return, my child: a welcome here awaits thee; 

No longer in the distant country rove; 
Resist the cruel tempter that belates thee, 

And keeps thee from my dwelling and my love." 

Return, return! Thy Father's loving-kindness 

Thou long hast scorned, and done his grace despite; 
Yet in his touch is healing for thy blindness, 

And he can turn thy darkness into light. 
Return in all thy rags of sin's defilement; 

Return with all thy want and sore distress; 
Thy Father's voice bespeaks his reconcilement: 

Flee to his breast, and there thy guilt confess. 

Return, return! Thy substance hath been wasted— 

Thou hast not aught to bring but thy poor heart; 
Yet art thou longing for the bread once tasted, 

And for his paths of peace, and faith's good part? 
Return, for why shouldst thou delay the pardon 

Thy Father's great compassion waits to grant! 
Arise and go, before thy doubts shall harden 

The homesick yearnings of the penitent. 

Return, return! Leave thou the swine and famine 

And seek again the plenty of thy home! 
Why dost thou toil among the husks of mammon, 

When to his rest the Father bids thee come? 
Return thou to his arms, his kiss, his blessing; 

Accept the robe, the sandals, and the ring; 
And there, thy sinfulness and guilt confessing, 

Thou shalt be found, lost treasure of the King! 

Return, return! The angel-hosts bend o'er thee— 

They wait to bear the tidings' joyful sound. 
They have beheld the Savior dying for thee, 

And will rejoice to sing, The lost is found! 
Return, for he will heal all thy backsliding— 

Will love thee freely, and will thus forgive; 
Come, weary soul, rest in his love abiding. 

Thou hast been dead— arise to-day and live! 
F. G. BURROUGHS. 



R1461 : page 315 



GROW IN GRACE. 



"Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things 
before, beware lest ye also, being led away with the error 
of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness. But 
grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and 
Savior, Jesus Christ. To him be glory both now and forever. 
Amen."-2 Pet. 3:17,18. 

There is a touching tenderness in the Epistles 
of the aged Apostle Peter to the household 
of faith, showing that, while he realized that 
the time of his departure was drawing nigh 
(2 Pet. 1:14; John 21:18,19), his solicitude 
for the growth and development of the Church 
was increasing. Accordingly, he writes two 
general epistles, not so much to advance new 
truth, as to call to remembrance truths already 
learned and fully received (2 Pet. 1:12-15), 
and to counsel all to faithfulness and to growth 
in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and 
Savior, Jesus Christ. 

In the preceding verses he has been calling 
to mind some of these truths, and he recognizes 
the fact that those addressed are already 
established in them; but, in view of his knowledge 
that false teachers would arise to pervert 
the truth, he counsels special watchfulness 
against being led away from their present 
steadfastness by the error of the wicked. That 
this counsel of the Apostle has a special fitness 
to the Church in the last days, our days, and 

R1461 : page 316 

was evidently so designed by the Spirit of God, 
is clear from verse 3— "There shall come in 
the last days scoffers," etc. 

Let us observe the manner in which the 
Apostle would have us guard against being led 
away by the error of the wicked. Is it by a 
careful investigation of all the claims which 
every new false prophet that arises may intrude 
upon our attention, thus giving heed to every 
seducing spirit (1 Tim. 4:1)? No: that would 
be quite contrary to the teaching of "our beloved 
brother Paul," to whom Peter so affectionately 
refers, and whom he so fully endorses; 
for Paul had given no uncertain counsel on 
this subject, saying, "Shun profane and vain 
babblings; for they will increase unto more 
ungodliness, and their word will eat as doth a 
canker;" and "I entreat you, brethren, to 
mark those who are making factions and laying 



snares contrary to the teaching which you 
have learned, and turn away from them; for 
they that are such are not in subjection to our 
Anointed Lord, but to their own appetite [for 
honor and praise among men, as great teachers 
— 1 Tim. 1:6,7]; and by kind and complimentary 
words they deceive the hearts of the 
unsuspecting. ...I wish you to be wise with 
respect to that which is good, and harmless 
with respect to that which is evil."— 2 Tim. 2:16,17; 
Rom. 16:17-19. 

Peter felt the force of Paul's wise and earnest 
counsel, and with emphasis re-echoed the 
same sentiments. To give heed to such seducing 
doctrines, contrary to the doctrine which 
we have already received from the Lord and 
the apostles, argues a lack of faith in those 
doctrines. Such a one is not established in the 
faith. And indeed there are those— and such 
is the general sentiments among the teachers 
of false doctrine— who think that it is not 
either necessary or advisable to be established 
in the faith. To be established is to be a bigot, 
is the idea they advance. And so it is, if 
one is so unfair in mind as to accept and tenaciously 
hold that which he has never proved 
either by sound logic or Bible authority. But 
he is not an unreasoning bigot who, in simple 
faith, on the authority of God, accepts the 
Word of God. And such, and only such, as 
do so are established in the truth. The difference 
between the strong and steadfast Christian 
and a bigot is that the one is established in the 
truth, while the other is established in error. 
The former knows the truth, and the truth has 
made him free from all doubts and misgivings, 
and from all desires to delve into the muddy 
pool of human speculations. To all such Paul 
says, "As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus 
the Lord, so walk ye in him: rooted and built 
up in him, and established in the faith, as ye 
have been taught [by us, the apostles], abounding 
therein with thanksgiving."— But, "Beware 
lest any man spoil you through philosophy 
and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, 
after the rudiments of the world, and not after 
Christ."-Col. 2:6-8. 

With these sentiments of "our beloved brother 
Paul," Peter's counsel is in fullest harmony, 
his advice being, not to waste valuable time in 
investigating "the errors of the wicked," but, 
on the contrary, to endeavor the more earnestly 
to "grow in grace and in the knowledge of 
our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ," who is the 
way, the truth and the life. The more thorough 
our knowledge of the Lord, and the more 



intimate our acquaintance with him, the more 
secure we are in our own steadfastness. 

But what is it to grow in grace? It is to 
grow in favor with the Lord through an intimate 
personal acquaintance and fellowship of 
spirit with him. It implies, first, a knowledge 
and recognition on our part of our redemption 
through his precious blood and a personal faith 
in and dependence upon all the promises of the 
Father made to us through him, and then an 
intimate communion with him in our daily life 
of prayer, and of observation of his will and 
obedience to it. If such be our constant attitude 
of mind and heart, there must be a constant 
ripening of the fruits of the Spirit, rendering 
us more and more pleasing and acceptable 
to our Lord. A sense of the divine 
acceptance and favor is given to us from day 
to day in increasing measure, in fulfilment of 
that blessed promise of our Lord, "If a man 
love me, he will keep my words; and my Father 
will love him, and we will come unto him, 
and make our abode with him."— John 14:23. 

R1461 : page 317 

This, as nearly as words can express it, is 
what it is to grow in grace; but the full and 
blessed understanding of it is best appreciated 
by those who from day to day walk with God 
in faith and obedience and love. 

To grow thus in grace and not grow in knowledge 
is impossible; for the very object of such 
communion is to build us up in a more perfect 
knowledge and acquaintance with the Lord- 
to bring us into closer fellowship with the divine 
plan, and to give us the privilege of being 
co-workers together with him in executing 
that plan. If, therefore, we love and obey the 
Lord and desire to grow in his favor, his written 
Word is our daily meditation and study, 
and thus we grow in knowledge: not, however, 
by finding out each year that what we learned 
last year was false, but by adding to what we 
learned last year, by putting on more and more 
of the armor of God until we realize its glorious 
completeness in the full discernment of the 
divine plan of the ages. We are then ready 
to do valiant service for the cause of truth 
in withstanding the encroachment of error 
(Eph. 6:10-13), being established, strengthened 
and settled in the faith. (1 Pet. 5:10.) But 
even to those thus established in the faith there 
is abundant opportunity to grow in knowledge; 
for while they will see nothing new or different 
in outline or design, they will be continually 



charmed and cheered with newly discovered 

lines of harmony and beauty in the divine 

drawings of the wonderful plan of the ages. 

As pupils we may ever study the master workmanship 

of the Divine Architect. 

"And still new beauties shall we see, 
And still increasing light." 

Our beloved brother Peter, zealous for our 
growth in knowledge, endeavors to inspire us 
thereto, by calling our attention to the wonderful 
events and the close proximity of the day 
of the Lord, saying— 

"The day of the Lord will come as a thief 
[unobserved by the world], in the which the 
heavens [present ecclesiastical powers] shall 
pass away with a great noise [tumult and confusion], 
and the elements [the various parties 
and sects composing it, split and torn by discordant 
views] shall melt with fervent heat [the 
heat of public discussion and investigation]: 
the earth also [society as at present organized 
under civil and ecclesiastical authority] and the 
works that are therein shall be burned up" 
[destroyed, in the strife and friction caused by 
increasing knowledge combined with selfishness. 
This will not be a literal fire, but, as 
described by the prophets, the fire of divine 
jealousy-Zeph. 1:18; 3:8]. (2 Pet. 3:10.) 
Already the noise and tumult, which shall thus 
eventuate in world-wide anarchy, are distinctly 
heard in every nation; for the day of the Lord 
has indeed begun, and the heat of human passion 
is growing more and more intense daily, 
and the great time of trouble is very near. 

"Seeing then that all these things shall be 
dissolved [seeing that present arrangements 
and institutions shall all go down], what manner 
of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation 
and godliness, looking for the coming 
of the day of God, wherein the heavens 
[the present ruling powers] shall be dissolved, 
and the elements shall melt with fervent heat?" 
Let us indeed lay to heart this solemn question, 
for we stand in the very presence of the 
Judge of all the earth. These words, while addressed 
to God's people eighteen centuries ago, 
and serving a purpose for good all along down 
this Gospel age, are specially meant by the Spirit 
for us, who are living in this very Day of God. 

"Nevertheless we [we who have come into 
covenant relationship with the Lord— we, unlike 
the rest of the world, know of the divine 
plan and], according to his promise, look for 
new heavens [the Kingdom of God— to be 
established in power and great glory] and a 
new earth [a new organization of society under 



the rulership of Christ and his glorified bride, 
the Church] wherein dwelleth righteousness." 
Blessed assurance! how favored are we above the 
people of the world who have not this knowledge! 

"Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for 
such things, be diligent that ye may be found 
of him in peace, without spot, and blameless." 
And Jude (24) reminds us that the Lord, in 
whose grace and knowledge Peter desires us to 
grow, "is able to keep you from falling, and to 
present you faultless before the presence of his 
glory with exceeding joy." Amen. 



page 318 

STUDIES IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULLNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 
PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1461 : page 318 

THE FIRST CHRISTIAN MISSIONARIES. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON VII., NOV. 13, ACTS 13:1-13. 

Golden Text— "That repentance and remission of sins 
should be preached in his name among all nations."— 
Luke 24:47. 

VERSE 1. The Church at Antioch had grown 
and prospered under the instructions of Barnabas 
and Saul, who, after spending a year with 
them, went to Jerusalem at the time of the 
famine and must have returned again to Antioch 
and resumed their work of teaching and 
strengthening them in the faith and hope of the 
gospel. The occasion of this lesson was probably 
about a year after the famine. Not only 
had the Church there increased largely in 
numbers, but in their midst had developed both 
prophets and teachers. The view of this band 
of Christians is truly a refreshing one. Here 
Jews and Gentiles were made one in Christ 
Jesus, and mingled together in ardent devotion 



to the recognized Messiah. They were full of 
love and zeal; they were earnest students of the 
Word of the Lord as expounded by Barnabas 
and Saul; they were prompt in sending relief 
to other Christians in time of famine. And 
now, having themselves grown strong spiritually 
through the knowledge of the truth and 
humble submission to its teaching, the missionary 
spirit began to develop. 

VERSE 2. As the prophets and teachers 
continued in the good work with fasting and 
prayer, the holy Spirit indicated in some way 
that Barnabas and Saul should be released from 
the work in Antioch and sent elsewhere, to 
the work whereunto God had called them— the 
work among the Gentiles— to which Saul had 
been appointed by a voice from heaven, and 
Barnabas by the circumstances which had drawn 
him into this work and by the ability he manifested 
in carrying it forward. We are not informed 
as to the manner in which the holy 
Spirit indicated this, whether by some miraculous 
means, or whether by a simple consensus of 
opinion regarding the matter, in view of the 
ability of the Church at Antioch now to dispense 
with their services. 

VERSE 3. In a most solemn manner— with 
prayer and fasting and the laying on of hands 
—the dear brethren at Antioch bade Barnabas 
and Saul God-speed on their mission. The 
laying on of hands cannot be understood as 
conveying authority to these brethren to preach 
the gospel; for they had been preaching the gospel 
for several years: and, besides, these brethren 
who laid their hands on them were not bishops 
or great ones in the Church; but, like all the 
others, they were simply brethren in Christ. 
The laying on of their hands we understand, 
therefore, to signify that they wished the new 
converts abroad to recognize these two as representatives, 
not only of the Lord, but also of the 
Church at Antioch, who, in parting with them 
and foregoing the advantage of their services, 
thus manifested their disposition to bless others 
with the same good tidings which had so refreshed 
them. And doubtless they paid their 
expenses and pledged them the support of their 
sympathy and prayers, and their means, if need 
be. Thus Barnabas and Saul went forth in the 
name of the Lord, and of the Church at Antioch, 
who thereby shared in the enterprise. In 
the symbolic services of the Tabernacle, this 
same significance attached to the laying on of 
hands. Thus Aaron, the high-priest, in laying 
his hands upon the head of the bullock to be 
sacrificed, declared that the animal represented 



him (Lev. 8:14) and thus typified Christ Jesus, 
our great high-priest who gave himself a sacrifice 
for our sins. 

Thus we see that there was no apostolic succession 
indicated in this simple ceremony; for, 
as a matter of fact, it was brethren who were 
not apostles who laid their hands on one (Saul) 
who was already an apostle chosen and ordained 
of God.— 1 Tim. 2:7. 

VERSES 4,5. Being thus sent forth by the 
holy Spirit, they began their work in the synagogues 
of the Jews, because the Jews, having a 
knowledge of the prophecies and of the events, 
etc., connected with the life and tragic death 
of Jesus of Nazareth, were best fitted to receive 
the truth. Just so now the truths of the new, 
Millennial dispensation belong to Christians 
first, and the testimony should be borne to them 
before going to the world in general. This being 
our custom, we are often confronted with the 
query, Why not go rather to wicked people 
who never go to church? We reply, Because 
this gospel is sent to the meek (Isa. 61:1), and 
because "Light is sown for the righteous, and 
joy for the upright in heart." 

But the temples of the nominal church today 
do not offer the same advantages for the 

R1461 : page 319 

presentation of the truth as did the synagogues 
of the Jews. The former are so hedged 
about with restrictions and formalities that 
there is almost no opportunity to present the 
truth there, while the Jewish synagogues, on 
the contrary, were open to any one who would 
read or expound the Scriptures. So also were 
the assemblies of Christians in those days of 
primitive simplicity, which have been so widely 
departed from by the nominal church of 
these later days. 

VERSES 6-12 show how God worked with 
Barnabas and Saul and manifested his power 
through them. As they sought to make plain 
the way of truth to an earnest inquirer an enemy 
appeared who endeavored to withstand their 
teaching; but the power of God exercised 
through Saul promptly silenced the opposer, 
and the truth had free course. 

Here the question naturally arises, Why does 
such power not exist in the Church to-day? 
On every hand the foes of truth and righteousness 
arise and flourish, and there is no power to 
withstand them save the power of the truth. 
We answer, it was not God's purpose thus to 
defend the Church from her foes all through 



the age. It was his purpose, on the contrary, 
to let "the mystery of iniquity" work and 
prosper, and to let the Church develop under 
the trial; but in those early days, in order to 
let truth have a start on a fair footing it was 
necessary for a time to restrain the power of 
the adversary, as in the case of Elymas the 
sorcerer. The difference between that time and 
this is that that was the seed-sowing time while 
this is the harvest. And therefore God now 
permits false teachers to increase and multiply 
more and more, and to have such liberty that, 
if it were possible, they would deceive the very 
elect. Even these enemies serve a purpose in 
testing and in sifting the true children of God 
from the false. 



R1461 : page 319 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT. 



page 319 

Kansas. 

DEAR FRIEND IN CHRIST:-I received your 
card, the Tracts and two numbers of "Zions 
Watch Tower," for which favors please accept 
thanks. I did not know that there was any 
such line of thought in publication, until I 
acted as scribe for a friend in ordering "Millennial 
Dawn;" but I have been reading the 
Word very studiously for some years, with the 
heart and will surrendered to God, and the 
body presented a living sacrifice. I sought to 
know God only in this search after truth; for 
Jesus, in his beautiful prayer, said, "And this 
is life eternal, that they might know thee, the 
only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou 
hast sent." 

I have read many publications, getting some 
food from each and all; but I have never found 
the liberty which you advocate, and which undoubtedly 
is of God, made practical; and I 
can accept nothing less than the liberty wherewith 
Christ has set me free. What need have 
we of man's sanction or ordination, since to 
come under man's dictation is to cut off spiritual 
communication with God. My continual 
aspiration to God is, Fashion me as the potter 
fashions the clay. Fill me with the knowledge 
of thy will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding. 
I am glad that I may be his child 



without subscribing to any rules according to 
the wisdom of man, which is foolishness with 
God. I am sure we may have Jesus dwelling 
in us, we may be baptized into his death (and 
so put on Christ), and his life may be sustained 
in us, as we eat of his broken body and drink 
of his shed blood. 

Praise the Lord, O my soul; be glad in the 
Lord, and rejoice! Oh, how unkind not to 
believe him and live; for he delighteth not in 
the death of him that dieth. Yes, he died to 
deliver us from death. He took the flesh, that 
through his death he might destroy him that 
has the power of death, that is the devil, and 
deliver us. 

Enclosed please find five dollars for the 
TOWER, Tracts and "Dawns." I would rejoice 
to do all that I can in disseminating the truth. 

Yours very truly in the love of the truth, 
H. M. WHITE. 



R1461 : page 319 

Tennessee. 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO.:-I received the three 
volumes of "Dawn" and several numbers of the 
Tower. They are indeed a helping hand to 
one who has been struggling to get into the 
light but dimly seen, standing outside of the 
Babel of confused tongues for nearly twenty-five 
years, and waiting for the Lord's coming 
since 1844. I now stand on the verge of three 
score years and ten, and pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come;" and with the ardent desire of the souls 
under the altar I inquire, How long, O Master, 
how long? 

How almost overwhelming is such a flood of 
light as the Lord is now giving through you 
and others of his chosen messengers! How 
inexpressible and exultant the joy of such light! 

R1461 : page 320 

I have often remarked that wherever there is 
an earnest, persistent seeker of the truth, it will 
finally come to such an one; and that if there 
should be no other way, a special messenger 
would be sent. 

I am thankful for the opportunity now offered 
to do some little service for the Master, by circulating 
your publications wherever I find a 
hearing ear or a waiting soul. Our Lord said, 
"Ye are my witnesses;" and I fear that I have 
not been a faithful witness, although I taught 



many of these truths privately for some years. 
Standing outside of all human organizations, 
and in a very dark corner of the earth, and 
knowing nothing of the TOWER movement (or 
work), I felt alone and fearful. But my moral 
courage is now greatly strengthened by the 
knowledge of the fact that there are so many 
and such strong laborers in the field. May the 
Lord ever guide us, and teach us when and 
what to speak, and when to be silent. 
Yours in him, S. G. KERR. 



page 320 

Iowa. 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO.:-I received the 
third volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN, and I was 
well pleased with it, as with the first and second 
volumes. They have given me great light on 
what seemed dark and mysterious passages of 
the Bible; and they have created in me a new 
interest in the study of the Old as well as the 
New Testament— not for mere curiosity, but 
because I see a new beauty in all their teachings, 
in all God's plans and purposes. We are 
made willing or unwilling instruments to accomplish 
his will. What a blessed thought, to 
be willing workers in his vineyard, and to be 
waiting with glad hearts for the Master's return 
to secure his own. 

I have loaned the books with the hope of 
enlisting others in the spread of the truth in 
this community. 

Fraternally, yours, W. D. HONENS. 



New York. 

DEAR FRIENDS:-I am sincerely grateful for 
the generous gift of the WATCH TOWER. I enjoy 
it beyond my power to express, and I 
read it, as I do the DAWN, with the Scriptures 
open beside me. The beauty and value 
of your publications lie in the fact that every 
statement is so completely fortified by Scripture 
references. I sometimes read the whole 
chapter, where one verse or more is referred to, 
and I am conscious of a much clearer comprehension 
of Bible teachings than I ever had before; 
for I was much troubled by skepticism. 
I did not then know how to study the Scriptures, 
as many of my teachers were also partially 
blind. 

I am very thankful that our blessed Savior 



so ordered the late events of my life that I was 

permitted to obtain some of the true light, and 

I trust some of that wisdom that maketh wise 

unto salvation. I believe it was his grace that 

caused some Tracts to be sent to me, and that 

led me to obtain Volume I. of DAWN. By the 

time that I had carefully read Chapter vi. of 

that work, all my skepticism and doubts disappeared. 

To me the Scriptures are not contradictory, 

nor is our loving Creator unjust, unwise, 

or lacking in power. Yea, he is infinite 

in all his attributes. 

I intend to use all means and opportunities 
in my power to aid in spreading the light that 
has so mercifully been extended to me. I desire 
to consecrate all my abilities, and the 
remainder of my life, to the circulation of 
literature that tends to a knowledge of righteousness, 
the truths of Scripture, the wonderful 
plans of our Creator, our Father, and his infinite 
love, wisdom and justice. May the Lord 
grant abundant success to our labors for the 
spiritual help of mankind. Gratefully yours 
in the Lord, B. G. BARTO. 



R1461 : page 320 

The following letter, just at hand, indicates 
that there are some truth-seekers in the pulpits 
too: a fact that one might be inclined to 
doubt, from the number of ministers who seem 
determinedly opposed even to investigating 
anything approximating "good tidings of great 
joy for all people"— hating the light, neither 
coming to it; but, like their prototypes in the 
Jewish "harvest," stopping and in every way 
hindering all who are longing for the dawn of 
the Millennial morning. Let us not despair 
of the ministers: there are some honest ones 
among them. Let us remember that it costs 
them more than others to embrace present truths. 
One of them (a Presbyterian minister in Pittsburg), 
after admitting privately that he believed 
much taught in the Dawns, was asked, Why 

R1462 : page 320 

then do you not preach it? His candid reply 
was: "My bread is not buttered on that side." 

Kansas. 
BRETHREN:-If you have anything Biblical 
in "The Plan of the Ages" which will lift 
the awful load of depression from mind and 



heart, and harmonize natural and "revealed" 
religion, in the name of mercy send it to me 
by return mail. Find thirty cents inclosed. 

Respectfully, . 

Pastor First Congregational Church. 



page 322 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1462 : page 322 

Probably no book ever had a greater number 
of free circulars sent out in its interest than 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I. East and West, 
North and South, dear friends of the truth are 
continually seeking to put the "meat in due 
season" before the truth-hungry. Our latest 
surprise in this direction was the receipt of an 
order for a copy of the MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
from a western town, enclosing a circular of 
which we had not heard until then, a copy of 
which follows. God bless the dear co-laborers 
who far and near are seeking in one way and 
another to feed his "sheep"— to proclaim the 
good tidings of great joy. Your efforts have 
much to do with the large circulation of the 
Truth. Over 300,000 copies, of Vol. I., The 
Plan of the Ages, are already in the hands of 
readers, and the work is still progressing. God 



be praised! 

New York. 

DEAR FRIEND: --Lest you should wonder 
how I came in possession of your name, I will 
state that I first saw it in the correspondence 
column of , of which I am a reader. 

Feeling that you must be one who is interested 
in searching after a knowledge of the 
wonderful things of our Great Father's creation, 
and desiring that your steps may be still 
further directed in the knowledge of things 
past, present and future, I have taken the liberty 
of addressing this communication to you, 
with the special object in view of calling your 
attention to a wonderful book— one which, perchance, 
you already have; but if not, one which 
I, a disinterested and humble servant of the 
Lord, would counsel you to obtain without delay. 

"MILLENNIAL DAWN" is a book which has 
been to me, and I know to many others, a 
great source of gladness and inspiration: a "helping 
hand" indeed to every earnest student of 
the Word, producing an inward joy which has 
caused many an one to cry out time and again 
from an overflowing heart, "Praise the Lord!" 
If you want to see things "new and old" in 
God's Word, brought out as you have never 
before seen them, and to have, as a humble, 
hungering seeker after truth, "meat in due 
season," obtain this deeply interesting book and 
prayerfully read it, comparing it with the Word. 
It can be obtained from the publisher by remitting 
the very low price named. Think not, 
dear friend, that I am in anyway interested in 
the publication and sale of this book other than 
from a desire to spread the truth; for such is 
not the case. 

I am sending out this circular (without the 
knowledge of the author and publishers) as a 
free-will missionary work of my own— a feeble 
effort on my part to spread the "glad tidings 
of great joy," and an effort which, please God, 
may he mightily bless to the praise of his great 
name, to whom be all the glory, Amen. 

Should you desire further information on this 
subject, I will be pleased to hear from you. 

Yours in the hope of the Gospel, 

JOHN A. MITCHELL. 



page 322 

THE SYRIAC NEW TESTAMENT. 



Murdoch's Translation of the Syriac-Peshito 
manuscript is sometimes inquired for. 

We can supply it in substantial half-leather 
binding, post paid for $2.00. 



Do not forget the Missionary Envelopes. We 
have a new lot and supply them now at the reduced 
price of 25 cents per hundred, and $2.00 
per thousand. This includes free delivery to you 
at your Postoffice. 



R1462 : page 323 
