Always Plenty to Do
1 Jehovah’s people are busy people. We have many obligations in connection with our family, employment, and school. And above all, there is always “plenty to do in the work of the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:58) We must prepare for and attend weekly congregation meetings. We are encouraged not to let a week go by without having some share in the field ministry. Sufficient time must be regularly set aside for personal and family Bible study. Elders and ministerial servants have many congregation assignments. At times we are asked to help worthy ones in need.
2 Occasionally, some of us may feel overwhelmed by all that we have to do. Yet, the busiest people can be among the happiest if balance and proper perspective are maintained.​—Eccl. 3:12, 13.
3 The apostle Paul was one who had plenty to do. While caring for his own personal needs by working secularly as a tentmaker, he labored in excess of the other apostles. He worked tirelessly as an evangelizer, preaching publicly and from house to house, while not neglecting his responsibilities as a shepherd of the flock. (Acts 20:20, 21, 31, 34, 35) Despite his busy schedule, Paul was always eager to do more in Jehovah’s service.​—Compare Romans 1:13-15.
4 Paul maintained his balance and a happy heart by relying on Jehovah for strength. He found his ministry to be rewarding and satisfying. (Phil. 4:13) He knew that God would not forget his work. (Heb. 6:10) The joy of helping others to know Jehovah energized him. (1 Thess. 2:19, 20) The assurance of realizing his Bible-based hope impelled him to remain industrious.​—Heb. 6:11.
5 We should also consider the good that results from our labors. Our presence at and participation in weekly meetings serve to upbuild and encourage others. (Heb. 10:24, 25) Our earnest efforts to reach all with the good news contribute to the advancement of the congregation as interest is cultivated and new ones associate with us. (John 15:8) Assisting others in need promotes a close-knit, familylike spirit in the congregation. (Jas. 1:27) Furthermore, like Paul, we should never forget that being busy in profitable works is well pleasing to Jehovah God. We deem it a grand privilege to serve him. For us there is no better way of life!
6 There is an added benefit in having plenty to do. When we are busy pursuing a healthy spiritual routine, time seems to go by much faster. Realizing that each day that passes brings us closer to the new world, we gladly accept the full life we enjoy now. We also realize the wisdom of staying busy, inasmuch as we have less time to get involved in futile worldly pursuits.​—Eph. 5:15, 16.
7 Surely, there is plenty to do in the work of the Lord. But we can remain happy if we continue to rely on Jehovah God and Jesus Christ, who make our service refreshing and rewarding.​—Matt. 11:28-30; 1 John 5:3.

