Part 1​—Show Consideration for Others
1 We rejoice to see the prosperity of Jehovah’s people, which has resulted in a growing number of congregations. In some areas, especially in larger cities, a strain has been put on Kingdom Hall facilities, sometimes requiring several congregations to use the same Kingdom Hall. This situation calls for extra consideration on the part of all involved.
2 Each congregation using the Kingdom Hall should leave it in neat and orderly condition for the brothers who come in next. The chairs should be put in order, any literature on the counter should be put away, and any personal items left around the Kingdom Hall should be collected. The rest rooms should be left in tidy condition, making sure that soap, towels, and paper supplies have been replenished and trash receptacles emptied.
3 When another meeting is scheduled to start shortly, those remaining after an earlier meeting should not tarry unnecessarily, interfering with preparations for the next meeting. Extended social conversation may result in overcrowding in the lobby and delay the brothers in getting things organized for the next meeting. Parking space around the Kingdom Hall may be limited, and it would be a kindness to leave promptly so that those coming in will have a place to park. On the other hand, those attending the next meeting should not arrive too early, causing unnecessary congestion in the lobby, cloakroom, and parking lot.
4 Where several congregations are involved, there is a special need for close cooperation in making arrangements for weekly cleaning of the Kingdom Hall. Usually, the congregations take turns for a designated period. When your congregation has that responsibility, make sure that the cleaning is done thoroughly and promptly. The other congregations using the hall will then have no cause for complaint.
5 Occasionally there is a need for each congregation to change its meeting times, such as when the circuit overseer visits. If another congregation is affected, the elders should advise the other congregation well in advance so that they can inform their publishers as early as possible. Also, if some authorized activity, such as a Pioneer Service School, a meeting of the circuit elders, or a wedding, is scheduled, the other congregations and any circuit overseers affected should be consulted well in advance; they will thus not schedule use of the Kingdom Hall at the same time.
6 There are quite a number of halls used by congregations assigned to different circuits. It is essential that the traveling overseers visiting these halls keep one another informed about upcoming visits that are being scheduled. Last-minute adjustments or other difficulties can result when two traveling overseers schedule visits during the same week.
7 Loving consideration for others, good communication, advance planning, and cooperation will help to maintain a warm relationship between congregations and will ensure that “all things take place decently and by arrangement.”​—1 Cor. 14:40.

