VOL. XXXV JUNE 15 No. 12 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

19 14-General Conventions- 19 14 178 

The Voice From Heaven 179 

Babylon Cast into the Sea 179 

Knowledge Brings Responsibility 179 

Fervent in Spirit— Watching Thereunto 182 

Lessons Learned by the Lord's Delay 182 

Our "Solitary Way" 183 

Fashioning Ourselves as Obedient Children 184 

How to Fashion Our Minds 184 

The Fashioning a Gradual Process 185 

Greatness the Reward of Service 186 

"Are Ye Able?"-"My Cup, My Baptism" 187 

"We Are Able"-"Ye Shall Indeed" 187 

What Blind Bartimaeus Saw 188 

The Worst of Blindness 188 

Only the Few Yet See 189 

Mind and Will 190 

Some Interesting Letters 190 

A Maturing Obligation 190 

What the Photo-Drama Did for Him 191 

page 178 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



1914-GENERAL CONVENTIONS- 19 14 



ASBURY PARK, N.J., JUNE 26 TO JULY 7 
COLUMBUS, OHIO, JUNE 26 TO JULY 7 
CLINTON, IOWA, JUNE 28 TO JULY 5 

The City Council of Asbury Park has extended a cordial 
invitation to the I.B.S.A. to hold a Convention in their city 
from June 26 to July 7, placing their Auditorium, seating 
2,000, at the disposal of the Association. The invitation has 
been accepted. 

Asbury Park is one of the most attractive and healthful resorts 
on the Atlantic Coast, and it is quiet and restful. Great 
trees shade the streets almost to the ocean's edge, and within 
a few minutes' walk from the sandy beach one is in the midst 
of typical rural scenery. 

The PHOTO-DRAMA will be presented each evening: PART 
I., June 26th; PART II., June 27; PART III., the following evening; 
then PART IV., etc., thus giving opportunity for three full 
presentations of the four parts. A splendid program, with 
more than twenty-four speakers, has been arranged. Brother 
Russell expects to speak on June 28th and 29th. Opportunity 
for symbolic immersion will be given July 6th. 

For particulars as to the Columbus, O., Convention (June 
26th to July 7th) and Clinton, la. (June 28th to July 5th) see 
June 1st WATCH TOWER, page 174. Owing to the Asbury Park 
Convention being held on the same dates as Columbus and 
Clinton, Brother Russell's dates at Columbus will be June 
30th, July 1st and 2d; Clinton, July 3d, 4th and 5th. 

The I.B.S.A. Convention Committees at Columbus, Clinton 
and Asbury Park have a complete list of all the good and 
available lodging places. You will assist all concerned by 
promptly advising the Committee at the place where you 
expect to attend a Convention, and for which days. 

It will be of further advantage, both to you and to all, if 
the Committees have the engagement of your rooms. This 
will avoid trouble and confusion at the eleventh hour and taking, 
at higher prices, rooms secured for others. 

Address at once at the city you expect to attend Convention, 
Int'l Bible Students Assn., Convention Committee, care 
General Delivery. 



When sending remittances to the Society, please remember 



to make them payable in all cases to the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, No. 17 Hicks Street, Brooklyn, 

N.Y. 



R5478 : page 179 

THE VOICE FROM HEAVEN 

"Come out of her, My people, that ye be not 
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive 
not of her plagues."— Revelation 18:4. 

THE context of the above Scripture shows that 

our text refers to Babylon— not the literal 

city of Babylon, but to the symbolic city, 

described in the Book of Revelation. The 

term Babylon seems to signify a concentration 

of the various errors in apostate 

church systems, personified in Revelation 

as mother and daughters. "Babylon the 

Great, the Mother of Harlots," is the name 

given by the Lord to the original System, 

thus intimating that the whole brood is illegitimate in 

every sense of the word. She neglected the Heavenly 

Bridegroom, and mingled in her "cup" a stupefying potion 

that has intoxicated the world; even the Lord's saints were 

bewildered.— Revelation 17:1-6. 

After the Apostles "fell asleep," the people of God 
gradually drifted into error of doctrine and practise, which 
culminated in the Dark Ages. A great System developed, 
and led into confusion and darkness. We need not suppose 
that in all these centuries every one connected with 
this System was hypocritical. As the people of Natural 
Israel were led captive into literal Babylon, so the people 
of Spiritual Israel, among whom were some of the Lord's 
true saints, were led captive into Mystic Babylon. Some 
of these would have liked to get free, yet did not know 
what to do. 

When we come down to the Reformation, we see that 
instead of getting entirely free from Babylon and her 
errors, the various systems then formed partook to a considerable 
extent of the spirit of the Mother System from 
which they had separated. The same spirit of persecution 
that was manifested in the "Mother" has also been 
manifested more or less in the "daughters." The enslaving 
power extended from medieval times to the Reformation; 
so that, looking out upon the so-called Christian 
world today, we see that there could not be a better word 
used to picture existing conditions than the word 
confusion. 

Yet there are true people of God still in this Babylonian 
System. But the time of separation is here: those 
yet remaining in Babylon must hasten! The fact that 
some of God's children have been in Babylon all through 



the Age shows us why God has had any respect at all for 
Babylon; His saints have been more or less enslaved 
there for centuries. This is the reason why God has 
dealt with Babylon in any sense or degree. 

BABYLON CAST INTO THE SEA 

Our text with its context is a prophecy that in the end 
of the present Age a time would come when God would 
wholly reject Babylon. In the picture given us in Revelation 
of this time, the Lord's rejection of the apostate systems 
is declared in the words, "Babylon is fallen, is 
fallen!" She has been spewed out of His mouth, and the 
Almighty now calls upon His true people to "come out of 
her." The faithful ones are delivering themselves out of 
Babylon during this Harvest time; the separating work 
is almost completed. Soon, as pictured in Scripture, the 
"sea" of anarchy will swallow up the false systems. 
Babylon is to be "cast as a great millstone into the sea." 
(Psalm 46:2; Jeremiah 51:62-64; Revelation 18:21.) We 
believe these prophecies are to be fulfilled in the very 
near future. 

The nominal Church no longer stands in a peculiar 
position— above the world. Some of her ministers declare 
that they do not believe in Jesus as the Savior of 
the world— man is his own savior, they say. They believe 
in the social uplift of humanity, which, according 
to their view, is to come by putting the right men into 
the right places, by giving woman the franchise, and by 
other methods of social reform. What a sorry hope! 

Some may ask: How may we recognize God's Voice 
calling His people to come out of the churches now? In 
what manner shall we hear His Voice? We answer that 
God bids His people to separate themselves from all sin 
and sinful conditions. Our forefathers did not hear this 
Voice, did not see this condition of sin. The Voice had 
not then spoken. Even in the time of the Reformation 
these entanglements of error were not clearly discerned. 
But now, in this Harvest time, we can see very clearly 
that the teachings of the nominal churches have been 
grossly in error— have grossly misrepresented the Divine 
Purpose and the Divine Character. We now perceive 
that Babylon is full of error and corruption of doctrine, 
and filled with the spirit of the world. 

KNOWLEDGE BRINGS RESPONSIBILITY 

Furthermore, the times and seasons of God's Plan are 
now made plain. We are shown that we are now living in 
the time foretold, when these systems of error are to be 
rejected by the Lord. Should we not leave these systems 
when we see all this? This is God's Voice to "come out 
of her." We hear this Voice now speaking; we see that 
this prophecy of Revelation is now being fulfilled. If 

R5478 : page 180 



any remonstrate: But, Lord, we have many precious 
friends in Babylon, and we are loth to leave them. We 
have tried to show them what Babylon is, but they will 
not heed. It will be a great loss to us to leave them all 
and take a stand against them. Must we come out? Our 
friends will think us crazy! The Lord replies: "Come 
out of her," or "receive of her plagues." 

You are not sharers of her sins until the time you see 
this. You were born in Babylon. The Lord is not holding 
you responsible for what you did not understand. 
But the better you understand, the more responsibility 
you have. If, when you see what the Truth is and what 
the untruth is, you still remain in Babylon and support 
her with your influence and dollars, you will be very 
culpable. If you fail to come out of her when you hear 
the Lord's Voice, it will imply that you are not thoroughly 
loyal to Him. You may be His children, but if you fail 
to obey the Lord through fear of earthly loss, it will 
prove that these things are more precious to you than 
His favor, and He will treat you as He treats the hypocrites: 
you will have a share in their experiences. 

If you are approving of the sins of the spewed-out 
systems by upholding them and giving them your influence, 
you will surely be partakers of Babylon's plagues. 
This is a fair warning. We understand that it is the duty 
of every Christian to break every tender tie, if necessary, 
and to be loyal to God, to stand free from the error and 
sins of Babylon. The time of her judgment has come. 

The plagues coming upon Babylon are sore troubles, 
which will result in the complete overthrow of the present 
order of things— political, social, financial and religious. 
This order of things in its various phases, is one Cause, 
under different uniforms; these interests are all united in 
one great policy. The princes and kings of the earth and 
their supporters are Babylon's great army, and pitted 
against it is another vast army, composed of the masses 
of the people. The conflict between these two great 
armies will ere long precipitate the present order of things 
of the world into anarchy. 

THE VOICE OF PRESENT TRUTH 

It becomes an important question then: Have all 
God's people heard this Voice? We answer that we do 
not think all have yet heard; hence there must be some 
Christians still in Babylon, partakers of her sins, but confused 
because of ignorance, because of lack of knowledge. 
The question might be asked: Shall we go forth making 
this call a special message? We answer: This is not our 
thought. Our thought is that where this is made a special 
message the result is usually different from what is 
intended: it makes many angry. They say: By what 
authority do you call us Babylon, and by what authority 
do you tell us to "come out"? 

Our thought is that it is the Lord who calls His people 



out of Babylon; the call is to be recognized especially as 
a Voice from Heaven. What is this Voice from Heaven? 
Apparently, the Voice is Present Truth— a presentation 
of the doctrines of the Scriptures, with their times and 
seasons— a showing that while there has been confusion 
and error all the way down through the Age, we are now 
in the Harvest time, when Truth is clearer than ever 
before. This Voice of Truth tells us whether or not we 
should support a system that is full of error, full of 
confusion. 

In what way should we give God's Message to come 
out of Babylon? We should show them the Light, the 
Truth; we should place before them the opportunity for 
investigation, and encourage them to prove these things 
for themselves. As they come to see the Truth and the 
bondage in which they have been, they will be glad to 
stand free in Christ by breaking off these shackles. This 
will be the Voice, then, that will show all the Lord's 
people who are in the right attitude of heart that they 
should stand free, that they should come out of Sectarianism, 
that they should not misrepresent the Lord by claiming 
that they are of Babylon when they are not, but that 
they take their stand for God. 

LOYALTY TO TRUTH THE TEST 

This stand will mean the holding forth of the Divine 
Plan of the Ages, the Truth. If, after one has seen the 
real character of Babylon and has gotten his bearings in 
a general way, he then remains, it can be only by compromising 
the Truth. By being worldly wise he might 
remain and continue for a time to have popularity, to 
have honor of men. But if after seeing the Truth, after 

R5479 : page 180 

understanding the Truth, one were to continue in 
Babylon, he would of course be a greater sinner than one 
who had not been so enlightened. 

It is not our thought that we should avoid doing our 
duty in the proclamation of the Truth, but that we should 
avoid arousing unnecessary antagonism; for people in 
error are in no condition to have the error lightly spoken 
of. They must be in the right condition before one can 
even whisper to them, "Come out of her." Even if they 
make inquiry of us, we should not speak too positively; 
but we should say: Now, my dear brother [or sister], if 
you have heard the Voice of God, if you realize that the 
various denominations are in error, then you will, apparently, 
see your duty. You once said you were of 
them; if now you see that you are not of them, you 
should tell them so. But when you shall see, and when 
you shall hear, is not for another to say. If, when you 
have heard and believe the Truth, you remain in Babylon, 
you will be a partaker of her sins, and more guilty than 
the average one among them. When you are able to hear 



this Voice yourself— this Voice which will show you the 
right and the wrong, the Truth and the error— no doubt 
you will have the fortitude to "come out." 

BABYLON'S ATTITUDE TOWARD THE TRUTH 

But those who hear the Voice of Present Truth, and 
who obey the call to come out of Babylon, are usually 
subjected to persecution. In our Lord's day, when the 
believers were from among the Jews, some were put 
out of the synagogues. We remember a particular instance 
during our Lord's ministry. A man who was born 
blind was asked how he had his sight restored; and when 
he confessed Jesus, the rulers put him out of the synagogue. 
(John 9:22,34.) That same spirit, that same 
condition, seemed to follow with the Apostles. 

All through the Dark Ages those who were faithful 
to the Light were kept out of the churches. The church 
creeds and practises were conscience-barriers to keep 
Light-bearers out; those faithful to the Truth were excommunicated 
or put to death as heretics. This condition 
continued to some extent even after the time of the 
Reformation. Servetus, a brother Christian, whose horrible 
death by burning at the stake was caused by Calvin, 
is a case in point. Jesus said, "They shall put you out of 
the synagogues; yea, the time cometh that whosoever 
killeth you will think that he doeth God service." The 
execution of Servetus was an instance of the literal fulfilment 
of our Lord's words. 

Those who have ruled the synagogues have not always 
been bad people, but mistaken people. Thus it was with 
Saul of Tarsus, when he haled Christians to prison and 

R5479 :page 181 

approved the death of St. Stephen. And so with the 
churches of our day when any become enlightened and 
let their light shine. The same thing is true that has 
always been true; namely, "The darkness hateth the 
light." They say: If you stay with us you shall not 
present these matters. So those who are loyal to God are 
in this way forced out of the synagogues; indeed, the 
loyal ones are now called to "come out." 

"YOUR BRETHREN THAT HATED YOU" 

But our day has a peculiarity that other days have not 
had. The Divine Plan is now so beautiful that we can 
see that others are in darkness, and this impelling Voice 
of the Truth is the Voice of God, the Voice of conscience, 
the Voice of enlightenment, calling us out of Babylon, 
which is misrepresenting God, His character, His Plan 
and His Word. We do not know but that they may go 
to the extreme in our day— to kill socially, to kill ecclesiastically, 
perhaps to kill physically. Nearly all the persecutions 
that have come to God's people have come from 



professed Christians, fellow-believers. "Your brethren 
that hated you, that cast you out for My Name's sake, 
said, Let the Lord be glorified; but He shall appear to 
your joy, and they shall be ashamed."— Isaiah 66:5. 

We are glad that these shall one day, not far off, we 
believe, see their mistake. Instead of feeling like bringing 
vengeance upon our enemies, we should feel quite a 
sympathy— not with them, but for them. We should 
realize that it is with them very much as it was with the 
Jews in our Lord's day: those Jews and their rulers knew 
not what they did, or they would have been ashamed. 
And they will be ashamed when they come forth and 
realize what they did— just as Saul of Tarsus was 
ashamed when he realized what he had done. And so 
with these blinded ones of today: "Some shall come forth 
to shame and lasting contempt." This contempt will last 
until there has been a proper repentance for their share 
in the persecutions of the Lord and His faithful ones. 

AMOUNT OF KNOWLEDGE NECESSARY 

We surely appreciate very highly the value of knowledge, 
but we also remember the truthfulness of St. Paul's 
statement that "knowledge (alone) puffs up, but love 
builds up." Yet knowledge is necessary to growth in 
grace. Only as we perceive the beauty of the Divine character 
can we appreciate our God. Therefore, we rejoice 
that He is lifting the veil and revealing Himself more and 
more to our eyes of understanding. 

We can see that mental capacity is not the same in all. 
Some can receive a large measure of the Truth, while 
others can assimilate only a little. No one needs more 
knowledge than he is capable of receiving. God is judging 
His people according to their character-likeness to 
His Son, our Lord, not according to what they know. 
While knowledge is very important, very necessary, still 
no one has a monopoly of understanding— no one has perfect 
knowledge in the present life; and if our eternal 
destiny depended upon knowledge, each of us would come 
short. Nevertheless, we believe that all who are the 
Lord's will be brought into touch with Present Truth, and 
will be judged by it. Those who obtain the knowledge 
and then show a disposition to shirk the responsibility 
connected with it or to deny the Truth or to live ungodly 
after seeing the Light, thus demonstrate their 
unworthiness. 

The Apostle, speaking to the faithful ones in Christ, 
says, "Ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that Day 
should overtake you as a thief. Ye are children of the 
light." He seems to imply that the Lord's true people 
will come to a knowledge of the Truth. This does not 
necessarily mean all the Truth, but enough to sanctify. 
One with large intellectual power would require and 
could assimilate a large amount of knowledge; one with 
small mental capacity would need less. 

There are certain basic principles that the Lord's 



people have at all times grasped; for instance, the fact 
that there is but one God. Even those who hold to the 
doctrine of the "Trinity" declare that there is one God. 
Thus they have a measure of the Truth, although they 
contradict themselves. It is the same in regard to the 
penalty for sin. Our forefathers desired to be right 
when they thought eternal torment the punishment for 
sin; and they called it a just penalty, in their endeavor to 
be right. But with these basic principles is mixed a large 
proportion of error. The whole world of mankind has 
been under delusions; and we who are now waking up 
are really surprised to see how little we actually knew— 
how ignorant we were in regard to some of the precious 
messages which our God has given us. 

"WEEPING AND GNASHING OF TEETH" 

But as we were children of God before we received 
full knowledge, so we believe that it is possible for others 
to be children of God without having full knowledge. We 
are living in the Harvest of the Gospel Age, when God is 
causing the knowledge of the Truth to encircle the earth. 
At the same time the Adversary is doing all that he can 
to hinder people from studying the Divine Message- 
raising a dust of calumny to blind the eyes of the unwary. 

It is because we believe that there are children of God 
attempting to live on the husks and skimmed milk of 
human tradition— brethren in Christ starving for the pure 
food offered in the Word of God— that we are trying to 
reach and help them. Otherwise we would abandon all 
special efforts at propaganda; for we know that as soon 
as the Messianic Kingdom shall have been set up, conditions 
will be favorable to all to come to a knowledge of 
the Truth as it is contained in the Bible. 

The days that are almost upon us will surely bring 
"weeping and gnashing of teeth" to many of the Lord's 
people; for whoever stands for error will be in opposition 
to God. They are about to go into a great Time of 
Trouble, and it will be their own fault. Some of us heard 
God's Voice early in the Harvest, and therefore we had 
the responsibility earlier; some heard later. Some are 
hearing now about the sins of Babylon— that these sins 
are about to be punished, and that they should come out 
and be on God's side, if they would have Divine favor. 
It is the desire to further sound out this present Message 
that has led us to the production of the PHOTO-DRAMA OF 
CREATION— that those who would not read might see. To 
whatever extent it helps each of God's children, still 
bound, to recognize his own responsibility, it represents 
the Voice of God, telling them their present duty as 
Christians. 



"When ye hear I am come, then can ye arise, 
The joy of your heart springing up in your eyes? 



Can ye come out to meet Me, whate'er the cost be, 
Though ye come on the waves of a storm-crested sea? 

"When I call, can ye turn and in gladness 'come out' 
From the home of your childhood, the friends of your heart? 
With naught but My promise on which to rely, 
Afar from their love— can ye lie down and die?" 

"Yea, we'll take up the Cross and in faith follow Thee, 
And bear Thy reproach, Thy disciples to be. 
Blest Savior, for courage to Thee we will fly; 
Of grace Thou hast promised abundant supply." 



R5480 : page 182 

FERVENT IN PRAYER-WATCHING THEREUNTO 

"Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, 
and watching thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication 
for all saints."— Ephesians 6:18. 

PRAYER is a wonderful privilege. It is a very 
great favor to be permitted to approach the 
Supreme Ruler of the Universe with our 
petitions. We should come, therefore, in 
the spirit of deep appreciation, of earnestness 
and humility and reverence. The 
greater our earnestness, the more acceptable 
will be our prayers, and the more abundant 
blessings shall we receive. 

There is a great deal of formal prayer. 
The Scriptures speak of this as drawing near unto God 
with the lips, while the heart is far from Him. (Isaiah 29: 13; 
Matthew 15:7-9.) It would be better not to approach 
the Lord at all than to do so in an improper manner. 
The man who merely utters words with His lips is 
not praying. A Christian should not say prayers, but 
should pray. We should not think of saying even one word 
that we do not mean and have not thought out. Many 
people have done themselves injury by praying in a formalistic 
manner. 

When we come to the Father, let us draw nigh in 
spirit— with the heart, the understanding, the mind— 
whether the prayer be long or short. Let us come with 
true and earnest devotion, with supplication, that He may 
see our intense desire in the matter. As our Lord said, 
the Father seeketh such to worship Him as worship Him 
in spirit and in truth. Without the spirit of prayer our 
petitions amount to nothing. 

No one may offer prayer to the Father except those 
who have accepted His terms, and have come into relationship 
with Him as sons, through the great Advocate. 
Others are aliens and strangers. There is a difference 
between worship, or thanksgiving, and prayer. Any one 



may offer worship— adoration, homage. Any one may 
bow the knee and express thanks and appreciation. But 
the privilege of making requests of God is directly limited 
to those who have been accepted in Christ. 

There is a difference, too, between prayer and supplication. 
The term prayer applies to any petition, great or 
small; whereas the term supplication means a special, 
agonizing desire for a thing— entreaty with intense yearning. 
But whether it is prayer in the ordinary sense, or 
intense prayer— supplication— we should always come in 
the spirit, with an appreciation of the fact that we are 
entering into the presence of the great Creator and that 
in thus doing we are enjoying a great privilege. 

"WATCHING THEREUNTO" 

St. Paul adds, "and watching thereunto." Watching 
seems to be an attitude of mental alertness. If we really 
believe that the Lord has indicated that we should pray 
for the things we need, and that He will give us these 
things, then we should be on the alert to recognize when 
we receive them. We should take heed as to the things 
for which we ask, and be sure that we ask for the things 
promised, the things for which we are entitled to ask. 

We should also watch for the Lord's providential leadings. 
The person who, after having prayed, forgets what 
he prayed for, and who cannot tell whether or not he has 
received an answer to his petition, has certainly missed a 
great blessing which it is designed that he should have. 

Prayer is not to be offered to be heard of man, but of 
God. It is intended to be a stimulation to our hearts and 
to quicken us to an expectancy of certain things; and it 
should be our earnest endeavor to keep our lives in harmony 
with our requests. When Jesus told His disciples 
to pray the Lord of the Harvest that He would send more 
laborers into His Harvest, He did not mean that they 
were to tell the Heavenly Father His business; but that 
they should be solicitous that others come into the work, 
that God would send forth laborers into His Harvest 
field; and that the disciples themselves should watch for 
opportunities of service, in harmony with their prayers. 

The Lord frequently called attention to the fact that 
we should be persevering in prayer. Perseverance is an 
essential quality in the sight of God. It includes patience, 
carefulness and interest. In short, it is related to every 
fruit of the Spirit which the Lord's people are to cultivate. 
Patience is good, but it needs perseverance. Love 
is good, but it needs perseverance. 

Perseverance does not make the will. The will is already 
there. It is the will that God recognizes in the beginning. 
But by various experiences, trials, difficulties, 
tests of endurance, the Lord would prove us and develop 
us. He would have us become very positive characters 
in all these qualities which have His approval. So our 
praying should all be in the spirit, from the heart. We 
should watch thereunto with perseverance day by day, 



until the Lord shall see that we have attained the character 
which He can honor with a share in the Kingdom. 

LESSONS LEARNED BY THE LORD'S DELAY 

Perhaps one reason why our Lord does not answer 
our petitions quickly is that He desires us to learn to 
watch for the answer and thereby get the lesson of appreciation 
and gratitude to Him, as we realize that He 
has given us our request. We should therefore pray with 
all perseverance, watching for the answer until it come 
—not watching merely for a few minutes, or for a day or 
a week. The Lord might see best to further defer the 
answer to our petition, either to test our faith or to increase 
our earnestness and get us into a better condition 
to receive the blessing. It requires time to become emptied 
of self and prepared to receive the mind of Christ; and 
with some, more time is required than with others. 

We are sure that the Lord will pursue that course 
which is best for us, just as a teacher with his pupils, 
and a parent with his children. The parent exercises 
judgment as to what is best for the child. So our Heavenly 
Father wishes to give us the good things. Sometimes 
He sees best that we wait a long time before getting 
the answer to our petitions; at other times He may 
give us a speedy answer to our prayer. Nevertheless, as 
the Apostle Paul declares, we know that all things are 
working together for our good, because we love God and 
have been called according to His purpose. And we must 
ever bear in mind the conditions which our Lord imposes: 
"If ye abide in Me, and My words abide in you, ye may ask 
what ye will, and it shall be done unto you."— John 15:7. 

We must search the Scriptures to know what is the 
mind of the Lord, what He has promised and what He 
has not promised. The fully consecrated will not want 
anything which is not in fullest harmony with the will 
of Him we so love and adore, and who is so worthy of 
our love and loyalty. We must remember, too, that while 
we are praying with persistence and faith, the Lord is 
preparing for us, not only the blessing and opportunity of 
service which we desire, but He is also preparing the circumstances 
and conditions which will bring this blessing 
or opportunity in the best form. This will require our 
waiting on the Lord, which should be in perfect trust and 
patience for His good time to grant the desire of our 
hearts. "The supplication of a righteous man availeth 
much in its working."— James 5:16.— R.V. 

R5480 : page 183 

Family prayer is also very desirable in the homes of 
the Lord's saints, wherever possible; and prayer amongst 
the children of God when they assemble together is eminently 
proper. Our Lord sanctioned this by praying with 
and for His disciples; and it was also commended by the 
Apostles. We are to pray, not for ourselves only, but for 



all of the saints and for the interests of the Lord's Cause. 
The Scriptures commend both public and private prayer 
amongst the children of God. But secret prayer is absolutely 
essential to the life of a Christian. 

PRAYERFUL ATTITUDE ALONE NOT SUFFICIENT 

We have been surprised occasionally to hear some 
professed follower of Christ urging the impropriety of a 
form of prayer in words, and of assuming any particular 
posture in prayer, or of praying at any stated time, asserting 
that kneeling in prayer is unnecessary— that all of 
life should be a prayer. Such a proposition is astounding 
to us— the logic of it is incomprehensible. True, we are 
to pray always, to be always in the spirit of prayer, to 
be so devoted to the Lord that we shall ever manifest in 
our lives the beauty of holiness, that we shall be shining 
lights in the world. But we hold that no Christian can 
maintain this heart attitude, or glorify God in his life, 
without going to the Lord in a particular and formal 
manner, and preferably upon his knees, and if possible in 
solitude at certain times. "Enter into thy closet, and 
when thou hast shut thy door, pray to Thy Father which 
is in secret."— Matthew 6:6. 

Our dear Master's constant attitude of prayer did not 
hinder His more particular devotions when He turned 
aside from the busy affairs of His life to converse with 
the Father in secret— sometimes briefly and sometimes 
spending the entire night in prayer in the mountain solitude. 
The very isolation of the Lord from all human 
help drew Him the nearer and the oftener to the Father 
in prayer and communion. So it is, or should be, with all 
the true followers of the Master. As we grow in His 
character-likeness we will, like Him, pray without ceasing, 
in everything giving thanks, singing and making melody 
in our hearts to the Lord, recognizing Him as the 
center of all our hopes and our joys. 

OUR "SOLITARY WAY" 

We all realize at times the inability of even our dearest 
ones to enter fully into and appreciate our sorrows 
and our needs. They are unable to sympathize 
with us fully in our struggles and our trials. 
This realization should send us, as it did our 
dear Lord, the more frequently to the Throne of Grace, 
where we are always sure of having the ear of 
One who understands us perfectly and can make all needful 
allowance for our frailty; who knows the limit of our 
ability to do and to be, in our imperfect flesh; and who 
can give us the perfect sympathy which none other can 
give. He never fails to hear and to heed the cry of His 
children, even though He may for a wise purpose in love 
defer for a time a visible answer to their pleas. 

JACOB AN EXAMPLE 



The prayer of Jacob at the time he was anticipating 
a meeting with Esau on his return from Padan-Aram 
may be considered one of the most excellent examples of 
earnest, persevering prayer to be found in the Lord's 
Word. It is full of confidence and trust in God. It recounts 
God's Promise to his grandfather Abraham and 
his father Isaac and the renewal of this promise to himself. 
He mentions to the Lord His promise also to bring 
him again to his home land. His humility is shown in 
his words: "I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies 
and of all the truth which Thou hast shown unto Thy 
servant; for with my staff [only] I passed over this Jordan 
[when fleeing from home], and now I have become 
two bands [great companies]."— Genesis 32:10. 

He tells the Lord of his fear of Esau, yet shows that 
his fear is offset by his confidence in the Almighty. It 
was at this time, and doubtless in answer to this prayer, 
that the angel of the Lord appeared to Jacob, and so full 
of faith was he in the Power of God and in His Promise 
to protect him and make of him a great nation, that he 
laid physical hold upon the angel, declaring: "I will not 
let thee go, except thou bless me!" The angel here appeared 
as a man; but Jacob had recognized him as the 
representative of the Lord, sent to meet him. 

We cannot suppose that the angel was not sufficiently 
powerful to release himself from the grasp of Jacob, but 
rather that God was pleased to bless him, and that these 
circumstances were designed for the very purpose of 
drawing out Jacob's longing desire for this blessing of 
the Lord, to demonstrate the depth and intensity of his 
desire. When this was proven, when he had manifested 
his deep appreciation of the blessing which God alone 
could give, and this great longing to be in harmony with 
Him, then the blessing came— Jacob's victory. God was 
pleased to reward such faith and energy and zeal. 

LESSONS TO SPIRITUAL ISRAEL 

Jacob was only a natural man, yet his prayer has in 
it a lesson that may be of much profit to New Creatures 
in Christ; not that we should wrestle with God as did 
Jacob, for we are sons of God, and sons have a much 
closer relationship than servants, and have no need to 
wrestle with God to gain His favor. The late Bishop 
Phillips Brooks expressed the true thought very beautifully 
and succinctly when he said, "Prayer is not conquering 
God's reluctance; it is laying hold upon God's 
willingness." We have His favor now; and He has promised 
us His choicest blessings. But Jacob's earnest zeal 
and faith and humility and his perseverance of mind are 
well worthy of our emulation and imitation. We should 
always pray and not faint, as our Lord reminded us. God 
wishes us to be persistent, and to have unwavering faith 
in His willingness to give us His best gifts. 

If the blessing in answer to our prayer does not come 



in the moment of asking, we are to continue "instant in 
prayer," patiently waiting for the Lord's due time, in an 
attitude of entire, sweet submission to His will, assured 
that if the answer be delayed it is because our Father 
in His wisdom sees a reason for it and has our highest 
welfare at heart. He is never indifferent to His children 
nor unheeding of their needs and of their cry for help 
and for fellowship with Him. But let us see to it that 
God's glory is our chiefest desire. 

Alas, how many spiritual Israelites seem to have a 
much less keen appreciation of propriety in prayer than 
had Jacob! He asked for God's blessing, in whatever 
manner He might be pleased to give it. Jacob did not 
specify even the earthly good things which God had 
promised him. He desired the Lord's glory in the fulfilling 
to him and his posterity of His great Covenant. Many 
of God's children ask and receive not, because they ask 
amiss, that the answer may minister to the desires of 
their flesh. The Lord has promised to care for the temporal 
necessities of His children and will surely give 
them what is best, whether this be little or much. 

How few seem to remember that as New Creatures 
our desires and requests should be especially for the 
things that pertain to our spiritual interests; that it is 
this class of blessings that the Father desires us to have, 

R5481 :page 184 

and has promised to give us! He assures us that as 
earthly parents are pleased to give good gifts to their 
children, so our Father delights to give us His Holy Spirit 
—His very best gift— the gift which comprises all blessing 
and glory, which will insure to us everything which 
is desirable, in the very highest sense. If the Lord's people 
who have consecrated their all to Him, could be 
brought to the point where their one aim in life, the burden 
of all their prayers, would be that they might have a 
larger measure of the Spirit of the Lord, the Spirit of 
holiness, the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of a sound mind, 
what an unspeakable blessing it would mean! 

ISRAEL -MIGHTY WITH GOD 

Jacob got the blessing and with it a change of name. 
Thenceforth he was called Israel, which signifies, Mighty 
with God, or "A Prince with God." This new name 
therefore was always a source of encouragement to him, 
an incentive to fresh zeal and to trust in the Lord. All 
of Jacob's posterity adopted this name. We have in antitype 
Christ Jesus, our Lord, the true Israel, the One who 
through faith and obedience to the Father has prevailed, 
who has overcome the world, the flesh and the Adversary, 
and has received the highest blessing of God as the result 
of His great struggle. He is now supremely exalted, and 
is declared to be the Prince of the kings of the earth. He 
has sat down with the Father in His Throne. 



We also, the followers of Jesus, bear the name of 
Israel. We, like Him, if faithful as was He, shall be exalted 
by the Father. We shall share with our Lord and 
Head His Throne. We shall be made higher than angels, 
principalities and powers, as our Master has been. How 
glorious this thought! How wonderful! Should not this 
great hope inspire us to the utmost diligence and carefulness 
that we may make our calling and election sure? 

If we prove faithful unto death, the name Victor, or 
"Mighty with God," will be our name. It will apply to 
every one of the Lord's faithful ones as it applied to our 
Head. But only those who manifest His Spirit, only 
those who so love God that they will hold on to His 
promise and who will not let Him go without the blessing, 
will receive the fulfilment of the promise and will reign 
with Christ in glory and share His Throne. 

Jacob had a method of marking the special manifestations 
of Divine providence— as when he called the place 
in which he wrestled with the angel Peniel— "the face of 
God." This was a reminder to him that there he had 
been privileged to receive from the Lord a particular 
blessing, a marked answer to prayer. Similarly it is profitable 
to Spiritual Israel that we should make note in some 
special manner of the Lord's mercies and providences to 
us. Many feel poor as respects the favor and blessing of 
the Lord, simply because they have failed to let these 
blessings make a proper impression upon their hearts at 
the time they were received. We are all leaky vessels, 
and unless special notation of these favors of the Lord 
are made upon the tablets of memory, or in some other 
way, their lesson and the encouragement and strength 
which they bring are largely lost to us. 

Doubtless we should all have more "Bethels" and more 
"Peniels" did we but follow the course of setting up some 
kind of monuments of our Father's faithfulness in His 
answers to our prayers, and there entering into some 
covenant or vow with the Lord in return for these His 
mercies. As each watches for fresh evidence daily of the 
love and special watch-care of our God over us, we shall 
find that we have far more cause for encouragement and 
thanksgiving than we would be aware of without such 
notation and watchfulness. Let each of us, then, daily, 
weekly and yearly raise to God our "Ebenezers," if we 
would increase our faith and joy and love. 



R5481 :page 184 

FASHIONING OURSELVES AS OBEDIENT CHILDREN 

"As obedient children, not fashioning yourselves according to 
the former lusts in your ignorance; but as He which hath called 
you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner 
of conversation."— 1 Peter 1:14,15. 



THE APOSTLE is not addressing the world, 
but those who have become children of God 
—those who have passed out from their 
position of condemnation with the world, 
and have been justified by faith in the precious 
blood, who have been accepted of the 
great Advocate Jesus, and have been begotten 
of the Holy Spirit. But it is not sufficient 
that we become children of God; for 

R5482:page 184 

these newly begotten children are only 

started in the Narrow Way, they are in an imperfect, 

undeveloped condition. They have this standing as children 

because they have put themselves into the hands of 

God and desire to do His will, loving righteousness and 

hating iniquity. 

On the basis of this stand that we took— of enlisting 
under the banner of Jesus, to fight against sin and self and 
Satan— God purposes to prove how thoroughly in earnest 
we were when we espoused His cause. He wishes us to 
attain to that development of character which will fit us 
to be associates with Jesus in His great Kingdom, which 
is to bless the world. 

If we are obedient children, everything will work well. 
We shall get the proper tests, the proper chiseling and 
polishing, everything that will make us "meet for the 
inheritance of the saints in light." But if we do not 
prove obedient, this will hinder us from ever getting into 
the Elect company, although we may have a place in that 
company of children who have had to be chastised and 
finally brought to proper obedience. 

By this we are not implying that any of God's children 
are exempt from discipline; for we are told that 
every son receiveth chastisement. (Heb. 12:6-11.) Those 
chastisements that came to our Lord Jesus were not deserved, 
but were experiences by which He proved His 
thorough loyalty and worthiness of exaltation. And so 
the chastisements that come to His followers are to fit 
them for future service and to demonstrate their worthiness 
of being counted in as members of His Body. 

The chastisements which are in the nature of punishments 
for sin should bring about a thoroughly loyal condition 
of heart in reasonable time, or the one chastised 
will lose his place in the Body. If he prove ultimately 
disobedient, he will be counted unworthy of any of God's 
favors, and will die the Second Death. The exhortation 
of our text, therefore, is to the highest attainment and 
the utmost loyalty to the Father. 

HOW TO FASHION OUR MINDS 

There is a fashioning of our minds in progress. It is 
not the fashioning of our will. The will is given up to 
begin with. But the will has to do with regulating the 



mind as well as the body— the will has to do with this 
fashioning. We will that our minds shall be educated 
along the lines of obedience, that we may be properly exercised 
by all the trials which God has purposed for us. 

R5482 : page 185 

We as New Creatures should learn to think as God 
would have us think, to develop habits of thought which 
upbuild the New Creature. We should eat and drink according 
to His will, and our clothing should be regulated 
according to His will. We are to seek His guidance in 
our life in all things— because of the weaknesses of the 
flesh, the promptings of the Adversary, and our environment. 
The Lord has made provision, and has given us 
definite instructions in the Scriptures, by which we may 
regulate our lives in harmony with His Word; and we 
should seek more and more to know the will of God and 
to profit by His providences in our lives, and to apply the 
knowledge gained, so that whether we eat, or drink, or 
sleep, or labor, we shall do all to the glory of God. 

Our organism of flesh we receive by heredity. These 
bodies of ours have various weaknesses and inconsistencies 
—some in one direction, and some in another. But 
they are all, more or less, perversions of the true ideal 
which God originally gave. Centuries of sin have left 
their mark upon us, upon our minds and bodies; and this 
mark is seen in the theories which have come into our 
minds. These errors in the past had control of us. 

Before we saw the Lord's way, we thought it was 
right to follow after earthly pleasures and pursuits and 
to put self first. We naturally said, This is the proper 
course for us to take. We see that the prominent and 
the great are following this course, seeking first the affairs 
of this present life— praise of men, how finely they 
can be clothed and housed, how fine a carriage or automobile 
they can have. They seek— and are in large measure 
able to secure— the gratification of the taste for 
earthly things, whether it be for the satisfaction of the 
mind, as various kinds of literature, or for the body, as 
for certain kinds of foods or drinks, etc. 

But when we become children of God, we ask, What 
is God's will in respect to what we shall eat or drink or 
wear, as to the use of tobacco, as to the cut of our clothes, 
etc.? It is not for us to decide now whether we shall 
go to the theater or play cards or dance. All these matters 
should have been decided before we consecrated ourselves. 
Now, in harmony with the Covenant we have entered 
into with Christ, we are to know strictly the 
Father's will. As we learn to see things from God's 
standpoint, we change our ideas as to what we shall eat, 
and what we shall drink, etc. And this change going on 
in our minds is the "fashioning." 

THE FASHIONING A GRADUAL PROCESS 



Although we discover some things very quickly, we do 
not learn all things at once. Some things are less conspicuous 
before our minds than are others, and represent 
the finer shadings of what would be proper for a New 
Creature. We gradually come to note these things more 
and more; and we ask, Which things shall we continue 
to choose? The knowledge of God's will is a matter of 
education. We come to see that this is right and that is 
wrong. (The world sets such a style for evening dress, 
such a style for morning dress.) When we become 
Christians we have new standards, and it takes some time 
to get everything harmoniously adjusted therewith. 

In line with this thought, the Apostle says, "Be ye 
transformed, by the renewing of your minds"— not by the 
renewing of the new will. We already possess the new 
will. But we see that the body is regulated by the mind. 
Therefore the new will says, I must begin with the mind 
I must get my mind to see things correctly, according to 
God's will. I will use the Bible and all the providential 
indications that will give me a knowledge of God's mind, 
and I will begin to conform my mind thereto. Thus our 
minds become gradually fashioned— transformed into the 
mind of the Lord. As we come to see more and more 
what is the will of God, our minds decide to do His will. 
Our reason plays an important part. 

God wishes to appeal to our reason, because we are 
thus better developed than in any other way. We are all 
in the School of Christ— under the tutelage of our Lord. 
In this School we are learning to do His will. We have 
the teachings of our Lord Jesus and the writings of the 
Apostles; and our Lord declared that whatsoever the 
Apostles should bind on earth would be considered bound 
in Heaven; and whatsoever they should loose on earth 
would be so considered in Heaven. Our education progresses, 
until, at the end of this life, those who have 
thoroughly learned the lessons of this School will be 
those who have been obedient children. These will have 
been transformed by the renewing of their minds, that 
they might prove what is that good, and acceptable, and 
perfect will of God."— Romans 12:2. 

OUR STANDARD-JEHOVAH'S RIGHTEOUSNESS 

The new will is, in substance, a will to be like our 
Father in Heaven. The Apostle Peter exhorts, "As He 
who hath called you is holy, so be ye holy." Holiness is 
the standard of perfection. Our will must be holy when 
we first make our Covenant with God. Nothing less than 
a holy will is acceptable to Him. If we had had an unholy 
will, a will not submissive to God, we would not have 
been accepted. So if our will be holy, we shall, as far as 
we are able, do His will. 

As He who has called us is holy, so we, as far as our 
will is concerned, will be holy. And we will so direct our 
mind, as to be holy in life so far as is possible. We will 
apply the principles of God's holiness to every affair of 



life. We will observe the Golden Rule, that we should 
do to others as we would that others should do to us. 
Whoever neglects to apply these principles of holiness to 
his own life is not growing in the new life, not being 
transformed. We should seek to have our minds fully in 
accord with God's mind, and our conduct as far as possible 
also in alignment. 

If our mind is not running in the proper groove, we 
must see to it that we turn it into the proper groove. We 
want to render obedience to our highest conception of 
what is the Lord's will, as far as we are able. Our will 
will be determined by God as loyal in proportion as it 
has been on the alert to watch the mind and the body, 
the tongue and everything pertaining to our conduct. 

The Apostle enjoins upon us that we shall be "holy 
in all manner of conversation." (1 Pet. 1:15.) The word 
conversation here has its broad meaning. It relates to 
our intercourse with others— all of our conduct with respect 
to others— our manner of life. We are to be holy 
in everything that pertains to our lives— in our thoughts, 
words and deeds. This is a very high standard; and no 
wonder that the Lord has set a high standard! It is for 
us to learn what this standard is, and to help others to 
know what it is. 

This is why we spend a few years this side of the veil 
after we have given our hearts to Jesus. We say that we 
have taken up our cross to follow Jesus, and the Lord 
wishes to demonstrate whether this is true. He is watching 
our course, and the foreordained number will be 
found for the Bride class. Others will be given another 
position not so good; and those who manifest that they 
have not the true spirit of obedience will die the Second 
Death. 



R5483 : page 186 

GREATNESS THE REWARD OF SERVICE 

-JULY 12.-MARK 10:32-45.- 

"The Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, 
and to give His life a Ransom for many."— Verse 45. 

IT WAS at the close of Jesus' ministry. For 
more than three years the Master had been 
calling His disciples and instructing them. 
They had come to recognize Him as the 
Messiah, the Heir of all God's promises, the 
One through whom the Messianic Kingdom 
would be set up, which would bless all the 
world of mankind— the dead as well as the 
living. 

The Master had particularly assured 
them that if faithful they should sit with Him in His 



Throne. However, He had not told them that His Kingdom 
would be a spiritual one, and that they would need 
the change of the First Resurrection before they could be 
sharers of it. He had not yet made clear to them the 
fact that a whole Age would intervene before they would 
be sharers in the Kingdom, and the Kingdom itself be 
established amongst men. But he had hinted all this. He 
had said, "I have many things to tell you, but ye cannot 
bear them now. Howbeit when the Spirit of Truth is 
come, it will bring My words to your remembrance and 
show you respecting future things." 

Jesus did, however, begin to break to the disciples a 
part of the news necessary for them to know and appreciate, 
lest they should be entirely overwhelmed and discouraged. 
He told them that He was going up to Jerusalem, 
and that the result would be that He would be 
delivered to the Gentiles to be crucified. St. Peter, always 
courageous, this time brought upon himself a severe 
rebuke. He undertook to correct the Master, saying, 
"You are not telling us truth; these things shall not happen 
to You, and Your saying them to us will only discourage 
us. You are, as I have confessed, the great Messiah. 
You are to reign; You are not to be crucified at 
all. Give up that thought, dear Master; and let us continue 
to think about the glorious things of the Kingdom 
into which You will soon be ushered and in which we, as 
your faithful disciples, will soon have a share. 

But Jesus rebuked St. Peter, saying, "Get thee behind 
Me, adversary; for thou savorest not the things that be of 
God, but those that be of men." 

And now in this lesson Jesus, in the same journey, 
again brought up the matter of the shame, ill-treatment 
and death which was to come upon Him. This time He 
included the thought of His resurrection from the dead on 
the third day. However, the matter was incomprehensible 
to the disciples; and they merely said to themselves, This 
is another of those dark sayings of the Master which seem 
so mysterious. Remember how He said to us on one 
occasion, "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, 
and drink His blood, ye have no life in you." That was 
a dark saying, and we could not understand it. But we 
hung on, although we did not then, neither do we now, 
understand the meaning of these words. Here we have 
another similar statement: the Master is representing 
Himself as receiving the treatment due to the vilest of 
criminals— crucifixion. 

They could not comprehend the meaning of the Master's 
words; these thoughts seemed so different from what 
they had been expecting! How could they receive them? 
Not until after Pentecost did they get the full grasp of 
the situation and of what Jesus had told them. There 
the Holy Spirit began to make plain the Divine arrangement 
—that the sufferings of all the Church must come 
first before the glories of the Kingdom would be revealed 
and the blessing to the world begin. 



ON RIGHT HAND AND LEFT 

Another of the Gospels tells us that the mother of 
James and John came with them and voiced their plea 
for them. They believed that the time for distributing 
the honors of the Kingdom was very near at hand. They 
wanted to speak for prominent places. We need not 
assume that these two dear disciples sought the positions 
closest to the Master merely for ambition's sake. Rather, 
let us suppose that they loved the Lord very dearly, and 
therefore thought that they could appreciate a nearness to 
Him more than could some of the others. Indeed, they 
evidently appreciated being near to the Master in His 
hours of suffering and deepest experiences; and they were 
permitted to come nearer than the majority of The 
Twelve. On several special occasions the Lord took with 
Him the same James and John, and Peter. They were 
with Him in the holy mount, and at the awakening of 
Jairus' daughter, and in Gethsemane's Garden. They 
were glorious characters, whom the Lord greatly loved. 

Let us mark carefully the words of Jesus. He did not 
say, My dear disciples, there will be no Throne to sit 
upon, but on the contrary He declared that while there 
would be a Throne, and while there would be places of 
preference in that Throne, they would not be distributed 
by Himself, but by the Father. 

The Father stands as the Representative of absolute 
Justice, while Jesus stands as the Representative of mercy, 
compassion, forgiveness. Places in the Millennial Kingdom 
are not to be given on the score of mercy or 
favoritism, but absolutely on the score of quality. The 
Lord Jesus Himself will have the highest place, because 
He is worthy. "Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to 
receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and 
honor, and glory, and blessing." The Father will give 
these to Him, as He has promised. Indeed, He has given 
our Lord honor and great glory, even though this Kingdom 
glory still waits until the Church, the Body of 
Christ, shall have been completed by the change of the 
First Resurrection. 

WHAT KINGDOM IS MEANT 

For many centuries confusion has prevailed amongst 
Christian people respecting the Kingdom of Messiah, so 
frequently mentioned by Jesus and the Apostles, and the 
basis of this lesson. There was no confusion at first, 
nor for nearly two hundred years after Jesus' day. 
The early Church understood very well the promise that 
Messiah would come a second time, would receive the 
Church to glory with Himself and establish the Kingdom 
of Divine Power for the rule of the world and the subjugation 
of all things to the will of God; and that this 
Messianic Kingdom would require a thousand years to 
fulfil its mission. But by and by a theory sprang up to 
the effect that the Church was to be organized as 



Messiah's Kingdom and was to conquer the world before 
Jesus' Second Advent. 

This unscriptural view changed the whole course of 
church history. Instead of longer preaching the Gospel 
merely with a view to calling out and perfecting the 
saintly few who would have a hearing ear and an appreciative 
heart, to make these ready for Kingdom honor 
and glory, the course changed. Thereafter the endeavor 
was to grasp civil power. Intrigues were begun, false 
claims were asserted, and the endeavor was made to obtain 
control of kings and nations along the lines of superstition. 
Additionally, persecutions were used; and as 
much as possible civil rulers were cajoled, threatened, induced, 

R5483 : page 187 

to become the tools of ecclesiasticism, for the purpose 
of establishing a world-wide dominion of the church. 

For a time— through inquisitions, etc., etc.— these 
things flourished; but ever since 1799 all thought of 
ecclesiastical dominion of the earth has given way. In 
their confusion many have lost all faith in the Messianic 
Kingdom, and few are looking for it at Christ's Second 
Coming. Many in perplexity discuss a spiritual kingdom 
in the hearts of believers. Others believe that Christ's 
Kingdom is now represented in the great governments of 
the world, and yet are abashed and confused when asked 
whether certain portions of Messiah's Kingdom are 
building dreadnaughts to destroy other portions of the 
same Kingdom. 

By the majority of Christian people, the teaching of 
the Bible seems to be regarded as not consistent nor 
logical; otherwise, they would see that St. James, St. John 
and the other Apostles could not sit upon twelve thrones 
without there being a ruling Kingdom. They would also 
see that the Kingdom must be future, in harmony with 
the Lord's prayer, "Thy Kingdom come; Thy will be done 
on earth, as in Heaven." What we need is to cease handling 
the Word of God deceitfully. We must learn to 
read our Bible reverently and to understand it by comparing 
Scripture with Scripture. Bible students who do so 
are receiving great blessings, and are perceiving that 
Messiah's Kingdom is not only future, but apparently 
nigh— even at the door. 

"ARE YE ABLE?"-"MY CUP, MY BAPTISM?" 

To the two dear disciples who requested places of 
special nearness to the Master in the Kingdom, Jesus 
made known the fact that any position whatever in the 
Kingdom would require the fulfilment of certain conditions. 
It was not enough that they had been called to 
discipleship. It was not enough that they had surrendered 
all to follow the Lord; that they had been with Him, had 
heard His teachings and had assented to them so far as 
they could understand them. There must be something 



more; else they might not get into the Kingdom at all. 

These conditions the Master declared, saying, "Are ye 
able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be 
baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?" What 
did He mean? Did He mean, Would they be able or 
willing to eat the Passover supper, and there partake of 
the unleavened bread and drink of the memorial cup 
which He would institute? They had already been baptizing 
many. Did Jesus mean that they should be baptized 
again in water? What was the purport of the words, 
My cup, My baptism? 

We reply that Jesus' "cup" was the one to which He 

R5484 : page 187 

elsewhere referred, saying, "The cup which My Father 
hath poured for Me, shall I not drink it?" In the Divine 
Plan God had already marked out that whoever will be of 
the great Messiah, and entrusted with the Messianic Kingdom 
glory, honor and power for the blessing of the world, 
must demonstrate worthiness of that honor and glory. 
In the case of Jesus Himself the cup meant all those 
experiences of ignominy and shame, including crucifixion, 
which He experienced during the three and one-half years 
of His earthly ministry and which he fully accomplished 
at Calvary when he cried, "It is finished." 

Of that cup the Master said to His disciples, "Drink 
ye all of it." In other words, whoever will be successful 
as a disciple of Christ in attaining to joint-heirship with 
the Master in His Kingdom glory, honor and power, must 
first of all demonstrate a loyalty and faithfulness in respect 
to suffering with the Master, must prove his love, 
loyalty and faithfulness unto death— walking in the footsteps 
of Jesus. 

The Master made no reference to water baptism, but 
to His baptism into death, of which He spoke a few 
days later, saying, "I have a baptism to be baptized with; 
and how am I straitened till it be accomplished!" The 
Master's baptism in the beginning of His ministry was 
merely a symbol, or picture, of the real baptism. His 
going down into the water, His burial in it and rising up 
from it symbolically represented His going down into 
death and His resurrection therefrom. His real baptism 
into death progressed for three and a half years, from 
Jordan to Calvary; and when He cried on the cross, "It is 
finished," He meant that His baptism into death was completed. 
He was raised up out of that death-baptism on 
the third day by the Father's Power, to the Father's right 
hand, which position He will always occupy. 

This was the Master's baptism. It meant the full 
renunciation of all earthly rights. And now He asked 
those dear disciples whether or not they were ready, able 
or willing to follow Him to this extent— to be sharers of 
His cup of ignominy and His baptism into death. Only 
by faithfully following Him thus might they hope for any 
share in His Kingdom. The same principle must apply to 



all the followers of Jesus. It is for each of us to decide 
whether we will drink of His cup or not; whether we will 
share in His baptism into death or not. Only the lowly, 
self-sacrificing, will be able or willing to endure such an 
experience. 

Let us now apply these thoughts to the incorrect views 
of the Kingdom so frequently held. How could these 
sentiments be applied to any Kingdom of God in the heart, 
or how could they apply to the various kingdoms of earth? 
Is it necessary for the kings of the earth to partake of 
Christ's ignominy and sacrifice unto death, by consecration, 
before they can reign? Or, applying the matter to 
the church systems at the present time, as some do, is it 
through great difficulty that any attain membership in the 
earthly institutions called the Church of Christ? Does 
it require self-denial to get into these? Are all who are 
in them buried with Christ in baptism— into His death? 
Do they all partake of the cup of His sufferings? Surely 
not! Only a right view of the Kingdom dovetails into 
these various statements. We must see that the Kingdom 
is the Pearl of great price, to obtain which all else must 
be sacrificed.— Matthew 13:46. 

"WE ARE ABLE"-"YE SHALL INDEED" 

In the other account of this incident the disciples answered 
that they were able, that is, willing, to undertake 
to share the Master's cup and His baptism. Of course 
they did not know clearly what all this meant; but they 
were able, or willing, ready, to do anything that the Master 
would command. So it must be with all who, like 
those faithful Apostles, shall come off conquerors and 
share with the Redeemer in the glory, honor and immortality 
promised to His Kingdom class, the Bride class. 

In that account, Jesus is represented as replying, "Ye 
shall indeed drink of My cup, and be baptized with 
My baptism." That is to say, willingness on the part of 
all is as much as the Lord could reasonably require of 
His disciples. We have not the power that He possessed: 
we are sinners by nature. He was "holy, harmless, undefiled 
and separate from sinners." We can merely, 
therefore, will to do right; and the Lord must needs take 
us under His care and into His School of affliction and 
experience, giving us the lessons necessary to prove our 
loyalty and faithfulness even unto death. How gracious, 
how Godlike, that because of our weakness as members 

R5484 : page 188 

of the fallen race we could not do all ourselves, 
God has provided for us in the Savior whom He has 
appointed! Our imperfections are accounted as imputed 
to the Redeemer, while His perfections are accounted as 
imputed to us. Thus through Him only may we hope to 
gain the Kingdom and glory and honor and immortality. 



CHIEF SERVANT-MOST HONORED 

The other Apostles were indignant that St. James and 
St. John should have made such a request. However, 
the incident afforded Jesus opportunity for laying down 
the rules which must govern in respect to greatness in the 
Messianic Kingdom. Whichever one will serve the others 
most will thereby be demonstrating to God a greater fitness 
for a higher place. This is different, as Jesus says, 
from the ordinary course of affairs, where a lordship is 
exercised according to some arbitrary rule. 

The rule of the Kingdom will be that the one who 
serves most will have the highest honor. Thus Jesus 
Himself is pre-eminently servant of all. His position is 
the highest in the Kingdom by Divine appointment, and 
others will range next to Him in proportion as they have 
His spirit of love, service, obedience and loyalty. 



R5484 : page 188 

WHAT BLIND BARTIMAEUS SAW 

-JULY 19.-MARK 10:46-52.- 

"Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of 
the deaf shall be unstopped. Then shall the lame man leap as 
an hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing."— Isaiah 35:5,6. 

IT WAS the Passover season, and many were 
journeying in the same direction with Jesus 
—toward Jerusalem. Bartimaeus, a blind 
beggar, sat by the wayside, hoping to receive 
charity from the passersby. An unusual 
commotion was created as Jesus 
passed, and Bartimaeus inquired the cause. 
The answer was that Jesus the Nazarene 
had just passed by. 

Bartimaeus had heard that Jesus was the 
reputed Messiah who, according to the Scriptures, 
would eventually bless the whole world and do 
away with sin, sorrow and pain. He had heard 
that already Jesus was performing cures, healing 
the sick, casting out demons and opening the eyes of the 
blind. Oh, he thought, Why did not some one tell me 
while He was passing! He has healed others, might I 
not be one of the favored ones? 

His faith and hope flamed up; and he shouted, "Jesus, 
thou Son of David, have mercy on me!" Be quiet! Make 
less noise! Do not interrupt the Great Teacher; He is 
talking with others, said the passersby. But Bartimaeus 
felt that it was now or never with him; he lifted his voice 
above that of the multitude, and shouted more loudly than 
ever, "Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on me!" 

Jesus heard the voice, and ever ready to be gracious 



to those who call for mercy, He bade the blind man come 
to Him. It would show his faith: it would thus be a 
more important lesson to the multitude. Helped by others, 
Bartimaeus finally found himself in the presence of Jesus; 
and the Master said, "What wilt thou that I should do unto 
thee?" Promptly the answer came, "O Lord, that I might 
receive my sight!" Jesus said unto him, "Go thy way; 
thy faith hath made thee whole." And immediately he 
received his sight, and became one of the followers in 
the concourse, praising the Divine power and acknowledging 
Jesus as the Messiah. 

"JESUS, THOU SON OF DAVID" 

The blind man's words, "Jesus, thou Son of David," 
had special significance to him and to the Jews of his day, 
which is lost so far as the multitudes of today are concerned. 
The Jews knew that Messiah as the great High 
Priest was in a measure prefigured by Aaron; and as the 
great Lawgiver, was prefigured, or typified, by Moses; 
and as the great King was prefigured, or typified, by 
Solomon, David's wise, rich, influential son, his successor 
in the kingdom. The uniting of all these lines of prophecy 
is found pictorially represented in Melchizedek, who was a 
priest upon his throne; that is to say, he was a priest of 
God at the same time that he was a prince or ruler— he 
had a double office. 

St. Paul calls our attention to this fact that Jesus is 
not ultimately to be a priest after the Order of Aaron— 
merely a sacrificing priest, without any reigning power; 
but that He is to be a Priest after the Order of 
Melchizedek. St. Paul cites the Divine declaration to 
this effect in the Psalms of David: "I have sworn and 
will not repent, Thou art a Priest forever, after the Order 
of Melchizedek." (Psalm 110:4.) St. Paul bases highly 
important arguments upon this prophetic statement. He 
shows the Divine foreintention in respect to Jesus and the 

R5485 : page 188 

Messianic Kingdom, and the character of the same. 

The committee arranging the order of these International 
Bible Studies evidently had in mind the fact that 
the miracles of Jesus at His First Advent were the merest 
fore-shadows of the greater miracles and works which He 
will accomplish at His Second Advent. In line with this 
thought, they have given us as the Golden Text for today's 
lesson Isaiah's prophecy respecting Messiah's Kingdom. 
This agrees with the general trend of the Apostolic 
teaching to the effect that all the miracles which Jesus 
performed were foreshadows, or illustrations, of the 
greater work which is to be accomplished by the establishment 
of His Millennial Kingdom, in due time. We 
read, "These things did Jesus and manifested forth His 
glory"; that is, showed in advance His Kingdom glory 
and power. 



We are not for a moment to think that Jesus and 
His disciples attempted to heal all the sick of Palestine. 
On the contrary, while many were healed, they were the 
exceptions amongst the multitudes that were sick— such 
as manifested special faith. In the present instance, 
Bartimaeus was only one of many blind beggars by the 
wayside, we may be sure; for Palestine, Syria and Egypt 
are the lands of blind beggars. The Lord had already 
passed Bartimaeus by, not heeding him, not offering to 
heal him. He had his eyesight restored because of his 
faith, because he cried out, because he would not listen to 
those who sought to still his voice and turn aside his faith. 

THE WORST OF BLINDNESS 

A similar case, we remember, was at the Pool of 
Bethesda. Multitudes were lying there, waiting for the 
movement of the waters, in order to step into the pool 
for healing. Jesus addressed Himself to only one of 
these, saying, "Take up thy bed and walk." It is when we 
come to understand that the miracles of Jesus pictured 
forth coming blessings during His Messianic Kingdom 
that we get the proper view of matters, and may rejoice 
accordingly that a good, glad Day is coming for all the 
blind, all the lame, all the deaf, as indicated by Isaiah's 
prophecy.— Isaiah 35:5,6. 

"Eyes have they, but they see not; ears, but they hear 

R5485 : page 189 

not." The whole world is referred to in the Bible as 
being blind and deaf to the things that are most interesting, 
most profitable. Only an occasional one here and 
there, like Bartimaeus of old, grasps the possibility of 
relief from his blindness and deafness, and takes the 
proper steps to secure relief. St. Paul tells us of this 
blind condition, saying, "The god of this world [Satan] 
hath blinded the minds of them that believe not."— 
2 Corinthians 4:4. 

Six thousand years ago, Satan started this work of 
blinding human understanding to the goodness of God 
and to those things which would make for their highest 
welfare. He still continues it. He began by contradicting 
the Almighty when he told Mother Eve that the penalty 
for sin, "Dying, thou shalt die," was a deception on God's 
part. Satan declared, "Ye shall not surely die"; and he 
persuaded her that this threat was merely an attempt on 
God's part to keep her from great blessings of knowledge, 
and that the true welfare of herself and her husband 
would be promoted by disobedience. 

The question naturally arises, What motive did Satan 
have in misrepresenting matters to our first parents? Why 
should he be interested in their disobedience and alienation 
from God? The answer is that thus only could he 
make them effectually his own slaves of sin. So long as 
they recognized God as their wise, loving Parent and had 



confidence in Him, they would remain loyal to Him, and 
correspondingly would not be the servants of sin. 

Satan has continued this work of misrepresenting 
God's Divine character and Plan for now six thousand 
years. St. Paul says that he puts light for darkness, and 
darkness for light, and that "we are not ignorant of his 
devices." After telling us that the god of this world has 
blinded the minds of all unbelievers, St. Paul adds the explanation 
that this is done lest the light of the knowledge 
of the glory of God should shine into their hearts— lest 
they should see the real goodness of God. He explains 
that this light of God's goodness is reflected, to those who 
see it, from the face of Jesus Christ our Lord. 

In this beautiful, poetic form the Apostle presents a 
wonderful truth which Bible students are more and more 
coming to appreciate. God is Love; and all the stories 
that we have heard to the contrary are intended to blind 
our minds and prejudice us against our best Friend. 
Hence it is that Satan has persistently propagated, not 
only amongst the heathen, but also amongst Christians, 
various doctrines which are the reverse of the Truth. St. 
Paul styles these "doctrines of demons."— 1 Timothy 4:1. 

During the Dark Ages the Adversary worked these 
into our Christian creeds, had them painted upon the 
walls of Christian churches, and had them acted out in 
theatricals of a darker day. These all picture God as the 
worst imaginable devil. They all represent Him as knowing 
what He was doing when He created our race and 
purposed from the beginning that nearly every member 
of the race should suffer an eternity of torture. No wonder 
that during the Dark Ages the world was not drawn 
to God by these horrible misrepresentations! No wonder 
that even when the Bible came back to the reverence of 
the people, these doctrines of devils adhered to it, and 
have since hindered the world from loving it! 

Now we are learning that we were all more or less 
blinded by the Adversary; and as we get free from his 
blinding influence, our hearts rejoice in the favor of Him 
who has brought us out of darkness into marvelous light. 

ONLY THE FEW YET SEE 

Writing to the Church of Ephesus, the Apostle intimates 
that while they had seen something, there was still 
much more for them to see. We quote: "Making mention 
of you in my prayers, that... the eyes of your understanding 
being enlightened, ye may know what is the 
hope of His calling, and what the riches of the glory of 
His inheritance in the saints." And again: "I bow my 
knees unto the Father... that ye may be able to comprehend 
with all saints what is the breadth, and length, 
and depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ, 
which passeth knowledge." We still need to offer this 
prayer on behalf of ourselves and of all the Church. 

As for the world, it still lies in darkness, in the 
Wicked One, as the Apostle declares, under the bondage 



of the superstitions which Satan has prospered. Only the 
few now get their eyes open, as did Bartimaeus. They are 
people of special character, who see special opportunities 
and who so greatly long for the light of the knowledge 
of God that they are willing to ignore the general sentiment 
of those who bid them be quiet and continue in ignorance 
—blindness. It is those who hunger and thirst 
after righteousness that have the promise of being filled, 
and those who are longing for sight that may hope to 
have it, in the present time. 

But, thank God, a glorious change is promised! Satan, 
the Prince of Darkness, is to give place to the glorious 
Prince of Light, the same One who healed Bartimaeus 
in a typical way more than eighteen centuries ago. He is 
to take the Kingdom. Divine Power is back of the Program 
by which Satan is to be bound for a thousand years 
and all his works of darkness to be undone. Instead of 
misrepresentation of God's true character and loving 
plans, the reverse will be given to mankind. The light of 
the knowledge of the glory of God will fill the whole earth 
as the waters cover the great deep— until no one shall 
need to say to his neighbor, Know thou the Lord; for all 
shall know Him, from the least to the greatest.— Isaiah 1 1:9; 
Jeremiah 31:34. 

"ALL THE BLIND EYES SHALL BE OPENED" 

Whoever in reading this prophecy thinks merely of 
the natural sight, and of the fact that all natural blindness 
will be done away in Messiah's Kingdom, sees only a 
small portion of the glorious work to be accomplished. 
The blindness of ignorance and superstition with which 
Satan has afflicted the race is far worse than the physical 
blindness. And the assurance is given us by the Lord 
that all the blind eyes shall be opened and all the deaf 
ears shall be unstopped. The Scriptural declaration, 
"Every eye shall see Him, and they also that pierced 
Him," has undoubtedly special reference to the eyes of 
understanding. Jesus declared to His disciples, "Yet a 
little while, and the world seeth Me no more; but ye shall 
see Me." Yea, the Apostle John says, "We shall be like 
Him; for we shall see Him as He is." 

By the miraculous change of the First Resurrection 
the Church class shall be made spirit beings like unto the 
angels, and will then see the Master face to face, because 
spirit beings like Him. But the world will never see Him 
in this manner. They will see Him with the eyes of their 
understanding opened, just as believers now see the 
Father and see Jesus by the eyes of faith and the eyes 
of understanding; just as we see the things which "eye 
hath not seen, neither have entered into the heart of 
man"— the things which God has in reservation for them 
that love Him, the things which God has revealed unto us 
by His Spirit, the things which we see with our spiritual 
vision. 

Similarly, during the Millennial period, all blinded eyes 



will be opened to the goodness, the greatness, the love, the 
power, of God. Thus the world will come to know God, 

R5486 : page 190 

being helped to that knowledge through the Messianic 
Kingdom; and all who avail themselves of the privileges 
then extended may attain to that glorious degree of knowledge 
mentioned by Jesus when He said: "This is life eternal, 
that they might know Thee, the only true God, and 
Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent." 

HELPERS, NOT HINDERERS 

In the type, the people first of all bade Bartimaeus keep 
quiet; but when Jesus called him, they joined in giving 
words of encouragement and in helping the blind man to 
the Savior. The latter action should represent the course 
of all who are the Lord's people. They should encourage 
the blind, the superstitious— all who are out of the way— 
to come to the Savior, to realize that He is indeed gracious 
and willing to save them from their blindness. 

We might extend these observations to various affairs 
of life, and say that many are blind as respects the beauties 
of the Bible, and that all who have gotten their eyes 
of understanding opened to see the beauties of its real 
teachings should be on the alert to assist others to the 
same blessing. We might extend the lesson to the use 
of the natural sight. Some are so deeply engrossed in 
business or in pleasure-seeking that they never lift their 
eyes to the glorious beauties of nature. The shining stars 
are telling of a Divine Wisdom and of an omnipotent Creator, 
yet the blinded ones fail to get a blessing from the 
message, because they fail to see. "Eyes have they, but 
they see not." 

All nature is speaking of a great, eternal God, and 
telling us that humanity is His chief earthly handiwork, 
and that our highest aim should be to seek to know Him 
and to serve Him. But how many are born blind and 
deaf to the lessons of the stars, of which the Prophet declares, 
"Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto 
night showeth knowledge. There is no speech nor language 
where their voice is not heard" ! There are some 
so blind mentally that they see not that the unhappiness 
which they feel is largely the result of their own selfishness. 
They see not that their homes might be more beautiful, 
might be places of comfort and happiness, instead 
of places of selfish grasping, upbraidings, discontent. 

All who realize these conditions to be prevailing in 
themselves or others should be crying out, "O Lord, that 
I might receive my sight!" and should be rejoicing also 
to the extent that they are learning that the time is coming, 
yea, is near at hand, when Messiah's Kingdom will 
grant the blessing of the opening of the eyes of understanding 
to all of Adam's race. 



R5486 : page 190 

MIND AND WILL 

IN THE WATCH TOWER for April 15th there 

occurs a statement which seems to call for 

an explanation. On Page 1 17, lines 1 1 and 

12, we read: "The will of the body was 

reckoned entirely dead before the individual 

could be counted a New Creature." 

While it is true that the words mind and 

will are often used interchangeably, nevertheless, 

it has been our custom to differentiate 

between these; but in the above sentence 

this was neglected. 

The will of the flesh dies actually; and we receive a 
new will, a holy will, the will of God, instead of our own 
will. If that will should ever cease to be holy, and turn 
again to be a fleshly will, that would be what the Apostle 
terms, "drawing back unto perdition." St. Peter says that 
such a change of will would correspond to a sow returning 
to her wallowing in the mire, after she had been 
washed. Those who turn wilfully and deliberately back 
to the will of the flesh are described as "twice dead and 
plucked up by the roots." In other words: This would 
mean that, the fleshly will having revived, the spirit-begotten 
new will had died. 

But with the mind it is different. The mind is a part 
of the body. The body has its fleshly appetites, preferences, 
propensities, and is continually clamoring for the 
earthly rights against the decision of the new will. The 
fleshly mind, therefore, is not dead; else it could not 
clamor and war against the spirit of the new will, the 
New Creature in Christ Jesus.— Galatians 5:17. 

Such clear-cut distinctions are to be found only in 
the Bible, and probably will not be appreciated by any but 
close Bible students. What we would better, therefore, 
have said is, "The mind of the flesh is reckoned dead, 
before the individual can be counted a new Creature." 

This is in line with the Apostle's statement, "Reckon 
ye yourselves dead indeed to sin, but alive unto God." 
Again we read, "Mortify [deaden] your members which 
are on the earth"— your fleshly mind. This mortifying, 
or deadening, of the fleshly mind means a continuous 
struggle on the part of the new will against the old creature 
reckoned dead, but not actually dead. 



R5486 : page 190 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
A MATURING OBLIGATION 



DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

Accept love and greetings from one who has been greatly 
blessed by your faithful service. For several years I have 
recognized THE WATCH TOWER publications as the means of 
grace provided for the "Feet-members" of The Christ— the 
Anointed. 

The information herein desired I feel sure has already been 
given, had I a mind sufficient to have grasped and retained it. 
But I hope you will bear with my feebleness and, if you think 
proper, serve me a morsel of advice. 

I have a wife and three children for whom I am able to 
earn but a bare living. As a Colporteur I have been able to 
provide as well for my family as by other employment. For 
some months I have suffered from a peculiar physical weakness, 
causing a nervous strain which, in turn, affected my 
mind. My salvation has been in concentrating my attention 
upon the study of God's great Plan, so that, by His grace, 
what seemed about to wreck me was turned into a great blessing. 
I have found, in secret prayer and study, peace of mind 
which enabled me to bear my disordered condition, although I 
grew physically weaker. 

Having taken up the Colporteur work I find joy and peace 
in keeping actively engaged in the service, but I can barely 
make expenses. I am owing a note at bank which will be due 
October 1st. I have a life-policy for $1,000, and I have an 
undimmed faith in the correctness of our chronology. In 
spite of the deadly attacks of Satan I have hope that I shall, 
through much tribulation, enter the Kingdom. 

My question is, Shall I be accounted faithful if I go on in 
the Colporteur work and leave it to the Lord's providence to 
provide the $100 to pay the note on October 1st? I have 
given instructions that in case of my death the note be paid 
from the policy, as it now appears that the insurance companies 
may hold up longer than the Church Militant. 

I wish to express my deep appreciation of the "meat in due 
season" provided by our Lord through you, as a "chosen vessel," 
and that to me, also, the article, "The Peace of God," in 
the August 1st TOWER was a master-piece and one of the 
weapons of resisting Satan's attacks upon me. I have 
learned that there is life in activity, mentally, physically and 
spiritually. 

Pardon my obtruding upon your valuable time. Please do 
as you see fit in this matter, but I shall be glad to be remembered 
in your prayers— that I may be given strength to serve 

R5486 :page 191 

acceptably. It is a delight to remember you and all the dear 
ones at Brooklyn Bethel and everywhere. 
Your brother in love, service and hope, . 



[We advise that you pay the interest in full, immediately, 
apologizing for delay, stating your excuse and promising 



to be punctual as possible in the future. Thus the matter 
may stand for some time, until you can conveniently pay 
the debt according to the evident original intent of the lender. 
But if, any time, payment be demanded, you should cash 
your insurance to pay, or borrow on it.— EDITOR.] 



GRATEFUL FOR THE TRUTH 

MY DEAR PASTOR:- 

It is nearly twelve months since I wrote, thanking you 
for the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. In that letter I said 
that if nothing happened apparently to fulfil our expectations, 
that 1914 marks the end of Gentile favor and the setting up 
of Christ's Kingdom, I should be as prepared as ever to 
accept with gratitude and joy your explanations of the 
Scriptures. 

Oh, what blessings I have received from THE STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES, THE WATCH TOWER, the tracts, TABERNACLE 
SHADOWS, etc.; I have feasted royally on "Present Truth." I 
grow hungrier after each meal! I feel I must thank you, and 
tell you also what a blessing the Vow has been to me. 

I came into the Truth in a remarkable way. Having been 
a professing Christian for thirty years, and taking part in all 
kinds of religious work, yet I was most unhappy, with a 
hungering for something I never received. One day I said, 
I will read nothing but the Bible; I will know, if possible, 
what is God's will and do it with His help. 

After this for weeks I was seeking books to throw light 
on the Bible. A man brought some Swedenborgian literature 
to the village, and loaned me one of their books. One night 
I took this up, as I thought, and found I had THE DIVINE 

R5487 :page 191 

PLAN OF THE AGES. The verse on the front page caught my 
attention at once: "To make all see what is the fellowship of 
the mystery," etc. 

I felt, This is something I want. I started to read and 
never rested till I had read it through; looking up all the 
references, with growing joy and wonder over every chapter. 
Oh, how precious it was at once! I said to my neighbor, I 
would not give away the knowledge this book has given me 
for a thousand pounds. In six weeks I had all the STUDIES, 
and soon I had all of your literature that I could get. 

THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES had been in the house for 
four years and I had not seen it. That day it was lying where 
I had put the Swedenborg book; I do not know how it got 
there. It seems it had been sent to my father four years 
previous. But the most remarkable thing I have not yet told 
you: A few days previous to finding your book I had gone 
to my room and on my knees told my Heavenly Father that 
I was unsatisfied. I was not being "persecuted for righteousness 
sake"; most people appeared to love me. I told Him I 
wanted, like Paul, a share in Christ's suffering: I was ready 



to die, if only I might attain. I wanted nothing less than 
the best. In a few days I found THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE 
AGES, as I have told you. Then I was short of time to read, 
and I fell and sprained my ankle very severely, and so had 
plenty of time to read. 

Oh, how thankful I am for my Heavenly Father's mercy 
and loving kindness and condescension in allowing me to have 
a place in His Little Flock! My heart is full of Christ, and 
"longs its glorious matter to declare"; but so few will hear- 
especially because I have come out of the Wesleyan church 
and all the offices I had there. My old friends fight shy of 
me; some have told me they would rather not hear if it 
would convince them they must come out. 

I am only a woman keeping house for my dear old father, 
and now that I have no offices in any church, I feel I am feeding 
and not passing the food on to others. I do not wish to 
be like the servant who buried his talent. I speak to all as I 
have opportunity, and some listen with great interest; but I 
do not know that I have succeeded in bringing any into the 
Truth. Two persons have bought full sets of THE STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES, but are not reading them. 

I have never looked back and feel I never shall. I feel 
consumed day by day to know my God, and do His will. 
Though a Wesleyan I was baptised (immersed) eleven years 
ago into Christ's death, understandingly, though not so fully 
as I understand today. Do you think I need to be baptised 
again? Please excuse me for taking your valuable time. 

Yours very gratefully and lovingly in His service, 
GRACE E. ROWSE.-Eng. 

page 191 

WHAT THE PHOTO-DRAMA DID FOR HIM 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have intended before now to write, especially to tell you 
what the PHOTO-DRAMA has done for me. It is a wonderful 
presentation of the Gospel, of man's degeneracy under the 
blinding influence of "the god of this world" (Satan) and of 
the saving and reclaiming power of Christ. 

I thought I knew my Redeemer, but oh, how much better 
I now know Him who bore for me the shame of death on 
the cross! My heart went out to Him, and I indeed suffered 
with Him. 

The pictures, while portraying man's degeneracy, show, 
throughout, our Father's Wisdom, Justice, Love and Power; 
they have established me more firmly in the promises of His 
Word. 

The people are asking questions of the nominal ministry, 
and being unable to answer the questions, they lower themselves 
to personal abuse and vilification of you. You, doubtless, 
know of the attack of the Y.M.C.A. upon you, brought 
on by questions asked after viewing the pictures. 

I was especially impressed with the fact, in mingling with 
the audience after each exhibition, that the thing that appeared 
to attract them most was the Thousand Years of 



Blessing. 

The pictures have made me more zealous to spread the 
Truth, and have increased my love for the Heavenly Father 
and our dear Elder Brother Jesus. I daily pray God's richest 
blessing upon the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION and all engaged 
in its presentation, and upon you, dear Brother, its 
author. 

I am your servant in Him, F. W. KNOCHE.— Iowa. 



R5487 :page 191 

A WORD TO THE WISE 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

While the closing hymn was being sung at THE TEMPLE 
recently, I noticed that rather more than a few of the 
ladies were apparently more interested in getting together 
their loose articles of attire and assuming their wraps than 
giving their respectful, if not devout, attention to the solemn 
and beautiful words that closed the day of praise and worship. 
The same people were in no particular haste to leave 
the building, as evinced by the greetings and adieux to their 
friends. 

Perhaps you might consider it would help in realizing our 
duties as the Lord's people, to wait quietly and orderly until 
the final words of the service are uttered, followed by a few 
moments of quiet thought and prayer before plunging into the 
cares of our daily life. A few words from you in THE 
WATCH TOWER, and occasionally an admonition, might remind 
the whole Church of the great privileges which we enjoy, and 
for which we should be grateful. 

Yours in the service of the Lord, ROBERT E. BRAY. 



RE PROMPTNESS AT MEETINGS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It seems to me that a word of encouragement to some 
of the dear friends in respect to greater promptness at meeting 
hours would be helpful. Apparently some do not realize 
the necessity for reverence in this respect. If we do not 
preserve order in regard to our meetings we are not observing 
Heaven's first Law. We must lack reverence for our 
Heavenly Father and for our Master, if we are less prompt in 
the Lord's affairs than we are in our own. 

Some of the dear friends come to the meetings as much 
as from thirty to forty-five minutes late. The same dear 
friends are very prompt in observing other appointments. 
How can we expect the Lord to be pleased with us if we 
give Him the inferior things? How can we expect to receive 
the chief promises if we do not put forth as much effort for 
our everlasting welfare as we do for the temporal? 

If we set a certain time for meeting and very seldom get 



there on time, we are not to be depended upon; our word is 
broken. How can we expect the Lord's approval in such a 
condition as that? He was so prompt and precise, doing the 
Father's will to the dot. 

These same dear friends are very noble in other respects; 
and how they can be so indifferent about coming into the 
meetings on time I cannot understand, except it be that they 
have gotten into this bad habit and do not know how to get 
out of it. I am sure I would like to lend them a helping hand 
in this direction. 

Yours in the one hope of all saints, FRED OTTI. 



page 192 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



I. B. S. A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR MONTH OF JULY 
Questions from Manual on Series Second of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY IV., VOL. II. 

Week of July 5 Q. 24 to 30 Week of July 19 Q. 38 to 45 

Week of July 12 Q. 31 to 37 Week of July 26 Q. 46 to 51 

Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each, 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



page 193 
