2003 “Give God Glory” District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses
1 Through his faithful prophet Isaiah, Jehovah commanded: “Pay attention to me, O my people; and you national group of mine, to me give ear.” (Isa. 51:4) In this increasingly critical time of the end, do we not agree that paying attention to Jehovah’s commands is more important than ever? One of the ways we “give ear” to Jehovah is by obeying his command to congregate for worship. How we look forward to the special opportunity that our annual district conventions afford! The Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses has again arranged for many district conventions to be held in the United States branch territory in 2003.
2 As indicated in the July 1, 2002, issue of The Watchtower, international conventions will also be held in selected cities, with delegates attending from around the world. Since a limited number of cities will host the international conventions, only congregations assigned to those conventions will be able to attend. But the international aspect will be felt at all district conventions. Missionaries will be present at conventions in many locations, and there will be an opportunity to hear some of their experiences. What can we do to benefit fully from the arrangements now being made for our summer conventions?
3 Be in Attendance Every Day: To benefit fully from the instruction provided through the faithful and discreet slave class, we want to make sure that we are there for the entire program. (Matt. 24:45) Do you need to ask your employer for time off to attend every day of the convention? Before Nehemiah asked King Artaxerxes for permission to go to Jerusalem to rebuild the walls, he “prayed to the God of the heavens.” (Neh. 2:4) You should likewise pray to Jehovah for courage to ask your employer for time off to attend all three days of the convention. What if your employer is reluctant to let you have the time off? Perhaps explaining that the instruction we receive at our conventions helps us to be honest, diligent, and trustworthy workers may help him respond favorably. Additionally, if we have unbelieving family members, it would be loving to inform them of our convention plans as soon as possible.
4 Use the Recommended Lodging List to Make Your Reservations: The local Rooming Department has spent the past several months obtaining sufficient hotel rooms for the convention. Your congregation has now received a Recommended Lodging List, which will be posted on the information board after this insert is considered at the Service Meeting. Book study overseers may make a copy of the list for their group only if the congregation has its two-day circuit assembly the week that the convention assignment letter is to be read. Even in such cases, however, copies of the Recommended Lodging List should not be made for individual publishers.
5 Using the instructions in the box on page 4, be sure to make your reservations only from the hotels on the current list. Please do not call hotels not on the list and ask if they have a rate for the convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses. In the past, some hotels have said that they had a rate for Jehovah’s Witnesses, even though these hotels were not on the list. The number permitted to occupy a room is indicated on the list under the heading “Adults,” with the maximum usually being four persons, including children. Please adhere to this requirement.
6 To guarantee your reservation, you must send a deposit to the hotel for each room reserved within ten days of making the reservation. Otherwise, the hotel can offer your room to someone else. If you send a deposit by check or money order, be sure to write on it your confirmation number.
7 If no rooms are available after calling all the hotels on the list or if you have a problem with a hotel, inform your congregation secretary. He should contact your convention’s Rooming Department, using the telephone number at the top of the Recommended Lodging List. Rather than calling a hotel that is not on the list, wait for a revised list to be received for your convention.
8 Helping Those With Special Needs: Are there some in your congregation who may need help in attending the convention? The special needs of the elderly, the infirm, or those in full-time service are cared for mainly by their Christian relatives, but elders and others who are aware of the circumstances of such ones can also provide loving assistance.
9 The Congregation Service Committee will review all Special Needs Room Requests submitted by publishers. Using the guidelines outlined on the form, the service committee should determine whether each request is a special need that cannot be cared for locally. Such a provision is only for publishers in good standing, along with their well-behaved children. The Rooming Department will contact the congregation secretary if they have any questions regarding a special needs request.
10 Attending Another Convention: If circumstances require that you attend a convention other than the one to which you are assigned and you need to obtain a hotel room, please see your congregation secretary. He can provide you with the address of the convention headquarters, which is printed on the back of the Special Needs Room Request form. Mail your request to the appropriate address, and include with it a self-addressed, stamped envelope. If there is more than one convention held in the city, be sure your request indicates the dates you wish to attend. The Rooming Department from that city will then send you the most recent Recommended Lodging List for the specified convention.
11 We Are a Theatrical Spectacle: Do people see the contrast between Jehovah’s Witnesses and those of this world? Absolutely! Note some comments from hotel managers in one city: “We’ve always had dealings with conventions, but you have been the most cooperative and kind.” “Last week we had another religious group with us. The difference between you and them is obvious.” “We know we can always count on your help and cooperation.” Do not such comments help us appreciate how the “wisdom from above” has a positive effect on our personality? (Jas. 3:17) Since we are “a theatrical spectacle to the world,” may our conduct at all times reflect the dignity and splendor of our God, Jehovah.​—1 Cor. 4:9.
12 Since “the scene of this world is changing,” we need our district conventions to help us stay spiritually focused. (1 Cor. 7:31) Making arrangements to attend every day will require effort, but it is well worth it. This year’s “Give God Glory” District Convention has been prepared to help us remain steadfast as we await the execution of Jehovah’s judgment upon Satan’s world. May we let nothing prevent us from receiving the instruction Jehovah has prepared for us.​—Isa. 51:4, 5.
[Box on page 3]
Program Times
Friday and Saturday
9:30 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.
      Sunday
9:30 a.m. - 4:05 p.m.
[Box on page 4]
How to Make Your Hotel Reservation
 1. Call hotels during regular business hours, using the telephone numbers on the Recommended Lodging List.
 2. Inform the hotel that you are attending the convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
 3. Provide the dates you will check in and check out of the hotel.
 4. Be sure that you are receiving the room rate(s) shown on the Recommended Lodging List. Do not accept a higher rate.
 5. If no more rooms are available, call another hotel on the list.
 6. Make your reservation, and ask for a confirmation number.
 7. Make your deposit by credit card, check, or money order. Never send cash. If deposit is made by check or money order, write the confirmation number on the front. Mail within ten days.
 8. If you have any problems, speak with your congregation secretary.
Please:
▪ Stay only in hotels on the Recommended Lodging List.
▪ Reserve only the rooms you will actually use.
▪ Keep your first reservation.

