Do You Contribute to an Accurate Report?
1 Many Bible accounts include specific numbers, which help to convey a vivid picture of what took place. For example, Gideon vanquished the camp of Midian with just 300 men. (Judg. 7:7) Jehovah’s angel killed 185,000 Assyrian soldiers. (2 Ki. 19:35) At Pentecost 33 C.E., about 3,000 were baptized, and shortly thereafter the number of believers grew to some 5,000. (Acts 2:41; 4:4) It is evident from these accounts that God’s ancient servants put forth much effort to compile a complete and accurate record.
2 Jehovah’s organization today instructs us to report our field service activity each month. Our faithfully cooperating with this arrangement contributes to the effective oversight of the preaching work. Reports may reveal that an aspect of the ministry needs attention or that more workers are needed in a certain part of the field. In the congregation, field service reports help the elders identify those with potential to expand their ministry as well as those who may need assistance. And reports on the progress of the Kingdom-preaching work provide encouragement for the entire Christian brotherhood. Are you doing your part to contribute to an accurate report?
3 Your Personal Responsibility: At the end of the month, do you find it difficult to remember what you have done in the ministry? If so, why not record your activity each time you share in field service? Some use a calendar or a diary. Others carry a blank field service report slip with them. At the end of the month, promptly submit your report to your book study overseer. Or, if you prefer, you may place your report in the report box at the Kingdom Hall. If you forget to turn in your report, promptly contact your book study overseer rather than wait for him to approach you. Conscientiously reporting your activity shows respect for Jehovah’s arrangement and loving consideration for the brothers assigned to collect and tabulate the reports.​—Luke 16:10.
4 Book Study Overseer’s Role: As an alert and attentive shepherd, the book study overseer takes an interest in the group’s activity throughout the month. (Prov. 27:23) He knows whether each publisher is having a regular, meaningful, and joyful share and is quick to offer assistance if any have not participated for an entire month. A word of encouragement, a practical suggestion, or an invitation to accompany him in field service is often all that is needed.
5 At the end of the month, the book study overseer makes sure that all in the group have followed through on their responsibility to report their activity so that the secretary can submit an accurate congregation report to the branch office by the sixth of the next month. As the end of the month approaches, it may be helpful for him to give the group a reminder and have report slips available at the book study location. If any are forgetful about reporting their activity, he can provide appropriate reminders and encouragement.
6 Submitting our field service reports promptly contributes to a report that accurately reflects what was accomplished in the field. Will you do your part by promptly reporting your activity each month?

