Proclaim the Kingdom Message
1 “I must declare the good news of the kingdom of God, because for this I was sent forth.” (Luke 4:43) With those words, Jesus identified the theme of his ministry​—God’s Kingdom. The message we proclaim today also centers on the Kingdom, as foretold at Matthew 24:14: “This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations; and then the end will come.” What truths about God’s Kingdom do people need to hear?
2 God’s Kingdom now rules from the heavens and will soon replace all human rulership. The Devil has already been ousted from heaven, and the present wicked system of things has entered its last days. (Rev. 12:10, 12) Satan’s wicked old system will be completely destroyed, but God’s Kingdom will not be shaken. It will remain forever.​—Dan. 2:44; Heb. 12:28.
3 The Kingdom will satisfy the wholesome desires of all obedient humans. It will provide relief from suffering caused by war, crime, oppression, and poverty. (Ps. 46:8, 9; 72:12-14) An abundance of food will be available to all. (Ps. 72:16; Isa. 25:6) Illnesses and disabilities will be but a distant memory. (Isa. 33:24; 35:5, 6) As mankind grows to perfection, the earth will be transformed into a paradise, and people will dwell together harmoniously.​—Isa. 11:6-9.
4 We show that we want to be subjects of God’s Kingdom by the way we live now. The Kingdom message should influence our entire life course, including our goals and priorities. For example, while we have an obligation to provide for our household, we cannot allow material concerns to choke Kingdom interests. (Matt. 13:22; 1 Tim. 5:8) Rather, we must heed Jesus’ admonition: “Keep on, then, seeking first the kingdom and his righteousness, and all these other things [life’s material necessities] will be added to you.”​—Matt. 6:33.
5 It is urgent that people hear and act on the Kingdom message while there is yet time. May we help them to do so by “using persuasion concerning the kingdom of God.”​—Acts 19:8.

