Remember Faithful Older Ones
1 Although a widow and despite advancing age, 84-year-old Anna “was never missing from the temple.” Her faithfulness moved Jehovah to grant her a special blessing. (Luke 2:36-38) Today, many brothers and sisters display a spirit like that of Anna despite facing challenging circumstances. When such faithful ones must contend with health problems or limitations due to old age, they may at times feel discouraged. Let us consider some practical ways in which we can encourage them and help them maintain a good spiritual routine.
2 Meetings and the Ministry: When others lovingly offer to provide transportation, many faithful older ones can more easily attend Christian meetings regularly. This builds up these faithful, longtime servants spiritually and benefits the congregation as well. Have you had a share in this fine work?​—Heb. 13:16.
3 Participating regularly in the ministry brings true Christians joy and satisfaction. But doing so can be a challenge for the elderly and the infirm. Is it possible that one of these dear ones could accompany you as a “fellow worker” in some feature of the witnessing work? (Rom. 16:3, 9, 21) Perhaps you could invite him or her to share with you in telephone witnessing or to go with you on a return visit or a Bible study. If the older one is homebound, could a Bible student come to that one’s home for studies?
4 Study and Association: From time to time, some invite an older or infirm one to attend their family study, even holding the study in that one’s home. One mother took her two young children to an older sister’s home for their study in My Book of Bible Stories, and all were encouraged by the association. Such individuals also appreciate being invited for a meal or some other social occasion. If infirm ones are too weak for an extended visit, perhaps you could call or stop by briefly to read to them, pray with them, or share an upbuilding experience.​—Rom. 1:11, 12.
5 Jehovah treasures faithful older ones. (Heb. 6:10, 11) We can imitate him by expressing our appreciation for them and by helping them to maintain a good spiritual routine.

