R695 : page 1 

VOL. VI. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., DECEMBER, 1884. 
NO. 4. 



page 1 

ZION'S 
Watch Tower 
AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 40 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS:— Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 



TAKE NOTICE. 



This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat— yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it— "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55: 1,2. 



page 1 

WALL CHARTS.-We still have some of these on hand, FREE 
for all who will pay the Express charges on them. See description in 
August issue. 



NOTE the removal of our business office to No. 40 FEDERAL 
ST., ALLEGHENY, PA. There, we will be pleased to receive a 
visit from any of you, when in the city. 



R695 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

It is a common proverb, and one very generally acted upon to-day, 
that, "In union there is strength." Both the Church and the world 
accept the maxim as correct; hence we find men binding themselves 
together in various unions, both social and religious. 

From some standpoints the idea certainly is correct. How could 
labor resist the encroachments of capital, or capital protect its 
interests, without their respective unions? How else could Free 
Masonry and similar institutions have gained present power and 
influence? How could kingdoms maintain their authority and 
dominion? How could the churches, both Papal and Protestant, 
have gained or retained their mighty power, influence and 
authority, had they not each fortified themselves by a union of 
hands? 

Looking out upon these great civil, social, and religious 
organizations, all must acknowledge that through their respective 
unions great strength has been secured. And the strength of each 
great party has helped to keep the other at bay. In other words, one 
uplifted arm of flesh has served to protect itself against another arm 
of flesh, as well as to exchange blows in the struggle for existence. 
And so the world to-day which has been banding its forces for 
centuries, and with increased energy during the last century, stands 



organized in companies of millions on opposite sides of almost 
every question of general interest. 

And what does it mean? Where shall it end? When each great band 
having united its forces, feeling sure that in its union there would be 
strength, now turns to look upon the equivalent strength of its 
opponent, the outlook is truly appalling from every standpoint, and 
men begin to fear if after all, these unions have given them 
sufficient strength to withstand the approaching conflict, now so 
manifest to every reasoning mind. 

While we have remarked the expressions and indications of fearful 
apprehension on the part of the great civil organizations, we also 
note the same indications on the part of prominent exponents of the 
great religious systems. While each secretly trembles for its own 
safety, yet outwardly boasts of its security, they note and delight to 
point out the elements of disintegration at work in each other. 

As evidence of this we quote the following from The Catholic of 
Nov. 15th: 

PAN-PRESBYTERIAN AND OTHER PROTESTANT COUNCILS. 

"With Dr. McCosh, of Princeton, we believe, originated the idea 
of a Pan-Presbyterian Council. The Church of England people went 
through the form of holding a Pan- Angelical Convocation some 
few years ago in London. The Methodists at once followed the 
example set them by their Episcopalian friends, and attempted to 
gather together the representatives of Methodism from every land 
where 'the gospel,' as expounded by Wesley and his followers, had 
been preached, into a Pan-Methodist Conference. This Pan- 
Methodist Council was to be a wonderful affair; Methodism was a 
young, growing and intensely active religious organization; it 
reckoned its followers by the tens of thousands; it had made serious 
inroads, both in England and the United States, upon the older and 
established forms of Protestantism; hence, much was expected from 
the Pan-Methodist Conference that assembled in London a few 
years since. But it was the old story of Protestantism re-told. 
Instead of union and harmony prevailing in the councils of the 
Methodist body, there was a singular revelation of the lack of both 
those qualities so essential to the welfare and stability of the 
organization. There was no authoritive declaration on those 
important subjects of doctrine and polity which had split 
Methodism into different and contending sects. In a word, the Pan- 
Methodist Conference, like the Pan-Anglican Convocations, was a 
signal failure. It did not impress anyone, it may be questioned if it 
did Methodists themselves, with the notion that the Wesleyan 
system was an improvement upon those forms of Protestant belief 
which it had supplanted in many quarters. 

"The idea of a Pan-Presbyterian Council was next taken up at the 
instigation of the President of Princeton, the able and learned Dr. 
McCosh. No sooner was the proposition put forward of holding a 



Pan-Presbyterian meeting, than it was hailed with a "remarkable 
unanimity and with almost universal interest and joy" by the 
Calvanistic Churches. What a pleasing spectacle it would be to see 
the divided followers of Calvin and Knox coming together and 
holding mutual intercourse and counsel upon their common 
standards of faith! Outsiders might be somewhat skeptical as to the 
possibility of a Pan-Presbyterian Council, but a supreme effort 
should be made, through the leaders of that body, to convince the 
world of the 'real and effective oneness' of Presbyterians throughout 
the world. 

"Accordingly a call was issued. And the first Pan-Presbyterian 
meeting was held in Edinburgh in July, 1877; a second in 
Philadelphia, September, 1880; and the third, and quite likely the 
last, was opened in the city of Belfast, Ireland, on the 2nd of July 
past. We have been reading lately some very unfavorable criticisms 
of this Belfast Pan-Presbyterian Council made by Presbyterians 
themselves. A paper was read before the United Presbyterian 
Ministerial Association of Philadelphia on the Belfast meeting by 
the Rev. Mr. Dales, from which we make some extracts. 

"The Rev. Dr. Dales writes: 

'"In looking, however, at the late meeting as we may now after the 
pleasurable excitements and varied entertaining, social and other 
interesting things connected with it are over, some matters may be 
noted which may be considered as grounds of apprehension in 
regard to it and the whole system of Councils as this one and its 
predecessors generally have been conducted— and apprehension as 
to whether any real and lasting good may be expected to flow from 
them— and apprehension also as to the desirableness, or possibly 
even the propriety, of their being continued. 

'"The freedom and boldness with which, as at the meeting in 
Philadelphia and possibly in Belfast, speculative views at least were 
advanced to inspiration, the claims or pretensions of science, 
ritualism and other topics, and which could not be antagonized or 
properly controverted at the time or in the place, lest there might be 
developed some unseemly scene of difference, and, what the 
outside world might say, of strife among brethren of the same 
name. Thus more or less of serious error might go uncorrected and 
unrebuked.' 

"Just so. There are most serious grounds of apprehension in the 
Presbyterian case, as well as in the Anglican and Methodist 
instances, of any "real and lasting good" likely to flow from such 
meetings. The elements are too discordant to be harmonized. And 
this critic goes on to say that 'there has been an unsatisfactory, and 
perhaps ominous, indefiniteness and uncertainty in those councils 
from the beginning.'" 

From all this we gather that Presbyterians themselves do not believe 
in the utility or advantages to be derived from the holding of Pan- 
Presbyterian Councils; that the experiment is a dismal failure; and 



this for the simple reason: that "unless the Lord build the house, the 
labor of the builders is in vain. " The Protestant fabric the Heavenly 
Builder certainly did not contemplate when he laid the foundations 
of the Christian Church." 

Thus the "Mother Church" points out to her wayward daughters the 
error of their course in following the principle for which they parted 
company with her, viz. : the right of private judgment in the 
interpretation of the Scriptures. 

And in their confusion they are beginning to heed her counsel, and 
by degrees are looking for the old paths— not the old paths marked 
by the steppings of Jesus and the Apostles, but for the paths of the 
great apostate church of Rome. 

As evidence of this, mark the spirit of intolerance which 
increasingly prevails throughout Protestantism: the authority with 
which they attempt now to silence private judgment, for which right 
they once contended; the emphasis with which they command their 
people to "stop thinking and go to work;" the effort to bind the 
people by fear, and to lead them to render undue reverence to men 
of like passions and frailties, who have assumed the right to lord it 
over God's heritage; and the indulgence they offer to men of the 
world who will advance their financial interests. Like Catholicism, 
they point to their age, their established clergy, trained and 
educated for their service, and their dignified presumption, as 
evidence of their divine authority. 

In keeping with this growing disposition to admire and imitate the 
"Mother Church," was the proposition entertained in the "Protestant 
Episcopal Congress" recently held in Detroit, Mich., to establish 
Auricular Confession. 

We append the following from the Detroit Evening News, showing 
the favor with which the motion was received and entertained: 

"It must have been a little startling to the majority of Protestants 
hereabouts, to discover the almost unanimity with which the clergy 
of the Episcopal Church Congress favored Auricular Confession. 
Indeed, almost the only arguments urged against it were those of 
expediency and practicability. Its philosophical 

R696 : page 1 

basis was heartily approved, and its scriptural authority conceded. 
The Latin clergy themselves could hardly have spoken more 
eloquently of the benefits of the practice than did the reverend 
gentlemen who appeared as its advocates in the Episcopal 
Congress." 

These and similar indications, manifest to every thoughtful mind, 
show the tendency of human schemes. Men were beginning to think 
they had built the tower of Babylon high enough to reach unto 
heaven, but, lo! the confusion of tongues! the discord among the 
builders! they cannot understand each other, and the various 



sections of the vast condemned structure are disintegrating, settling, 
falling. As an evidence that this is beginning to be realized, we 
quote the following from the Chicago Express which is part of an 
article written by Bishop Foster, of the Methodist Church. While 
traveling in Europe, he took occasion to speak of those forms of 
worship there which are supported by law, and the acts that led to 
such a state of things. He says:- 

"That there is but little real, vital, personal religion in these lands, is 
among the most patent facts. ...I know of nothing more sad than the 
religious condition of Europe, and the saddest part of it is, that it is 
chargeable to the Church itself, and therefore the more hopeless. If 
something is not speedily done, the so-called Christian Church will 
drive Christianity from these ancient lands, if not from the whole 
world." 

In speaking of the primary causes which led to this state of things, 
he says:- 

"Did Constantine make the Roman mind Christian by abolishing 
paganism, and proclaiming the religion of the cross in its stead? and 
did creating the constituted Roman nation into a church, make the 
nation a Christian church? or did he not rather paganize 
Christianity?" 

Speaking still further of the present state of things, he says:- 

"By a false theory, the Church has been taken from the people, and 
converted into a priestly and political machine, and has ceased to be 
a Church of Christ, as much as the papal machine at Rome. ...This 
condition of things is the sad inheritance of the union of Church and 
State." 

The editor of the Express in calling attention to the statements of 
the Bishop, says:— 

"The Church in America has also very largely become a political 
machine, and has been used as a means of raising a campaign fund 
to retain and maintain the party in power, and return men to office, 
who have betrayed the people, and 

R696 : page 2 

sold them to the giant corporations of the land.... How long, we 
would ask of Bishop Foster, does he imagine it will be before the 
Church in America, like the Church of Europe, will be forced to 
seek an alliance with the State in order to sustain itself, because of 
the indifference of the people, who perceive its iniquitous practices, 
and scoff at its pretended Christianity? Already a union of the two 
is a thing openly spoken of as desirable. 

"We have before us at this moment a religious journal, the Sabbath 
Sentinel, which in its leading editorial warns the Church against the 
tendency. The rich men within the Church, who have taken shelter 
there against public condemnation of their crimes of extortion, are 
ready at any time for the union-more than ready. They would do 



with their taxes to the Church as they have done with their taxes to 
the State: frame the laws in such a way that the poor shall be forced 
to pay for them. Every one of the causes which produced the union 
of Church and State in Europe, exists either in full bloom or in 
embryo in this country; and here, as there, 'if something is not 
speedily done, the so-called Christian Church will drive 
Christianity from the land.' Again we say, with the Bishop, 'Let the 
Church of God come out from the world; let it be made of followers 
and disciples of Christ; let it represent righteousness and truth; let it 
cut loose from false and entangling alliances; let its priests be 
clothed with salvation, and its citizens be a holy communion; let it 
demonstrate its divine lineage,-let this be the watch-cry of Zion, 
and then it will be a power in the earth, and will silence the taunt of 
its enemies.'" 

What then shall we conclude? Is there to be no union among 
Christians —shall brother forever stand divided against brother? 
Shall truth forever be so vaguely comprehended that God's children 
may not have full confidence in it? Is there no common bond of 
union? 

Yes, assuredly there is a common bond of union— the spirit of truth 
promised -which is able, through the exercise of our free unbiased 
judgment in the study of God's word, to lead us into all truth, in its 
due season. And all thus led are united to each other and to Christ, 
the great invisible head of the church. And in that union there is 
strength, which no opposing forces can withstand, and before which 
all must fall. 

Therefore, you who thus stand united to Christ, though you may 
stand alone among men, be of good cheer, contend nobly for the 
faith once delivered to the saints, though alone you contend against 
a host. Greater is he that is for us than all they that be against us. 
Babylon's massive walls shall crumble into dust, but the mountain 
(kingdom) of the Lord's house shall be established. Isa. 2:2. 

As an example of a strong church system or union, Papacy is head 
and shoulders above all others. Her principle of teaching the 
infallibility of decrees of Popes and Bishops, and the utter 
ignorance of truth and subservience in all others, is the tried and 
most approved method of having union in error. Because of this, 
Papacy will probably survive the shock of the coming storm longer 
than any other section of Babylon. For the same reason limited 
monarchies will probably fall sooner than absolute monarchies in 
the same conflict between truth and error. Yet truth is mighty and 
shall prevail. 

That union only will be lasting, which is based upon the liberties 
and restraints provided in the Word of God, and which recognizes it 
as the only infallible teaching. 



page 2 



EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Wayne Co., Pa., Oct. 23d, 1884 



MY DEAR BROTHER:-A copy of the WATCH TOWER of 
October, 1883, has just fallen into my hands. There are several 
articles in that issue of such a character that, should the tone of the 
paper for 1884 be similar, I want to take it and circulate it as far and 
wide as possible. I am Pastor of the Christian Church of this place. 
Our people are liberal in sentiment and love the Holy Scriptures. 
Hence any paper containing so much candid research and Biblical 
exegesis as the above mentioned number, will find willing readers. 

Please send me a sample copy. 

Fraternally yours, . 

Ayrshire, N.B. 

SIR:— In the goodness of God I have got a look at your pamphlet, 
"Why Evil was Permitted. " I have been deeply interested in the 
subjects therein presented for some time. Please to favor me with a 
copy of ZION'S WATCH TOWER with the supplement already 
mentioned, and any others of a like description. Christians cannot 
but note to what an extent the power of God is being put forth in the 
calling of one here and another there. In striking contrast is the way 
in which the devil, knowing that his time is short, is using every 
effort in his power, and so the conflict is going on, while the so- 
called Church of God is sound asleep. Let us realize our position. 
By faith having received the blessed Christ and realizing the 
guiding and teaching of the Holy Ghost, may we grow in grace and 
in the love of God. 

Yours, most respectfully, . 

Bellaire, 0.,Nov. 23, 1884. 

C. T. RUSSELL, Dear Sir:— In sending a little order to you, allow 
me to make an explanation of causes that led me to this course. 

A few weeks ago, on a pleasant Sabbath afternoon, I went for the 
first time in my life across the Ohio river here, to Wheeling. While 
visiting churches and other places of interest, I passed, it seemed by 
chance, the State House, where Elder J. B. Adamson was preaching 
to a group on the pavement. I staid so long to hear him that I saw 
little more of the city that day. I heard the Bible explained— I heard 
him "vindicate the ways of God to man," as Pollock says. I got the 
little book, "Food," etc. I felt then, and more ever since, that that 
day was a great crisis in my life. 

Mr. Adamson was in this town afterward, and I "heard him gladly." 
He came, at my earnest request, to my room, and talked to me of 
this mystery— now made clear. Besides, the little volume is 
satisfying my mind wonderfully. 



Please read the enclosed card, and then address it so that it will 
reach Mr. Adamson, if you know where he is. 

Truly yours, 

We give below the "card" referred to in the above. 
Bellaire, 0.,Nov. 23, 1884. 

J. B. ADAMSON:-Dear Sir:-I now send a few lines to tell you 
how fully I believe I have found the truth. I have not quite finished 
the little book "Food," and I have not read much of the paper yet, 
but everything is like the breaking of sunlight on a dark day. The 
darkest problems of my mind, that have confronted me for many 
years, are being clearly solved-so many of them. I tell my 
associates quietly but gladly, that I have found that for which I have 
longed. And I tell my near friends— the dear ones at a distance— that 
I have found peace with God. It was such a revelation to me: The 
Bible, the Saviour, the Church, and the world, all appear to me in 
such a different light from that in which I looked at them before. 
Yet truly my life's experiences have been preparing me for the 
immediate acceptance of these things. I feel that I have long known 
what self-denial is— indeed I have tried hard. Now though I feel how 
unworthy my powers of body and mind, are, I consecrate them to 
God. I am so anxious to attain to the highest and feel sorry to think 
of failing in that. How glad I am that my feet were led that day, past 
the Wheeling State House. May God bless you and your companion 
in your work— Mrs. A. 

Yours in faith, . 

The brother need not conclude that he is too late to attain to the 
"High Calling." Thousands of God's children have given 
themselves to the Lord long ago, who are now being led to more 
fully realize the full import of their covenant. They have learned 
and practiced self-denial, self-sacrifice, and are now being 
quickened by the truth to renewed energy in sacrifice and 
devotedness to God. And it is the privilege of all such to so run to 
obtain. How many sincere hearts have in solemn song or words or 
prayer declared to God- 

"My all is on the altar." 

"And the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of remembrance 
was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that 
thought upon his name. And (unless they should forsake or despise 
their covenant John 8:31) they shall be mine saith the Lord of hosts, 
in that day when I make up My jewels." Mai. 3: 16,17. None of us 
understood fully the extent of our sacrifice when first we made it. 
Each added day brings its opportunities for sacrifice, and God's 
word is now making clear to inquiring minds that it must be even 
unto death; and as we daily realize the death struggles of the old 



nature, glorious visions of the new burst upon our spiritual visions 
through the precious word. And thus we are impelled and helped in 
the way of sacrifice-even unto death. 

Let all who see these incentives therefore be earnest in their efforts 
to make them known to other consecrated saints, that they too may 
be likewise inspired to make their calling and election sure. 

Cheshire Co., N.H. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL: -My wife has been receiving THE 
WATCH TOWER for several years past, and I have occasionally 
read an article in them without awakening any particular interest in 
my mind until about two months ago. Then my attention was 
especially called to them, and since that time I have read them 
eagerly and with very great delight. 

I have read, also, "Food for Thinking Christians," "Tabernacle," 
etc., and find as a result quite a revolution wrought in my life and 
religious emotions. 

I was in the Methodist ministry seven years previous to the last four 
years, and should probably be there now but for the different and 
changing views of my wife, as she has been a nominal (though not 
a real) Baptist till within a few years past, and now neither of us 
find a resting place in either of these or any of the other churches. 
We find ourselves in sympathy with the most of your writings, 
though I am unable, as yet, to measure fully up to some views you 
put forth. Nevertheless, the doctrines you hold wherein I cannot go 
with you do not concern particularly your main teachings, as I 
understand them. 

My mind is in lively exercise just now as to what my work in the 
Master's vineyard shall be, and how it shall be done. That this "Plan 
of God" for the restoration of the race should be placed before those 
that are prepared to receive it, as also before the probably much 
larger company that would accept it if properly explained, I am 
fully convinced. But it is not so clear in my mind in what way this 
can be done with the best promise of success. "He that winneth 
souls is wise;" and this same wisdom is required in sowing the seed. 
Scarcely elsewhere than in the churches are there any prepared for 
such meat as this, and even there but few; and how even may they 
be best approached is a question. 

I am inclined to start out to teach or in some way to proclaim this 
doctrine. My wife has been pondering this matter for several years, 
and is fully persuaded that it is the genuine teaching of Scripture. 
So she is ready to go out; but I am not so taught as to be confident 
of a qualification for the task. 

In my ministry I professed and preached sanctification, but a little 
over two months ago I experienced an outpouring of the Spirit far 
surpassing anything I had previously known. 



Then my wife, calling attention to the great consolation she had 
received from your writings, I began to see the harmony existing 
between your teachings and the Bible, and forthwith the wondrous 
wisdom and love of God became astonishingly grand and glorious 
beyond any former conception. "O that men would praise the Lord 
for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of 
men." Your brother in Christ, 

[We pray that the Lord may abundantly bless you and use you as a 
channel of blessing to others. We kindly refer you to some hints on 
preparation in our August issue. -ED.] 

New York, Oct. 27, '84. 

C. T. RUSSELL:— Dear Brother:— You have been giving me 
considerable of your thought and time lately, and I appreciate this. 
Your last letter is very strong but perfectly clear to me, and 
accepted, as I know it is according to the spirit of scripture 
teaching. 

Rejoice! I have entered into a new consecration. I have been 
drawing nearer to this for nearly four years, and had given up time 
that according to human foresight belonged to my business, and on 
which my future prosperity very much depends. I have long 
realized that nothing in the world is of much value to me and have 
truly realized all worldly employment or position or name as 
unworthy to be compared with the joy to be revealed to us through 
our Lord. 

I am deeply impressed. I am a thinking man and from past 
experience (in my advancement toward full consecration) know the 
trials and sorrows that will encompass me, and no one with whom I 
am connected or personally acquainted to give sympathy-My 
family opposed. But these things do not hinder me. I have been led 
to look only unto the Lord God Almighty for guidance and 
sympathy and from thence it is unfailing. 

I have given up my business— that is, I am where I am, it seems to 
me, by the will of the Lord, and I see no possibility of change that I 
could advantageously make at present, and I am convinced that 
when a change is to be made the Lord will give me a conviction of 
mind and opportunity to that effect. I have given up my family-that 
is they, as well as everything, stand second to the will of God and to 
his love. 

As far as I know and can judge of my own heart or purpose or 
choice I believe that I truly desire to give my whole time and daily 
life to the Master— wholly for his service. 

The impression on my mind is that he will give me a greater 
knowledge of his truth and then open a way for me to use it yet 
more fully. I really count my life as nothing if I may win Christ. My 



question or thought is not how to avoid trouble or pain, but "what is 
thy will O! God?" 



I am yet lacking in many things, but the Lord will make me better 
and better acquainted with his truth and his will. It takes all my 
faith to keep me, but there is no wavering. I press forward. 

Yours in fellowship and service, 



page 2 

DESCRIPTION OF JESUS. 

The following epistle it is claimed was taken by Napoleon from 
the records of Rome, when he deprived that city of so many 
valuable manuscripts. It purports to have been written at the time 
and on the spot where Jesus commenced his ministry, by Publius 
Lentelus, governor of Judea, to the senate at Rome— Caesar, 
Emperor. It was the custom in those days for the governor to write 
home any event of importance transpiring during his term of office. 

"Conscript Fathers:— There appeared, in these our days, a man 
named Jesus Christ, who is yet living among us, and, of the 
Gentiles, is accepted as a prophet of great truth; but his own 
disciples call him the son of God. He hath raised the dead, and 
cured all manner of diseases. He is a man of stature somewhat tall 
and comely; with a very ruddy countenance, such as the beholder 
may both love and fear. His hair is of the color of the filbert when 
fully ripe, plain to his ear, whence downward, it is of more oriental 
color, curling and waving on his shoulders. In the middle of his 
head there is a seam of long hair, after the manner of the Nazarites. 
His forehead is plain and delicate; his face, without spot or wrinkle, 
beautiful, with a comely red; his nose and mouth are exactly 
formed; his beard is the color of his hair, and thick; not of any 
length, but forked. In reproving he is terrible; in admonishing 
courteous; in speaking, very modest and wise; in proportion of 
body, well shaped. None have seen him laugh, many have seen him 
weep. A man for his surpassing beauty excelling the children of 
men." 



page 3 

The following poem is from a Bible standpoint, beautifully 
expressive of the prospects of the 

R696 : page 3 



GROANING CREATION. 

BY J. G. WHITTIER. 



Across the sea I heard the groan 

Of nations in the intervals 

Of wind and wave. Their blood and bones 

Cried out in torture, crushed by thrones, 

And sucked by priestly cannibals. 

I dreamed of freedom slowly gained 
By martyr meekness, patience, faith, 
And lo! an athlete grimly stained, 
With corded muscles battle-strained 
Shouting it from the fields of death. 

I turn me, awe-struck, from the sight 
Among the clamoring thousands mute. 
I only know that God is right, 
And that the children of the light 
Shall tread the darkness under foot. 

I know the pent fire heaves its crust, 
That sultry skies the bolt will form 
To smite them clear; that Nature must 
The balance of her powers adjust, 
Though with the earthquake and the storm. 

God reigns, and let the earth rejoice! 
I bow before His sterner plan. 
Dumb are the organs of my choice; 
He speaks in battle's stormy voice, 
His praise is in the wrath of man. 

Yet, surely as He lives, the day 

Of peace He promised shall be ours, 

To fold the flags of war, and lay 

Its sword and spear to rust away, 

And sow its ghastly fields with flowers." 



R696 : page 3 

SPIRITS IN PRISON. 

N.B.— Before reading the following four articles the reader is 
requested to carefully re-examine an article in our issue of June last 
under the caption, "Sons of God and Daughters of Men." 



"Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that 
he might bring US to God, being put to death in the flesh but 
quickened [in] spirit. By which also, [in addition to this work done 
for US] he went and preached unto the spirits in prison; which 
sometime were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God 
waited in the days of Noah."- 1 Pet. 3:18-20. 



A satisfactory interpretation of this Scripture has long been 
sought, and but few have found a solution perfectly consistent and 
satisfying to themselves. Under the increasing light of the Lamp it 
is now becoming clear, to us at least. 

The two views of the passage commonly held we shall state first, 
and then give our present views. 

The most common view is, that during the time that Jesus was 
entombed he was off on a missionary tour preaching to the 
antediluvians. It is part of this view that the antediluvian sinners 
were suffering torture in a place they call hell. 

If its advocates would consider it, they would find that their 
interpretation favors a view of future probation for the 
antediluvians, a thing which they strenuously oppose. For if Christ 
preached to them it must have been for some purpose, and surely it 
was not to merely mock and deride them; his preaching must have 
been a message of hope-a part of his blessed "good tidings of great 
joy." And if there is a future probation for the antediluvians, why 
may not our position be correct, that in Christ all the families of the 
earth shall be blessed? 

This is the objection which consistency would urge against this 
view from the standpoint of those who hold it. But if we view it 
from the scriptural standpoint, and with the correct idea of death, 
we must reason that if Jesus was really dead during those three 
days, as the Apostles declare, then he could do no preaching, for 
"the dead know not anything," (Eccl. 9:5), and "there is no work, 
nor devices, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave." (Eccl. 
9:10.) Secondly, if Jesus had been an exception to the rule and 
could have preached, the antediluvians could not have heard, for 
certainly they have no wisdom, nor knowledge, in the grave. Hence 
this view is found generally unsatisfactory and out of harmony with 
the Scriptures. 

The second view, and the one which seemed most reasonable to us 
until recently, is to refer the preaching to that which Noah did under 
the direction of the Spirit of God to the antediluvians, who at this 
time are imprisoned in death. The objection to this view is that the 
preaching was not done to men, nor to the spirits of men, but to 
spirits, spiritual beings; and the preaching was not done by Noah, 
nor by the Spirit of God, but by the death and resurrection of Jesus. 

As we at present see the subject, it seems very clear that the spirits 
are those spiritual beings whose disobedience took place during the 
days of Noah, and whom God therefore imprisoned or restrained in 
some of their former liberties and privileges; even "those angels 
who kept not their own principality, but left their own habitation [or 
normal condition] he has kept in perpetual chains, [restraints,] 
under thick darkness, for the judgment of the great day." Jude 6.- 
Diaglott. 



This interpretation seems to meet all the circumstances of the case 
thus far. Now we inquire, In what way could Jesus preach to these 
during the time he was dead? We answer that it is not so stated. It 
was by the facts that he preached, as we sometimes say that 
"Actions speak louder than words." It was by his sufferings, death 
and resurrection that the preaching was done. Thus, as Jesus went 
from step to step in his work, his course was preaching a grand 
sermon to those angels who once had been placed in control of 
man, and had themselves fallen instead of lifting up mankind. In 
Jesus they saw exemplified obedience even unto death, and its 
reward— resurrection —to spiritual being of the DIVINE NATURE. 
Such was the great text, and the lesson from it is stated by the 
Apostle in verse 22, viz., that Jesus was now highly exalted and 
given a name [title] above every name was "gone into heaven, and 
is at the right hand of God [position of highest favor] ; ANGELS 
and authorities and powers being made subject to him." They knew 
Jesus before he left the glory of the heavenly condition and became 
a man. They knew the object of his self-sacrifice as a man. They 
saw him obedient even unto death and then his high exaltation 
came as a reward (Phil. 2:9). They must have felt keenly their loss 
through disobedience, cut off from communion with God, 
restrained as unworthy of former liberty and communion with the 
purer minded of mankind, and their own future an unsolved 
mystery. We can but imagine that sorrow and chagrin filled their 
hearts as they contrasted their course of disobedience and its results 
with Jesus' obedient course and its majestically grand results. We 
can fancy them saying, Would that we had realized before as fully 
as we now do the wide contrast between the results of obedience 
and disobedience. Would that we might have another trial; with our 
increased knowledge our course would be very different. 

A clear distinction should be borne in mind as between Satan and 
these angels. Satan evidently sinned against great light, so that 
infinite wisdom finds no place to do more for him. His was not a 
temptation to sin from bad example in others, as was the case with 
the "angels who sinned" in the days of Noah, being led into evil by 
their contact with fallen man, for Satan is the father of lies and was 
a sinner prior to man's fall, and was man's tempter. With reference 
to Satan nothing is stated in Scripture to indicate a future trial; but, 
to the contrary, it is expressly stated that he is to be "destroyed." 
Heb. 2:14; Rom. 16:20; Rev. 20:10. 

Here we start the inquiry: Is it possible that there may be probation 
for these spirits in prison who were formerly disobedient in the 
days of Noah, led into sin through man's bad example? We 

R697 : page 3 

answer that God's loving care over and for man, while we were yet 
sinners, and his impartiality would lead us to hope that he might as 
well have some provision for the spirits imprisoned in death. 
Though because of the different penalties upon the two classes the 
means of recovery may not necessarily be the same in all 



particulars: for instance, these angels not being condemned to death 
need not to be redeemed from death. 

If those angels which sinned are to have a future trial— during the 
Day or age of judgment [or trial], it follows that there is hope for 
them. If then under the able instruction and assistance of the 
glorified church they forsake sin and lay hold upon righteousness, 
they shall be accounted worthy of everlasting life and happiness. 

If we find no Scripture statement contradictory of this— no 
statement telling of their destruction, may we not have hope for 
them and search for some Scripture statements favoring that hope? 

We find but two statements apparently contradictory; the one is 
(Mark 1:24; Luke 4:34; Matt. 8:29), "Art thou come to destroy us 
before the time?" This shows us that these imprisoned spirits had in 
mind destruction or torment as their final doom, but it by no means 
proves that their suppositions were correct, no more than for some 
of the so-called Orthodox to believe that nine-tenths of humanity 
will be everlastingly tormented would be a proof of it. The fact is 
that we find Satan, the master teacher who has taught men to thus 
blaspheme God's character through misrepresentation of his plans, 
was the master and chief over these cast-down spirits, and evidently 
had misrepresented Jehovah's plans to the imprisoned spirits as he 
has to men. He is the father of lies. 

The second text is (Matt. 25:41), "into everlasting fire, prepared for 
the devil and his angels." This cannot be used as an argument 
against a hope for a probation for the imprisoned spirits, for though 
by force of circumstances and restraint from any other service, they 
are now, Satan's angels or messengers or servants, yet they may not 
always be such, IF an opportunity were granted for them to return 
to God's service and be angels of God. The passage relates to the 
"lake of fire" or destruction into which at the close of the Millennial 
age all are to be cast, who are out of harmony with God. Satan will 
be of those cast into that everlasting destruction, and with him all 
who do unrighteousness or have pleasure therein —all of whom, 
spirits or men, are reckoned to be on his side, his angels or 
messengers— evil doers shall all be cut off from life. To cut off such, 
and such only, was God's plan from the beginning, for such only, 
destruction and cutting off from life forever was designed. 



R697 : page 3 

THE PROBATION OF ANGELS. 

The preceding article naturally suggests the inquiry, Will those 
"spirits in prison," "those angels which kept not their first estate," 
and who received such a powerful lesson from the ministry death 
and resurrection of Jesus, ever have any opportunity to profit by the 
lesson? will they ever have a chance to repent of their sin, to leave 
Satan's service, and return to loyalty to God? 



If at first we thought that the Scriptures were silent on the subject, 
we have found that to be a mistake, and when God speaks we may 
reasonably conclude that there is something profitable for us to 
learn. Hence let us give ear that we may learn whatever our Father 
deems expedient to communicate. 

Jude informs us that those angels (verse 6) which "committed 
fornication and went after strange flesh" "also" "in like manner" to 
the Sodomites (verse 7), God is keeping under restraint, their 
(penalty or punishment) "unto the judgment of the great day." The 
great day is the Millennial Day and mankind is also waiting for this 
judgment [krisis- trial]. Peter's testimony is in harmony 2 Pet. 2:4. 
And Paul settles the matter that these fallen and now imprisoned 
spiritual beings will have a trial as well as mankind, under the reign 
of Christ- the Church, the kingdom of God in exalted power. 
Speaking of the propriety of their deciding earthly difficulties, he 
says, "Do you not know that the saints shall judge the 
world?.. .Know ye not that we shall judge angels?" 1 Cor. 6:1-4. 
The Greek word here rendered judge, is krino of the same root as 
krisis rendered judgment in Jude 6 and signifies, to govern; to test; 
as to mete out to each individual blessings of stripes according to 
the merit of their course when brought fully into the light of truth, 
and under all the blessings of the reign of Christ. Hence it is thus 
seen that it will be a part of the work of the Christ to rule over and 
direct both human and angelic sinners, "to judge angels" and "to 
judge the world" of mankind-fallen men restrained unconscious in 
death, from which they have been redeemed, and fallen spirits 
restrained alive until this judgment or trial of the Great Millennial 
Day, when the saints under the headship of Jesus shall try their 
cause, giving everlasting life and favor to those who shall then 
prove themselves worthy of it, and everlasting destruction to those 
unworthy. 

Besides we find frequent references to a work Christ is to do in 
subjecting heavenly or spiritual as well as human powers, when the 
church which is his body has been selected and the work of judging 
and blessing commences. For instance we read, Eph. 1:10 "In the 
dispensation of the fullness of times, to re-establish [under God's 
dominion and law] all things in Christ [the disordered] things that 
are in heaven [spiritual] and on earth [human], in him."-Douay 
translation. Again, "In him it hath well pleased the Father that all 
fullness should dwell, and through him to reconcile all things unto 
himself, making peace by the blood of his cross, both as to the 
things on earth and the things in heaven. " (earthly and spiritual 
transgressors.) Col. l:20-Douay. 

In Eph. 3:8-10, it is shown that the length and breath of God's 
redemptive plan has been hidden by God until the Gospel Age, 
when the Apostles were commissioned to declare to men, the 
conditions upon which they might become sharers with Jesus in the 
execution of Gods' loving plans, and that the intent is, ultimately to 
have all the heavenly or spiritual beings know, through the 



instrumentality of the Church, the boundless wealth that is in God's 
great gift- His Son-and the different methods and steps his 
wisdom marked out for all his creatures. We quote the passage from 
the Diaglott translation:- 

"To me, the very lowest of the saints, was this favor given— To 
announce among the nations the glad tidings— the BOUNDLESS 
WEALTH of the anointed one: even to enlighten all as to what is 
the [method of] administration [or operation] of that secret [plan] 
which has been concealed from the ages, by that God who created 
all things; in order that now [henceforth] may be made known to 
the governments and the authorities in the heavenlies, through [the 
instrumentality of] the congregation [church] the much-diversified 
wisdom of God, according to a plan of the ages," "which he 
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord." 

It would appear then, that God's bountiful plan and diversified 
wisdom, contains something of interest to the angels, and if of 
interest to any, of a special interest to those confined or restrained, 
and waiting a trial in the judgment of the great day. They see the 
saints and seek to look into things revealed by the spirit and Word 
to these, but in no other way can they learn of their future, or of 
what provision has been made for them in the boundless wealth and 
diversified wisdom of God, because it is to be "made known," 
"through the church." 

These condemned angels have been learning much since the first 
text and sermon, (The lesson of Jesus' obedience and exaltation 1 
Pet. 3:18-20 and 1 Tim. 3:16) for we read that we are made a 
spectacle to the world-both to angels and to men." (1 Cor. 4:9- 
Diaglott.) The spectacle and lesson is both to men and angels for 
the reason that both men and angels will shortly be judged by the 
church and blessed by it, if found obedient and worthy of life. 
When the testimony in due time is given, all things, both in heaven 
(the spiritual condition) and on earth (the human) shall bow to 
Jehovah's anointed and confess him their Lord and Ruler and those 
who refuse his righteous authority shall be cut off as unworthy of 
life. Isa. 45:23; Rom. 14:11; Matt. 25; Acts 3:33. 

R697 : page 4 

The angels that sinned in the days of Noah have had a bitter 
experience since; no doubt death would have been preferable in 
many respects. Cut off from association with good angels and 
placed in the companionship of each other and Satan without God 
and having no hope they must have had a terrible experience, with 
sin's demoralizing effects, while they have witnessed in man its 
ultimate penalty-death. Surely many of them will be prepared for a 
return to their former estate and its privileges and blessings, on 
whatever terms a just God may prescribe. 

We cannot forget too their respectful conduct toward Jesus and the 
Apostles, and the message they delivered; far more respectful 
indeed than that of the strictest sect of the Jewish church. While the 



latter scoffed and said, "Is not this Jesus the son of Joseph?" (John 
6:42) The former exclaimed "Thou art the Son of God." Mark 3:11. 
While the former said thou hast a devil and art mad, the latter said, 
"I know thee who thou art, the HOLY ONE of God." Mark 1:24. 

While they respected the true, they opposed the false saying to 
some who pretended to exercise power— "Jesus I know, and Paul I 
know, but who are ye? And the man in whom was the evil spirit 
was, leaped on them and overcame them." (Acts 19:15.) 

The Jews and Gentiles beat and stoned the messengers of God 
when they came among them with the glad tidings of salvation, but 
some of these fallen angels seemed desirous of spreading the glad 
tidings. One followed the Apostles, saying: "These men are the 
servants of the most high God which show unto us the way of 
salvation." Acts 16:17. 

THE BASIS OF THEIR HOPE. 

But now comes an important question, Scripture shows us that our 
hope centres in the fact that a ransom price for our sins was given 
by Jesus, but what is the basis of the hope for these fallen angels? 
On what ground can they have a trial and hope of future everlasting 
life? Did Jesus die for them? 

We answer that Jesus did not die for the angels— the ransom- 
sacrifice was human, a ransom for men. "Verily he took not on him 
the nature of angels," etc. (Heb. 2:16.) Furthermore they were not 
under condemnation of death, hence have never lost their life in any 
measure and would need no ransom from death, when they were 
not in, nor condemned to it. It was because DEATH had passed 
upon all men and they never could obtain life without, that Jesus' 
ransom was necessary in order that we might regain life. Those 
angels which kept not their first estate, were condemned, not to 
death, but to restraint and confinement, until a day of trial, when 
God will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he 
hath ordained. (Acts 17:31.) They are therefore undergoing their 
penalty as truly as man is suffering his, though they be very 
different in kind— "according to the much diversified wisdom of 
God." 

And yet they had a great interest in Jesus' work, for though they 
were not being redeemed or bought by the precious blood, as was 
man, yet it was this Jesus, the Redeemer of men, who on account of 
this work, would be accounted worthy of high exaltation to the 
divine nature, and given all power in heaven as well as in earth. In 
the exercise of which power in heaven (or among spiritual beings) 
they may hope for their day of trial to come, when they as well as 
men may be released from the dominion of Satan. 

Again, if we have the correct view of the matter, that these angels 
cast down, had been tempted and seduced by evil in men, which 
had become very great (Gen. 6:5) then we see how the 
reconciliation accomplished by the blood of the cross would apply 



to and cancel all guilt, both direct and indirect, which resulted from 
the one man's disobedience. So that now, in the words of the 
Apostle, "It pleased the Father... having made peace [propitiation- 
satisfaction] by the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all things 
unto himself, by him, whether things [out of harmony] in earth, or 
things in heaven. " Col. 1 :20. 



R697 : page 4 

GOD'S COMPREHENSIVE LAW. 

God's wisdom, and love, and justice decide on what is best, and 
that decision is his will or law. But strictly speaking only so much 
of God's will as he expressed to his creatures is law to them. Hence 
while his laws never conflict, they may be more or less fully 
expressed on one occasion than on another. 

All of God's intelligent creatures are under instruction, being taught 
those laws which his infinite love, wisdom and justice have enacted 
for the well-being of all. Though created perfect, each in his plane 
of being, yet they all lack that scope of knowledge and wisdom 
which belongs in full measure only to the divine nature of which 
they are but images. They all lacked experience, hence in giving 
them instruction in the wisdom and propriety of his laws, it has 
pleased Jehovah to make an illustration which would manifest and 
practically exemplify his own character and prove to his creatures 
the wisdom and righteousness of his laws. 

It is evident that the spirit of his law is not to take advantage of 
some transgressive slip occasioned by lack of experience on the 
part of his creatures, but that he intends it to apply to the thoughts 
and intents of the hearts. That this is the real intent of God, we shall 
see illustrated by his dealings with those who have from lack of 
knowledge become sinners. 

His law in full, as we now see it in the light of His Word, is, "The 
soul that sinneth, it shall die"; that no being shall be permitted to 
live, who, when fully informed of God's righteous will, and enabled 
to obey it, shall not conform thereto; that all such shall be cut off 
from life. But this is as it may be seen NOW; once it was not so 
clearly expressed, nor so clearly seen. 

To exemplify this law fully, God caused man to be used as an 
illustration before the extreme penalty was placed upon the angels. 
So he placed upon him the full extreme penalty of his law— death, 
KNOWING that through inexperience he would violate that law 
and come under its penalty. But God purposed to make an 
illustration to all his creatures of the exceeding sinfulness of sin and 
the sure consequences, while at the same time his love and wisdom 
so marked out the plan, that man, the illustration, might not suffer 
loss, but be fully recovered from the penalty, and be himself 



blessed by being everlastingly guarded against sin by the lessons 
learned. 

Nor should we forget that God's dealing with man was perfectly 
just. He had a perfect right to demand perfect obedience from a 
perfect creature, and the fact that he has not required it at first of the 
angels, was a FAVOR toward them, permitting them to acquire by 
observation of mankind, a knowledge of sin and its dire results, 
before being placed liable to its extreme penalty— death; even as 
toward man he has displayed his FAVOR also, though in a different 
manner, viz., through a ransom, and Saviour, and restitution, and 
future trial for life, more favorable than the first, because of the 
knowledge of sin and its effects, meanwhile acquired by 
experience. Let us briefly 

VIEW THE EXHIBITION 

of God's character as displayed in his dealing toward mankind 
whom he made a spectacle to angels. (1 Cor. 4:9.) In so doing, let 
us guard against the common error which judges of God's actions 
exactly as of our own. Let us remember that justice, love, wisdom, 
and power, as commonly displayed by the fallen race, in dealing 
with each other, and with their children, is far from being perfect, 
far from being what it was at first, the image of those qualities in 
Jehovah. In consequence of the fall these qualities are constantly at 
war with each other, in our experience; sometimes love has a 
victory over justice, and sometimes justice has the victory over 
love. 

But with Jehovah there can be no conflict, and neither ever gains a 
victory or ascendancy over the other; both are perfect, and work 
only in perfect harmony. 

Before man was created, the justice, wisdom, love, and power of 
God held conference on the subject, and devised the plan which has 
since been developing. The plan was suggested by wisdom and 
concurred in by the other qualities, the arrangement and execution 
of it being left in Wisdom's hands. 

Wisdom designed to have the largest returns of experience and 
benefit to man, and the most valuable illustration of God's character 
to all his creatures, on every plane of being. Accordingly Wisdom 
said, Let the man come under the control of Justice, Love, and 
Power, separately, that the force and operation of each may be the 
more forcibly illustrated. Let Justice first have complete control, let 
the man be dealt with by the strict law, "Thou shalt not—" "In the 
day that thou dost... dying thou shalt die." And it was so. 

Man inexperienced and unused to controlling his liberty, violated it 
and experienced the full weight of Justice, as Wisdom had foreseen. 

The lesson under Justice has been long and severe, but the lesson 
must be thorough, so that it shall never need repeating. Men and 
angels must learn that Justice is relentless, irrevocable and 



unalterable. Then, too, before it could be realized that the remedy 
for man lay only in Jehovah and nowhere else, an opportunity was 
offered for the trial of other methods for his recovery. First, the 
angels were given rulership, (during the age before the flood), and 
made a miserable failure, for while man became more and more 
corrupt himself, his evil influence led to the fall of some of those 
who had attempted his assistance- "those angels which kept not 
their first estate." 

With the Deluge that order of affairs passed away. Then, under the 
law, given to one selected nation, another and a different 
opportunity was offered, to prove to man that even if God should 
cancel all enmity, or resentment, and receive the world into 
covenant relations, yet they would require a Restorer so that they 
could continue in harmony with God, even after being brought 
back. Hence sacrifices and offerings for sin were instituted, and 
God treated that nation AS THOUGH original sin and guilt had 
been removed, and then placed them under law to prove to them 
their inability (as degenerate creatures) to keep his law without a 
restitution to perfection-his likeness. 

Meanwhile Love stood ready to act at the moment Wisdom should 
give the word. It would have acted at once but for two reasons; 
First, it could not oppose or interfere with the action of Justice in 
condemning man and delivering him over for the execution of the 
prescribed penalty— death. Secondly, Love might have 
acknowledged Justice and approved its action by promptly 
providing a ransom [an equivalent price], but Wisdom objected and 
would not permit this course at that time, because it saw best to 
make the lesson complete and thorough. 

Hence for over four thousand years Love was not permitted to act, 
and might only speak in shadowy sacrifices and ceremonies, and 
more or less obscure promises. But finally when the right time had 
come, "in due time," "in the fullness of time," Wisdom gave the 
word and Love began to act in man's relief. The first act was to 
produce a perfect and sinless man to be a suitable "ransom for all," 
and it must be one not under the Adamic curse, who would lay 
down his life for the race, and whose sacrifice would meet all the 
requirements of justice, and therefore be acceptable as a ransom 
and propitiation for our sins. And Love's great exhibition was seen 
in the gift of the grandest, and greatest, and first of all God's 
creation, who became a man to redeem men, and "they called his 
name Jesus" when he became a man. 

Ah! says one who judges by his own habits and feelings, Now 
comes Love's victory over Justice. We shall see that God is more 
loving than severe. Not so, my brother; God is not more loving than 
severely just, he is perfect in both respects. It will be indeed a 
victory for Love, but not over Justice. It will be much grander than 
that. It will prove a victory for both Justice and Love; for it will be 
gained by Love's paying the price demanded by Justice-a 
RANSOM, "an equivalent price." 



Thus did the love of God magnify the justice and law of God, and 
"make it honorable," by acknowledging its claims in the payment of 
the very penalty demanded -man's death (Rom. 5:19). 

We need scarcely say, that the love of God so long veiled from 
sight, was manifested in the gift of his Son to be our Redeemer and 
Saviour. The record is: "Herein is love, not that we loved God, but 
that he loved us and sent his Son to be the propitiation [satisfaction 
or appeasement] for our sins." "IN THIS WAS MANIFESTED 
THE LOVE OF GOD toward us, because that God sent his only 
begotten Son into the world, that we might LIVE through him." (1 
Jno. 4:9,10.) 

When Love had RANSOMED man, and was ready to reveal itself 
by restoring mankind to perfection and harmony with God, Wisdom 
forbade it and declared that a further development of its plan would 
ultimately enhance Love's glory, and perfect the work: that an 
interlude must occur [the Gospel age] in which should be selected 
some from among the redeemed; some sharers in Christ's sufferings 
and reproach, who should be counted worthy to share his glory, and 
be his associates in the execution of LOVE'S TRIUMPH in "the 
restitution of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets." 

Long and faithfully has Love labored, yet all her labor will yet be 
lost, unless in due time Wisdom shall commission POWER to do its 
part in the great plan. 

Power thus far has done almost nothing directly in man's relief. 
Wisdom forbade it until its due time, hence we see it but feebly 
expressed save in the resurrection of our Lord and in the miracles, 
which but shadow forth its coming work. 

Now we are living in the day when Power begins to act, not in 
opposition to Justice, but in harmony with Wisdom, Justice, and 
Love, in crushing out sin and evil, and in legally removing the 
penalty of sin and the dominion of evil, cancelled through the 
ransom paid by Jesus. Oh, blessed day! The Lamb that was slain 
and redeemed us by his blood is now invested with POWER to 
restore and bless all whom he bought, and he is now about to take 
unto himself his great power and shall reign until he hath put all 
enemies in subjection (Rev. 20:6; and 1 Cor. 15:25). 

A thousand years earth's coming glory, 
'Tis the glad time so long foretold, 
'Tis the bright morn of Zion's glory 
Prophets foresaw in times of old. 

Thus God has chosen the plan which most fully and grandly 
exemplified his unalterable justice and exhibited the exceeding 
riches of his grace— his love; and in the restoration of man from 
destruction and death to life and perfection will God's power be 
illustrated far more forcibly than in man's creation. And as men and 
angels come to recognize the full fruition of God's plan in the ages 



to come will they not with one consent exclaim with our brother 
Paul, as he caught a glimpse of it: O the depths of the riches both of 
the WISDOM and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his 
judgments and his ways past finding out! For who hath known the 
mind [plan] of the Lord? or who hath been his counsellor? 
....Because out of him, and through him, and for him are all things. 
To him be the GLORY for ever." (Rom. 1 1:34,36.) 



R704 : page 4 

"THERE is a gift that is almost a blow, and there is a kind word 
that is munificence; so much is there in the way of doing things." 



R704 : page 4 

"NEARNESS of life to the Savior will necessarily involve 
greatness of love to him. As nearness to the sun increases the 
temperature of the various planets, so near and intimate communion 
with Jesus raises the heat of the soul's affections towards him." 



R697 : page 5 

DIVERSIFIED WISDOM OF GOD. 

"The much-diversified wisdom of God" (Eph. 3:10. Diaglott) 
which selected one course with reference to men, chose another 
course with reference to the angels and did not first deliver them 
over to Justice under the extreme penalty of the law, but 
pronounced a lesser penalty until they should have learned of evil 
and its consequences from the example or "spectacle" furnished 
them in mankind. 

But the result of wisdom's course in either case is the same— The 
angels being perfect, and having had an example of the extreme 
penalty of the law will be able and doubtless glad to conform to 
God's law when again offered the opportunity. Man, who 
experienced the extreme penalty of the law, when restored will be 
able to appreciate forever good and evil, and to rightly choose that 
which is good. While both will then be liable to the extreme 
penalty— death— neither need come under it because of a perfect 
appreciation. They will then, as God does, love righteousness 
because it is good and hate unrighteousness because it is wrong. 

Though the experience of angels might at first appear less severe 
than man's, yet when it is remembered that man's dying experience 
was limited to an average of three-score years and ten, while the 
angels who sinned experienced over four thousand years of living 
restraint under Satan's rule, it will generally be conceded that their 
experience was not less severe than man's. 



In view of the great work to be accomplished, how necessary is the 
elevation of the Christ (head and body) to the DIVINE nature, since 
his mission is to govern, direct, and bring to perfection, "whosoever 
will," both of spiritual and human beings. And does not the 
selection of this class, made different both from angels and men— of 
the divine nature —illustrate yet further the much diversified 
wisdom of God, whereby he is able to work all things according to 
the counsel of his own will? 



R700 : page 5 

SHEEP AND GOATS. 

Our answer to some inquiries awakened by the article under this 
caption in the August number, we publish, hoping that they may be 
of use to others who may not have written. 

This parable cannot with any consistency be applied to anything 
which occurred at the first advent of our Lord. Its location is fixed 
by the introductory sentence— "When the Son of Man shall come in 
His GLORY." 

Its location is further fixed by the rule of judgment or trial 
prescribed, viz., works. The positions assigned on the right hand or 
left, are expressly stated to be because (or inasmuch as) certain 
works were done or not done. The test of the trial or judgment of 
the church during the Gospel age is "not works, but faith." By grace 
are ye saved through FAITH. "Not of works lest any man should 
boast." "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved." Mark 
16:16. 

The reason for this may be readily seen: To test men by works in 
the Gospel age while under the dominion of the Prince of this 
world, and greatly crippled by the imperfections of our fallen 
nature, would be a very unfair standard. Hence, though now works 
according to our ability must naturally follow faith, our justification 
and reward are according to our faith, and not according to our 
works. 

In the coming age the circumstances will be very different. With 
Satan bound, evil and error restrained, the clear light of truth 
shining, driving away all obscurity, mist, darkness and error, and 
consequently driving away all room and opportunity for doubt, faith 
will become the possession of all mankind: all will know the Lord 
from the least to the greatest. Therefore we may see the 
reasonableness of the Scripture teaching that the test in the next age 
will not be faith, which none could then avoid, but works, which 
under those favorable circumstances should result from the 
knowledge and opportunities then afforded. 

We know of no statement of Scripture relative to the world's trial 
during the Millennial age, which mentions any other test of 



approval than that of works. Of course, this will imply and include 
a previous faith in the ransom. Works will be the test of judgment 
in that age as faith is the test in this. 

Works was the basis of the Law covenant, which with its mediator- 
Moses, was a shadow or type of the good things coming-the New 
Covenant and its mediator —Christ. And thus Moses wrote of 
Christ, saying: "A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto 
you of your brethren like unto me. Him shall ye hear in all things: 
and it shall come to pass that every soul [person] that will not hear 
[heed] that prophet shall be destroyed from among the people. 
(Acts 3:22,23.) This shows obedience (works) to be the basis of the 
antitypical covenant-the "New." 

The Apocalypse teaches the same lesson regarding the world's trial 
in the Millennial age, when the present thrones 

R701 : page 5 

are cast down and the rulership of earth is handed over to the saints, 
(Rev. 20:4;) when Satan is restrained (ver. 2); when the glorious 
New Jerusalem (heavenly kingdom) has come to rule the earth in 
harmony with the laws of heaven; and when the nations are being 
guided and directed by the light of truth shed abroad from it, (Rev. 
21:23,24.) When the books (of Scripture) are opened, and their 
teachings made clear and plain to all, and another book or record of 
those worthy of life-everlasting is open for recording the names of 
those who then shall be the Lord's "sheep," and worthy, as shown in 
the parable, to enjoy his favor and everlasting life;* when the 
GREAT WHITE THRONE, representative of purity, justice, 
fairness and impartiality of the TRIAL, when all the world-small 
and great shall be tried by Him that sitteth upon the throne, the 
basis of that judgment or trial is expressly stated in these words, 
"And they were judged every man according to their works." Rev. 
20:13. 

In perfect harmony then, is the teaching of Jesus in the parable 
under consideration. Love and its fruit, good works, will be the 
ground upon which the sheep of that age will be rewarded; and 
failure to develop and exercise these, under such favorable 
circumstances, is the peculiarity of the wayward "goat" class, 
condemned as unworthy of life— to be cut off— to die. God deems 
them unworthy of life, and our hearts and minds bow to his all-wise 
decision, "Every soul which will not hear that prophet shall be 
destroyed from among the people." Acts 3:23. 

Let it not be forgotten that the Millennial trial according to works, 
and ability of those being tried to render works of merit and 
approval, is based upon their redemption from the Adamic curse, by 
Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all. Had it not been for that 
redemption there never would be a Millennial age of blessing and 
trial for the dead race. There could have been neither awakening or 
trial had we not been bought with His precious blood. 



Does not the reading of Matt. 25:41, indicate torture in literal fire as 
the merit of the "goat" class? No, not a word is mentioned about 
torture. The thought of torture has been added to the statement by 
some whose theories it fitted, without any authority, except that 
they infer torture as a result of contact with fire. But fire is not used 
as a symbol of torture, but of destruction. God under the Law 
shadows never permitted Israel to torture any creature, though he 
frequently commanded things and dead carcasses to be burned with 
fire as a symbol of utter DESTRUCTION. It is this significance that 
we attach to fire in this verse— destruction. To apply it literally 
would be out of harmony with the entire parable— the fire is not 
more literal fire than are the goats literal goats. Everlasting fire then 
would signify everlasting or non-ending destruction. 

"PREPARED FOR THE DEVIL AND HIS ANGELS. " 

Is it true that this fire or DESTRUCTION which will take place at 
the close of the Millennial age and in which the "goat" class will 
share— was prepared or designed, for the Devil and his angels? Yes, 
thus it is written, and so we believe. It is stated in so many words. 1 
John 3:8; Heb. 2:14. 

"His angels"— the word here translated angels signifies messengers, 
and the Diaglott so translates it. We do not understand it to refer to 
those fallen angels now associated with Satan— "Those angels 
which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation," etc., 
(Jude 6) but we apply the word on a more general principle. Satan 
will be bound at the close of the Gospel age, and all under his 
control will be released. But those who during the trial of the 
Millennial age will not become willing and obedient servants of the 
Lord, are reckoned His adversaries— the messengers and 
accomplices [angels] of the great adversary, Satan; and into 
destruction such are cast— the devil and his angels. It was prepared 
for them. Such, and such only, did God from all eternity design to 
blot from existence as unworthy the boon of life. 

Does the word everlasting in verse 46 indicate that the punishment 
will last forever? It certainly does. When some one told you that the 
Greek word aionian, here rendered everlasting, had not such a 
meaning, but always meant a limited period of time, they 
misinformed you, and merely applied a definition common to a sect 
called "Adventists," but nevertheless an error. It is true that the 
words aion and aionian sometimes are used to refer to a limited 
period of time— an age, epoch, or lifetime, but it is equally a fact 
that these words are used sometimes to represent an unlimited or 
"everlasting" time, and that it is so used in this verse there is no 
room for question or controversy. It is settled by the use of the same 
word to the righteous— they go into life EVERLASTING or 
"aionian"— the same Greek word being used. This fact is obscured 
in the common version by reason of the translators having used a 
different English word— eternal. The passage declares the same 
length of punishment (destruction, as shown above) to the goat 



class, as of reward to the righteous sheep, and if Adventists and 
Universalists claim that aionian here always means a limited period, 
they should, to be consistent, hope only for a life of limited duration 
for the righteous, since the same Greek word is used in reference to 
both. 

Is it true that the word "cursed" in verse 41 in the original Greek 
means merely unblessed or less blessed? 

By no means; the Greek word here translated cursed is kataraomai. 
It signifies the very opposite of blessing; it signifies a curse in the 
sense usually understood in the English. Webster defines cursed 
thus: Deserving a curse; execrable; hateful; detestable; abominable. 
Apply any of these synonyms in the place of cursed in the language 
of the text and see what kind of a blessing it would be. The same 
Greek word is used with reference to the cursed fig tree in Mark 
11:21, Also in Luke 6:28, Rom. 12:14 and James 3:9. And the same 
root word, katara, is used three times with reference to the original 
curse or condemnation resting upon all who failed to keep perfectly 
the requirements of the law of God in Gal. 3:10-13. If the curse 
lifted by Jesus' death was severe, then the curse imposed by him 
upon those called "goats" in the parable, is severe, and in no sense a 
blessing. As a matter of fact, the first curse which came upon all 
men through Adam's disobedience was death— cutting off from life- 
- and to purchase for man a right to live again, Jesus needed to be 
and was "made a curse for us"— cut off from life, treated as the 
sinner, as our substitute, that we might be restored to life and made 
the righteousness of God through him. (2 Cor. 5:21.) If, then, the 
Adamic death was a curse from which none could be released 
without a Redeemer, what must it imply to receive the curse again, 
and from the lips of the Redeemer? It implies, what other Scriptures 
state, that those who shall refuse to hear and heed that Prophet shall 
be cut off. The fact that he who redeemed and will bless by 
bringing all to a knowledge of the truth, with full opportunity for 
life everlasting, will be the one to say "Depart ye cursed" declares 
plainly that their trial will then be ended. He redeemed from the 
curse once, but "Christ dieth no more." (Rom. 6:9.) 



*Evidently the "other sheep" as also another "book of life" from 
that of the Gospel age. (John 10:16 and Rev. 20:12.) 



R697 : page 5 

SHALL NEVER DIE. 

"I am the resurrection and the life: he that believeth in me though 
he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth 
in me shall never die." John 1 1:26. 



These were Jesus' words of consolation to Martha. They state 
briefly man's future hopes in, and because of the redemption that is 
in Christ Jesus. Let us analyze the statement, and, if possible, gain 
its full import. 

The first statement— "He that believeth in me, though he were dead, 
yet shall he live," teaches that only believers shall be resurrected— 
made to "LIVE." This may appear out of harmony with other 
statements of our Lord to the effect that ALL in their graves shall 
"come forth," until we recognize the full force of the words, 
RESURRECTION and LIVE. We have heretofore shown that the 
word resurrect signifies to lift or raise up again to perfection, and 
that since man's fall was from perfection, as represented in Adam, 
his resurrection would imply a bringing to perfection again. But 
many Scriptures indicate that while the gospel Church will be lifted 
to the perfection of the new nature in a moment, in the twinkling of 
an eye, the world will be resurrected, or brought to perfection of 
their human nature, gradually, the entire Millennial age being the 
times of resurrection, or restoration. 

Now, we shall find in the scripture under consideration, that by 
recognizing a similar fullness of meaning in the word "LIVE," we 
have the statement clear and easily understood, and in harmony 
with all other Scriptures. 

To LIVE means a great deal, in its full import. Adam and Eve lived, 
i.e., had life in perfect measure, before sin entered. When death 
entered and the dying commenced, it was a process of ceasing to 
live-so death, the opposite of life passed upon all men. Hence, 
looked at from God's standpoint, all are dead, and none alive. (2 
Cor. 5:14; Matt. 8:22.) So then though it is true that all in their 
graves shall "come forth," they will come forth with a small 
measure of life, such as men now have, still measurably in death. 
[The most hale of the race today, enjoy but a fragment of perfect 
life,] in which condition all shall come to a knowledge of the truth, 
and whosoever believeth in the Ransomer though dead, "yet shall 
he LIVE." Belief in the ransom being necessary to the full 
acquirement of the favor purchased-LIFE. 

In perfect accord with this view (and no other) is that peculiar 
statement of John 5:25: Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is 
coming when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and 
they that hear shall LIVE." [Sinaitic MS. omits "and now is" in this 
text.] According to the general conception this should read, they 
that live shall hear, but this would not have been in harmony with 
the plan,-not true; hence the peculiar and guarded expression used, 
only appreciable as we come to see more deeply into God's plans 
for that coming age. All are dead-under death's dominion —it has 
passed upon all. The Redeemer has come, the ransom has been 
paid, and in due time all the dead shall hear [be brought to a clear 
conception of it] and they that hear [receive, or grasp it] shall [in 
due time] LIVE, reach perfection of life-being. A few who were of 
the dead class, have heard more or less distinctly in this age of the 



ransom price given for our release. Those who have heard it, could 
also AFTERWARD HEAR, of a prize or high calling 

R697 : page 6 

being offered during the Gospel age to believing sacrificers, and 
thus have "access into THIS GRACE, wherein we stand and rejoice 
in hope of the GLORY of God." But the due time in which the great 
mass of the dead shall hear, will be when the "little flock" has 
attained the glory, and as Members of the great Prophet shall teach 
and bless the people, bringing them out of their graves or opening 
sin-blinded eyes and prejudice-stopped ears, as it is written. (Isa. 
35:5.) 

Let us now examine the second part of Jesus' statement: 
"Whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die." 

In the light of the previous statement, this one becomes very clear 
and simple. It is the Lord's assurance that any who reach the 
condition of LIFE, may retain it forever, if they shall forever 
continue believers. It is the promise of Everlasting Life. 



R701 : page 6 

CLOTHED AND UNCLOTHED. 

"For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were 
dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made with hands, 
eternal in the heavens."— 2 Cor. 5:1. 

This is a blessed and comforting assurance to those consecrated 
saints who in fulfilling their covenant of self-sacrifice, realize daily 
that the "earthly house," or "earthen vessel" is dissolving. Such 
have a building of God [a new or spiritual body prepared for them] 
eternal in the heavens. But, this Scripture is only applicable to those 
who by sacrifice of the human nature have become "new 
creatures"— partakers of the divine nature. 

To this class, the human body has become, as it were, a house or 
temporary dwelling place for the new mind, the begotten new 
creature. Of the world this is not true; they are not new creatures, 
and the body is part of themselves and not a house. They have no 
new nature to maintain in the human conditions for a time, nor are 
they ever to be clothed with a heavenly, the spiritual body. 

The world is in due time to be delivered from its present bondage to 
sin and death, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, i.e., into 
freedom from corruption (death), but not to the spiritual nature and 
body. Their hope is restitution to human perfection, while that of 
the Church is the completion of our change of nature from human 
to spiritual. Our new nature, is burdened by the frailties and 
imperfections of the human and longs for full perfection as a new 
creature, remembering that the full fellowship of the Lord cannot be 
obtained before that change. Hence walking by faith we long for the 



house from heaven, a spiritual body adapted to the desires, etc., of 
the new mind. "In this tabernacle [or house] we groan, earnestly 
desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven." 

"For, we that are in this tabernacle do groan, being burdened: not 
for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality 
might be swallowed up of life." The unclothed or death condition, 

R702 : page 6 

is not desirable though the majority of the Church had to remain in 
that condition for many years. Paul, when ready to be offered, must 
wait for the crown laid up for him, but not to be received until the 
day of Christ's appearing. (2 Tim. 4:8.) 

"Now he that hath wrought us for this self-same thing is God, who 
also hath given unto us the earnest of the spirit." We are begotten of 
God for the very purpose of being developed and born into the 
spiritual likeness, and the fact that we now realize that we have his 
spirit [leading us to sacrifice the earthly] is evidence that in due 
time we shall be born in the spiritual likeness— made like unto 
Christ's glorious body. 

Therefore we are always confident and willing rather to be absent 
from the body and to be present with the Lord. 

It is now, the privilege of the saints to be ushered into the presence 
of the Lord as soon as the earthly body is laid down, as we read, 
"Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord from henceforth." (Rev. 
14:13. See TOWER for April 1883.) 

Though this was the thing desired by all the saints during this age, it 
was not the privilege of any until this time of the Lord's presence. 
But it was the privilege of all to be always confident, knowing that 
after the earthly house should be dissolved— in God's due time, they 
should be clothed upon with the heavenly house, the spiritual body, 
swallowed up of life. Amen, so let it be. R. W. 



R702 : page 6 

THE GOSPEL THEME. 

"And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of 
heaven suffereth violence and the violent take it by force. " Matt. 
11:12. 

There is to-day more of what is commonly considered Gospel 
preaching than at any previous time in the world's history. From 
thousands of pulpits it is heard twice every Lord's day, and again at 
the mid-week meetings, while thousands of printing presses are 
preaching through weekly and monthly periodicals, and millions of 
tracts, pamphlets, and books. And added to all this, there are the 
extra efforts of what are termed lay-evangelists, Christian 
associations, salvation armies, etc. 



But as we listen to the many, many voices, we hear sounds 
strangely out of harmony with the commission of the great Head of 
the church, whose leading these all profess to follow. It would seem 
that if the commission was ever heard by this great army of 
preachers, it must have been forgotten. What was it? Hearken again 
to the Master's voice: "Go.. .and as ye go, preach, saying, The 
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand." (Matt. 10:6,7.) And again "Let the 
dead bury their dead; but go thou and preach the kingdom of God." 
(Luke 9:60). And the Lord's disciples are taught also not only to 
preach-to publicly proclaim the coming of the kingdom of God, 
but to pray for it, saying: "Thy kingdom come-thy will be done on 
earth as it is done in heaven." 

If that prayer is ever to be answered— and it certainly will be, since 
he who dictated it could not err, and would not teach us to ask for 
anything out of harmony with Jehovah's will— then there will come 
a time, when the kingdom of God will be actually SET UP in the 
earth, and when as a consequence of the setting up of that kingdom, 
His will shall be done ON EARTH, even as it is done in heaven. 
You who have so frequently declared your firm belief in answer to 
prayer, do you believe this? Shall not this united prayer of all the 
saints for nearly nineteen centuries past, dictated by the unerring 
wisdom of our Lord, be answered? Most assuredly it will. 

The coming of the kingdom of God, and the things pertaining to 
that kingdom —the death of Christ as the necessary preliminary 
work to its introduction, and the resurrection of Christ, the 
assurance and pledge of it, was the great theme of the Apostles' 
preaching, and the inspiring hope of the early church. 

When John the Baptist came preaching repentance, it was with the 
strong incentive, never before offered, "The kingdom of heaven is 
at hand." Jesus preached the same truth, saying, "Repent, for the 
kingdom of heaven is at hand." And this was the spirit of the 
teaching of all the Apostles. Men generally desire to be in favor 
with the ruling power, and the coming kingdom of heaven meant a 
coming reign of righteousness, wherein the righteous would prosper 
and the wicked would be punished. If the kingdom was at hand, 
then how natural and proper to urge it as an incentive to repentance 
and righteousness. 

Ever since the fall repentance had been preached: but none before 
John were commissioned to preach the kingdom of God at hand, 
and other truths relative to it. This is the Gospel, the good news not 
made known in other ages. As Jesus said, "The law and the 
prophets were until John; since that time the kingdom of God is 
preached" [Sinaitic MS. omits with evident propriety the words 
"and every man presseth into it."] But the law and the prophets 
though shadowing forth and foretelling the coming kingdom, could 
never be clearly understood until the Gospel unraveled their 
mysteries. 



Was it in any sense a fact, that the kingdom of heaven was at hand 
in John's day? Nearly nineteen centuries have passed since, and still 
the powers of darkness reign and the kingdom of heaven is not yet 
SET UP. Still the wicked flourish and the righteous are oppressed. 
If we consider the expression as referring to the setting up of the 
kingdom in power and glory, it was true, and Jesus' words in John 
16:16 will help us to understand the statement. To his disciples, 
when about to leave them, he said, "A little while, and ye shall not 
see me: and again, a little while and ye shall see me;" and the little 
while has been the entire Gospel age. 

Ah yes, it is a little while from God's standpoint, with whom a 
thousand years is but as one day. (2 Pet. 3:8). From God's 
standpoint, and we are invited to take the same position of 
observation, it was but a "little while" to the second advent of 
Christ and the establishment of his kingdom. The kingdom was just 
at hand, and the king about to be anointed for his glorious reign. 
And if this was true in John's day, how emphatically true is it at the 
present time to which the prophecies point as the hour that just 
precedes the dawn of the glorious day of that reign! Jesus did not 
explain to the early Church just how long God's "little while" 
should be, as it would have seemed a very long time to them. 

But it would seem that in some sense, the kingdom of heaven had 
an existence in John's day; for Jesus said, "From the days of John 
the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence and 
the violent take it by force. " Since the kingdom when set up cannot 
suffer, but must reign triumphantly, we conclude that the text refers 
to those elements of the kingdom in existence, and being developed 
during this age. 

In John's day, Jesus, the Lord's anointed, was present, and he and 
the few disciples who then received him as their Lord, were then 
the only elements of the kingdom; but during the Gospel age others 
have become subject to him; and his reign of righteousness has 
been over them to mould and fashion them according to the divine 
will. So far as the imperfections of the flesh permit, God's will is 
done by these as it is done in heaven. It should be clearly manifest 
that none but those who are entirely consecrated to God, are of this 
kingdom, though many claim to be and think they are of it, who do 
not claim entire consecration. 

The subjects of Christ, the heavenly king, hearken to, and obey his 
voice. They do not turn every man to his own way and plan 
regardless of the Commander's instructions, though the command is 
to march through danger, privations, loss and suffering. But to 
those who recognize Jesus as king and become subject to him 
before his glory and power are manifested, there are exceeding 
great and precious promises, to be realized when his kingdom is set 
up. They shall be accounted worthy to reign with him. It was to 
give to this class the privilege of suffering and as a result, of 
reigning with Christ, that the kingdom began to be preached so long 
before it was to be actually SET UP or established in power. 



Of this class only, are our Lord's words first quoted true. These 
suffer violence at the hands of the present reigning power of this 
world-Satan, and the subjects of his kingdom, and the pages of 
history from the days of John the Baptist until now, present the dark 
record of the violence suffered by those who are of the kingdom of 
heaven. 

Violence persecuted and crucified our King, stoned Stephen his 
faithful martyr, beheaded Paul, crucified Peter, roasted others by 
fire, tossed them on piercing forks, and heaped upon them every 
indignity that fiendish wickedness could devise. And even in these 
days, when the "salt of the earth" (See July issue) has to some 
extent purified human society, and counteracted the terrible 
influence of Satan's reign, still the kingdom of heaven suffers 
violence. Their names are cast out as evil, they are despised and 
rejected; their business interests suffer, and they are counted as 
fools and fanatics. The violent take the kingdom by force— With 
overwhelming force of numbers and wealth they subdue the little 
handful of the saints, trample and crush their influence, and hinder 
the progress and spread of the heavenly kingdom. Thus by the 
dominion of evil, is made possible for the Church, a baptism into 
suffering, even unto death. 

R703 : page 6 

But is this all so, because the Heavenly King lacks the power, and 
is unable to bring victory to his faithful followers? This reminds us 
of the words of Jesus when about to perform the symbol of his 
death- "Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becometh us [himself and 
his church] to fulfill all righteousness "-the righteousness of God's 
law which required this sacrifice. 

God is able, and will bring victory to the tried and faithful few who 
have been loyal subjects of his kingdom in these stormy times. 
These we are told are to be kings, and priests, and joint-heirs of the 
throne with Jesus Christ, when in due time the kingdom of heaven 
is SET UP— placed in control. Though the violent prince of this 
world lays them all low in death, the power of the Almighty will 
bring them forth to certain victory. 

We would call special attention to the date Jesus mentions in the 
text. It dates "from the days of John the Baptist." 

Other children of God, preceding the day of John the Baptist, 
suffered in like manner as those who have suffered since. But 
notice, Jesus does not say, From the days of John the Baptist the 
children of God suffer violence, but the kingdom of heaven 
suffereth violence. Then those children of God who lived before 
that time were not of that kingdom to which Jesus referred-the 
kingdom of Christ. How could they be, when as yet there was no 
king anointed? 

The kingdom of heaven then began to have an existence when Jesus 
was anointed to be the King-at the time of his Baptism-"in the 



days of John the Baptist," after which time as John said, he began to 
decrease (in influence) and Christ to increase. Though ever since 
then, his kingdom has been in existence, yet this has been the time 
of its humiliation and affliction; its littleness and poverty have 
made it the subject of contempt and ridicule, while its unwavering 
opposition to the spirit of the world, has incurred their hatred and 
persecution. 

So it was also true in John's day that the kingdom of heaven was 
then at hand —about to come in the sense mentioned. But to-day it 
is true in a still more glorious sense; for the time for the setting up 
and exaltation of the kingdom is at hand. The prayer of these loyal 
subjects henceforth to be joint-heirs of the throne with Jesus, the 
king, is about to be answered. His kingdom is just about to come, in 
its glory and power, and the blessed outcome of the victory of that 
kingdom, will be, that God's will shall be done in earth as it is done 
in heaven. 

If then, we would be faithful to him who has called us to preach, let 
us see to it that we preach the Gospel (good news) of the kingdom, 
and that we be not diverted from it by any side issues. The 
kingdom, and things pertaining to the kingdom— its character, its 
permanence, its sure foundation, its blessed influence, and the 
cheering and inspiring fact that its setting up in glory and power is 
just at hand, should be the theme of every true servant of God. And 
if we have been faithful disciples of the Master we cannot be 
ignorant of these things, and if we know them how can we refrain 
from telling them. "Go ...and as ye go preach, saying, the 
KINGDOM OF HEAVEN is at hand." 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R703 : page 6 

A JEWISH-CHRISTIAN MOVEMENT IN RUSSIA. 

A most remarkable religious movement is in progress among the 
Jews in Southern Russia. It is nothing more nor less than the 
establishment of Jewish-Christian congregations among the Jews, 
which are to be in connection with none of the Christian religious 
communions as at present existing, but are to constitute a peculiar 
Christian association in close connection with Jewish customs and 
manners, and with the rejection of all Gentile-Christian dogmas. 
The soul of the movement is a Jewish 

R703 : page 7 

lawyer, Joseph Rabinowitz, a man of high reputation among his 
people. For many years the social and religious status of his people 
has been an object of deep concern to him, and in 1880 he 
published a program in which he advocated a complete 
reorganization of the Rabbinical system. He was further active in 



the work of a society for the promotion of agriculture among the 
Jews of Southern Russia; and during the days of persecution in 
1882 earnestly advocated the return of his people to Palestine. 
During that period the change in his religious convictions took 
place. It was not the result of Christian mission work, nor is he a 
convert in the ordinary sense of the word. The change was 
gradually effected, and only after long deliberation did the thought 
of organizing Christian congregations of the Jewish nationality 
assume maturity in his mind. After his return from Palestine his 
conviction was: "The key to the Holy Land lies in the hands of our 
brother Jesus." In the words "Jesus our Brother" lies the kernel of 
his religious views. His work has been successful, and now there 
are no less than two hundred families adhering to this new Jewish 
Christianity, and recently the Pesach festival was celebrated in 
accordance with the liturgy drawn up by Rabinowitz. 

Prof. Franz Delitzsch, of Leipzig, the leader of Jewish missions in 
Germany and editor of the Saat auf Hofnung, a quarterly devoted to 
this work, has just published a pamphlet of about seventy-five 
pages on this new religious development, the largest space in which 
is occupied by original documents, in both the Hebrew and the 
German translation, on this movement. These documents embrace 
thirteen theses: a confession of Faith of the National Jewish Church 
of the New Testaments; an Explanation of the Faith in the Messiah, 
Jesus of Nazareth, in the sense of this congregation; a Haggada for 
the Israelites believing on the Messiah, Jesus of Nazareth; and, 
finally, an Order of the Lord's Supper. As appendices are added a 
declaration of a teacher, Friedmann, to the Jewish believers in 
Christ, and a declaration adopted by a conference of the latter, held 
in March of the present year in Kischinew. The little pamphlet thus 
contains all the materials for a study of the new movement, as these 
are all original documents by its advocates. 

The theses, which are to be regarded as the basis of the new faith, 
start out with the deplorable state of the Jews in Russia, and 
maintain that the endeavors at improvement on the part of the Jews 
themselves have proved futile. "There is need of a deep and inner 
moral renewal, of a spiritual regeneration. We must cast aside our 
false gods, the love of money as such, and in the room thereof must 
establish in our hearts a home for the love of truth as such, and for 
the fear of evil as such." For this, however, a leader is necessary. 
Who is he to be? In Israel none can be found. "The man who 
possesses all the qualifications of a leader— love of Israel, 
sacrificing of life, pureness, deep knowledge of human nature, 
earnestness in the exposal of the sins and evils of his people-we 
have, after careful research in all the books of the history of our 
people, found only in one man, in Jesus of Nazareth." The wise 
Israelites in his day could not understand him; "but we, in the 
present year (5644) can say with a certainty that he, Jesus, he alone 
has sought the welfare of his brethren. Therefore we should sanctify 
the name of our brother Jesus." "We should receive the gospel 
books into our houses as a blessing, and unite them with all the 



Holy Scriptures which were handed down to us by our wise men." 
The last thesis reads: "We hope confidently that the words of our 
brother Jesus will bring us, as fruit, righteousness and salvation; 
and then the hearts of the people and the government will be turned 
to us in friendship, we shall have life and prosperity like other 
nations who live in safety under the shadow of European laws, 
framed in the spirit of our brother, who has given his life in order to 
make the world happy and remove evil from the earth! Amen." 

The rest of these documents are in the same vein, and all show that 
the movement is, as yet, guided by an undefined and crude idea. 
The Jewish character is stamped on its brow; but who will deny that 
great possibilities lie, in germ, in it? It will, doubtless, be wise to 
heed Delitzsch's admonition to withhold judgment for the present 
and await further developments. He closes his preface to his 
pamphlet with the words, "Spoil it not. There is a blessing in it."— 
N.Y. Independent. 

Bishop Titcomb, of the English church in Northern and Central 
Europe, in a letter to the London Times, mentions this same 
movement, and gives the following as one of the most noteworthy 
of a series of articles of faith which they have drawn up: 

"According to the decree of the inscrutable wisdom of God, our 
fathers were filled with hardness of heart, and the Lord punished 
them with the spirit of deep sleep, so that they opposed Jesus Christ 
and sinned against him until the present day. But by their unbelief 
they led other nations to greater zeal, and they thus contributed to 
the propitiation of mankind, who have believed in Jesus Christ, the 
son of David, our king, when they heard the good tidings through 
the peace-promising messengers (Isaiah 52:7), who had been 
disgracefully expelled from communion with Israel. In 
consequence, however, of this our sin against the Christ of God, the 
world has grown rich by its faith in Christ, and the nations in 
fullness have entered the kingdom of God. Now, too, the time of 
our fullness has also come, and we, the seed of Abraham, are to be 
blessed by our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; and the God of our 
forefathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, will take pity upon us and 
replant the branches which have been torn out, into our own Holy 
Root— Jesus. And thus all Israel shall share the eternal salvation, 
and Jerusalem, our Holy City, shall be rebuilt and the throne of 
David be reestablished forever and evermore." 



R704 : page 7 

OUR JUDGMENT. 

FROM THE DIVINE AND HUMAN STANDPOINTS. 

For the time past... may suffice us to have wrought the will of the 
Gentiles. ..wherein they think it strange that ye run not with them 
...speaking evil of you.. ..For this cause the gospel was preached 



also, to them that are dead, that they might be judged, according to 
men— in the flesh, but according to God in the Spirit.— 1 Pet. 4:3-6. 

Our explanation of the above Scripture is asked. We understand 
verse 5 to be a parenthesis, and hence in arriving at the direct chain 
of the Apostle's argument, it should be for the time ignored. To 
bring the important points of the argument closer together, we have 
arranged the quotation as above. 

The consecrated child of God has not only realized justification 
from sin through Jesus' imputed righteousness, but in his 
consecration he has given up —sacrificed— his justified human 
nature, and henceforth, according to God's instruction, he reckons 
himself no longer of the human nature, but a "new creature in 
Christ Jesus," a partaker "of the divine nature." And God so reckons 
him. 

Hence God judges of such, not according to the flesh, but according 
to their spirit or mind, and as new creatures, spiritual; while by men 
this class is misunderstood, for they think of you as of other men— 
in the flesh— and hence think strange that you are not controlled by 
the same desires and ambition as themselves. 

It was to produce this very distinction in you that the gospel was 
preached to you, who are dead to the world, that you might have 
Christ formed within you— his mind and principles, and that thus 
you might be so different from the world, that they, not 
appreciating the real cause of the change, but still regarding you as 
"of the fleshy nature," may think strange of you and misconstrue 
your motives, and hate you, and buffet you, and thus try you and 
make you meet for the inheritance of the saints in light. 
Nevertheless, remember that God recognizes you as a new creature, 
and will judge of all your course accordingly. You may know then, 
that your faith and patience he will appreciate, and that "your labor 
is not in vain in the Lord." 



R704 : page 7 

A SECOND CHANCE. 

A subscriber sends us the following extract from a paper, which 
attempts to demolish Peter's statement, that following our Lord's 
second advent there will be "times of RESTITUTION of all things, 
spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began, 
(Acts 3:21). It says: 

"Now the trouble about all this is found in the fact that such 
teachers as John the Baptist and our Lord appear to have known 
nothing about this "second chance." John's text was "Repent, for the 
kingdom of heaven is at hand." He spoke of the ax being laid at the 
root of the tree. He referred to One coming with a fan in his hand, 
gathering the wheat into his garner, but burning the chaff. Jesus 



took the same text, and indorsed the doctrines of John most 
positively. In his parable about Dives and Lazarus nothing appears 
looking to a "second chance": and, in the sentence pronounced in 
the Judgment scene, nothing favors the theory in question. One of 
two things is very certain: either Jesus and John knew nothing of 
probation after death, or if they did, they trifled with their hearers; 
for nobody who heard them preach, had any other impression than 
that now was the accepted time, and to-day the day of salvation." 

If a man should pick up an almanac and read throughout, its 
description of the weather to be expected from January to 
December, and should apply all its predictions of frost, hail, snow, 
rain, and thunderstorms to a single July day he would obtain but an 
imperfect idea of the kind of weather to be expected. Yet not more 
mixed than this seems the indiscriminate use of Scripture 
statements by the writer of the above and others. Truths concerning 
the next age are mixed with those of the past and present, and the 
result is great confusion, and a selection of such parts from all as 
will best suit preconceived ideas. We cannot suppose that a man 
who had the first idea of what the symbols— ax, tree, garner, chaff, 
wheat, fan, etc., mean would apply them as they are used above, or 
blend them in any way with the parable of Dives and the Judgment 
scene of Matt. 25. 

Let us pull straight the tangle before considering a "second chance." 

Both our Lord and John were speaking of the Jewish polity, when 
they compared it to a tree at whose root lay an ax. The end of 
special favor to that nation had about come, and if in the little while 
of Jesus' ministry they should fail to bring forth good fruit, they 
would be cut off from the root of promise, and believers from the 
Gentiles would be grafted in instead, (Rom. 11:17). It was the 
harvest time; for their age had reached its full. Jesus was present to 
select with his "fan" of truth, the wheat from among the chaff and 
"garner" it in the Gospel age, while a time of "fire" or tribulation 
came upon the chaff remainder of the nation, and as a nation, 
burned them up. 

Dives, a representative, in parable, of that people, so long peculiarly 
favored of God, faring sumptuously every day of God's special 
favors, has for some time been looking longingly for aid to the 
Gentile whom once he despised, but who now has been exalted to 
favor— Abraham's Bosom— and though once wild and ungoverned, 
has become the favored branch out of the Abrahamic olive root of 
promise. 

The Judgment scene referred to (Matt. 25), is the only point which 
bears at all upon the question of "second chance." It applies to the 
Millennial age, and is clearly described as being after the Lord has 
come the second time and established his kingdom (church) in 
power and great glory. Then the nations shall be judged or tried and 
rewarded, (Matt. 25:32.) When that scene has transpired, there will 
assuredly be no hope of further trial-no further chance. 



Let us now hastily glance at the statement made in the above— "John 
the Baptist and our Lord appear to have known nothing about this 
'second chance.'" 

Our Lord certainly knew that because of one man's transgression, 
sin and death had passed upon all men (Rom. 5:16,18), 
consequently man's FIRST CHANCE in Eden had resulted in total 
loss. He failed and lost all in the first chance, being tried 
representatively in Adam. All were condemned. That Jesus knew 
this, and came into the world to redeem all men in order that all 
men might have a SECOND CHANCE, is clear, from his statement 
that he came "to seek and to save that which was lost." 

As the expression, "which was lost," tells the tale of the first chance 
and its failure, so the words "seek and save" proclaim a second 
chance to all the lost. 

Who can reasonably dispute that the opportunity which comes 
through Jesus is a second chance? You and I had nothing whatever 
to do in the first chance of life offered to the race; we have to do 
only with the second. If then, you and I, fellow-believers, got our 
present or second chance of life through the ransom that Jesus gave 
for our sins, redeeming us from the first loss, shall we say that he 
was a ransom only for the small minority of mankind who have 
thus far heard of it and believed? or shall we conclude that "He is 
the propitiation [satisfaction or covering] for our sins; and not for 
ours only, but also for the sins of the WHOLE WORLD"? (1 Jno. 
2:2.) 

Accepting this as the truth, is it not absolutely certain that the nine- 
tenths who have not yet heard, and hence not yet had the "second 
chance" Jesus' death was designed to provide, will surely have it in 
God's due time? Is not this fact clearly stated by the Apostle Paul 
when he says that Jesus "gave himself a RANSOM [equivalent 
price] for ALL, to be testified in due time"? 

The gospel age now closing is not the world's due time; it is the 
time appointed for the selection or election of a little flock out from 
the world, who, with Jesus, shall soon take (the "purchased 
possession") the dominion of earth out of the hands of Satan, the 
present "Prince," and give judgment or trial to the world-its second 
trial— the great blessing so long promised. The great Prophet shall, 
in that Millennial day, speak to the people, and "they that hear shall 
live," becoming his sheep and coming to his right hand of favor; all 
others, as willful goats, being cut off, (Acts 3:22,23.) And none 
claim more strenuously than we, that now is the acceptable time. 
That the Gospel Age is a special season, during which the Christ — 
the world's deliverer shall be selected, proved and fitted for their 
great work as the Seed of Abraham (Gal. 3:29) to bless all the 
families of the earth. Now is the only time to secure this high 
calling. Now is the time of sacrifice, the only time when such 
sacrifices are acceptable to the Lord. 



R705 : page 7 



ZION'S WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY. 

If our charter is granted in a few days as we expect, voting 
certificates will at once be issued to all whose donations to the 
Society's funds shall aggregate Ten Dollars or more. Each ten dollar 
donation representing one voting share according to our charter. 

A few have evidently misunderstood the matter of obtaining a 
Charter and feared it was either an attempt to obtain protection or 
recognition, from a government of this world; or an evidence of 
lack of trust that God could and would carry forward his own work 
no matter who lived or died. 

These are mistaken ideas. While we trust fully to the Lord's care of 
His own cause, it is our duty to so arrange our affairs and His, that 
in case of one death it would not require miraculous interposition to 
prevent disputes, and law suits from swamping the Society and 
annoying our successors in its management. So far as the 
Government is concerned we ask only those rights which it accords 
to aliens as well as citizens. And a charter such as we are asking for 
is such a right; it brings us under no obligation whatever. 



page 7 

LANDS SELECTED. 

The following plots of the donated Florida land have been 
selected: Please refer to last month's Supplement and cross them 
out:-viz. Plots No. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 30, and 35. 



R705 : page 8 

HOW READEST THOU? 

The doctrine of atonement and reconciliation to God by the death 
of Christ implies that it was his death which constituted the 
reconciling act. It must be conceded that if the natural death of 
Jesus on the cross paid the penalty, then it was natural life only that 
man forfeited by disobedience. If both of these claims be true, then 
all men, according to Scripture, were, on the death of Christ, at 
some time entitled to a resurrection. Now, in the light of these facts, 
we should desire an explanation by substitutionists of 1 Cor. 15:17- 
18. There the Apostle is credited with saying: "If Christ be not 
raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins. Then they also 
which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished." If the doctrine of 
substitution be true, these two verses cannot be. If, as is claimed, 
the death of Christ paid man's penalty, then, whether Christ be 
raised or not, man could not justly be in his sins. Moreover, if 



Christ's death entitled man to a resurrection, and this, 
substitutionists claim, then neither those in Christ nor out of him 
could have perished because of having previously fallen asleep. — 
Day Star. 

OUR REPLY. 

The force of this expression, "If Christ be not raised, your faith is 
vain; ye are yet in your sins: then they also which are fallen asleep 
in Christ are perished," lies in the fact that if Christ was not raised, 
he was dead, and could have no power to bless the families of earth, 
as he had purposed. The death of Christ as purchasing mankind, 
would still be a grand expression of his love, even though he had 
never arisen from the dead to dispense the blessings which his 
ransom-sacrifice gave the right to bestow; for "Greater love hath no 
man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends." But it 
would have been waste and loss to purchase us had he not had in 
view a resurrection, which would enable him to bless those bought. 

But again, according to the types of the sin-offering, If the High 
Priest performed his sacrifice in a manner acceptable, so that its 
sweet perfume filled the Most Holy, then he should LIVE beyond 
the vail and could come forth to bless those for whose sin he had 
made sacrifice; and if he lived not, it was an evidence that his 
sacrifice for sins had not been properly done, and was not 
acceptable to Jehovah, and no blessing nor remission of sins could 
come from such a sacrifice. 

Thus seen, Paul's argument is this: Christian friends, you occupy an 
unreasonable, a ridiculous position when you say (verse 12) that a 
resurrection of the dead is an impossibility. If it is an impossibility, 
then is Christ not risen: and if so, why do you talk about being 
forgiven your sins and having hopes through him for the future? A 
dead Christ— one not raised from death— can never bless you; 
wherefore, if you accept the good news of redemption and blessing 
through Christ, be consistent and admit also a resurrection of Christ 
and the resurrection for all through him. 

Jesus' work for mankind is greater and grander than some seem able 
to grasp. He bought us with his own precious blood— substituting 
himself as a man for the race of men, tasting death for every man. 
But this purchase of mankind was only a means to an end— he 
bought the race that (in due time) he might have the legal right to 
RESTORE it to perfection. Hence, both the death of Christ was 
necessary for our purchase, and his resurrection was essential to the 
carrying out of the blessed plan for our restoration to harmony with 
Jehovah. 

Other statements of the same Apostle prove that he recognized fully 
the necessity both of the death to purchase and of the resurrection to 
confer the blessing upon those purchased. He says of Jesus, "Who 
was delivered [into death] for our offences, and was raised again for 
our justification"— i.e., in order that he might justify us. (Rom. 



4:25.) And again, "If while we were enemies we were reconciled to 
God by the DEATH of his Son, much more [easily believed, is the 
promise that] being reconciled we shall be saved [recovered fully, 
from the imperfections and penalties of sin] by his life. " (Rom. 
5:10.) 

It was impossible for the Apostle, as well as for us, to state every 
feature of the plan at once; hence, in treating of the resurrection in 
the passage above cited by our contemporary, he does not allude to 
the value of the death of Christ. But blind indeed must be the 
reader, if he has not seen that Paul and every other Apostle and 
prophet laid great stress upon the death of Christ as a ransom for 
all, the only BASIS of hope for blessings through him. 

Here let us remind our readers that those who deny that Jesus "gave 
himself a ransom for all" should give some reason for his death— an 
adequate reason for so great an event. To say that he died as we die, 
because of sin and imperfection, is to deny the testimony of 
Scripture, that he was holy, harmless and separate from sinners, and 
had no cause of death in him. To claim that he died merely as our 
example (to show us how to die?) is to furnish an inadequate 
reason, for there are many noble examples furnished in Scripture of 
those who laid down their lives for the truth. (Heb. 1 1:37,38). 

The only adequate reason for Jesus' death is repeated over and over 
again in Scripture, viz. : that we being condemned to death, he took 
our nature that he might "taste death for every man." "He died for 
our sins," "redeemed" us, "purchased" us, "bought us," giving 
himself "a ransom [equivalent price] for all." 



R706 : page 8 

LET TRUTH PREVAIL. 

Latrobe, Pa., Oct. 28th, 1884. 

DEAR BROTHER R.:— I send you by this mail a copy of a paper 
loaned me by an infidel neighbor. When done with it please return 
it to me. 

Read the article headed "Col. Ingersoll Catechized." Somehow I 
can not help feeling an interest in these honest, earnest, truth- 
seeking men far above what I can for the bigoted and superstitious 
upholders of orthodoxy. We believe much in common, and I can 
not help but respect such men as Putman, Ingersoll, and Chainey 
more than many of the preachers in Babylon. They show more 
candor, firmness and honesty. They are more noble. They manifest 
a better spirit, yes, such as Christians might well imitate. Notice 
Ingersoll's reply to the question, "Do you consider that churches are 
injurious to the community?" 

What a moderate yet truthful answer is given, all of which we can 
accept save one word— "miraculous." 



I don't know whether it would be prudent for you to publish the 
article referred to in Z.W.T., but I feel as though I would like every 
one of its readers to see it-knowing how they would appreciate the 
jewels of truth with which it abounds. 

Truly, these are trying times for the Christian blinded by the creeds. 
I cannot see how any of them who will think, investigate, and read, 
can escape infidelity. They can't answer it from their standpoint. 

How glad I am that my eyes were opened in time, else certainly 
such men as Ingersoll could have converted me to infidelity. The 
only safety for the intelligent church member is his bigotry and 
blindness. It keeps him orthodox, but as WE see orthodoxy, it is 
little better than infidelity. In fact both are the result of Spiritual 
blindness. I guess the blindest of the two and the most bigoted, is 
the stickler for orthodoxy. 

Since my return from our pleasant visit with you, I have betimes 
felt homesick. I long to behold him in glory. I long for the reign of 
him who will scatter darkness and ignorance, and bless all with 
truth. 

I have written in haste. "Mid scenes of confusion and creature 
complaints, How sweet to my soul is communion with saints." 

Yours etc., . 

We clip the paragraph referred to by our brother from the 
published interview between Mr. Ingersoll and the Editor of the San 
Franciscan. This is a fair sample of the spirit of the entire 
interview:- 

Question:-Do you consider that churches are injurious to the 
community? 

Ingersoll:-In the exact proportion that churches teach falsehood; in 
the exact proportion that they destroy liberty of the thought, free 
action of the human mind; in the exact proportion that they teach 
the doctrine of eternal pain, and convince people of its truth— they 
are injurious. In the proportion that they teach morality and justice 
and practice kindness and charity— in that proportion they are a 
benefit. Every church, therefore, is a mixed problem— part good and 
part bad. In one direction it leads towards and sheds light; in the 
other direction its influence is entirely bad. 

Now I would like to civilize the churches so that they would be able 
to do good deeds without building bad creeds. In other words, take 
out the superstitious and the miraculous, and leave the human and 
the moral." 

The following letter from another of this class, shows how the spirit 
of candor and reasonableness is appreciated. And we rejoice to 
know that others of doubtful hearts have been and are being led 
through careful study of the harmonious plan of God, as we now 
see it, to exclaim with us "My Lord and my God," and to trust in his 
precious promises. We wait with patience the promised hour when 



all the doubting Thomases will be given tangible evidence of the 
truth of God. 

Behold we bring good tidings of GREAT JOY which shall be to 
ALL PEOPLE. 



New York, Oct. 18, 1884. 

C. T. RUSSELL:— Dear Sir:— My wife is a subscriber to your 
"Watch Tower." I am a free thinker: But I want to thank you for the 
impartial way in which you have treated your opponent Col. 
Ingersoll, in the issue of this month. You have done what I have 
never before seen in a religious journal— before passing criticism 
on what Col. Ingersoll said in his lecture on "Orthodoxy," you have 
squarely, honestly and in a manly way printed what he said, and for 
this act of fairness, I for one wish to express my thanks. I am sir, 

Very truly yours, 



Truth is truth, from whatsoever source it may come; and he who 
loves and cherishes the fragments which he is able to discern 
amidst the rubbish of prevailing error, is ever worthy of our respect 
and esteem. Would that all "Free-thinkers" were free indeed. "The 
truth shall make you free"— "If the Son shall make free ye shall be 
free indeed." 



R706 : page 8 

THE RIDICULOUS SITUATION. 

The following preamble and resolutions have been adopted by the 
Chicago group of the International Association; 

Whereas, many thousands of people in Chicago are hungry because 
of a so-called over production of food products. 

Whereas, There are many thousands of people of Chicago in rags 
because of a so-called over production of clothing. 

Whereas, There are many thousands of people in Chicago who have 
no employment, because a few have no need of their services. 

Whereas, The gamblers in bread on the Board of Trade propose to 
raise the price of bread by feeding the surplus wheat to hogs, sheep 
and cattle; therefore, 

Resolved, By the International Working People's Association, that 
the hungry, naked, and unemployed, should organize and take some 
action by which they can remove the so-called "overproduction," 
which subjects them to the evils that make existence precarious and 
life miserable. 



The Chicago Alarm, in referring to the foregoing preamble, says: 



"The ridiculous situation that requires men to freeze because there 
is too much coal in the country, and starve because there is too 
much bread in the country, and go naked because there is too much 
clothing in the country, and lie out-doors because there are too 
many houses in the country, cannot always continue, especially 
when we know that the natural ingenuity of invention is constantly 
and rapidly increasing this over-supply, glutted markets, and forced 
idleness."— John Swinton's Paper. 



R705 : page 8 

"IT IS MY WAY." 

Many people, when reproved for an improper word or action, 
excuse or justify themselves by saying, "It is my way." Is this a 
proper ground for justification? Let us see what the Scriptures say 
about it? 

The Lord says, "Amend your ways." — Jer. 7:3. If our ways are not 
right they should be amended, and not justified. The weeping 
prophet says, "Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto 
the Lord."— Lam. 3:40. The Lord calls us to consider our ways. 
(Hag. 1:5,7.) By careful consideration our ways may not appear 
excusable. 

But the fact that certain ways are our own ways, should be no 
excuse for retaining them, but rather a reason for rejecting them. If 
we should honor God, we would not do our own way, (Isa. 58:13). 
"For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my 
ways, saith the Lord."— Isa. 55:8. Of the wicked he says, 
"Destruction and misery are in their ways."— Rom. 3:16. In pleading 
with Israel he says, "Thou shalt remember thy ways and be 
ashamed."— Ezek. 16:61. The psalmist asks, "Wherewithal shall a 
young man cleanse his way?" and the answer is given, "By taking 
heed thereto according to thy word."— Ps. 1 19:9. His own 
experience is given in verse 104: "Through thy precepts I get 
understanding; therefore I hate every false way." The law of God is 
a detector of false ways, therefore we should test all our ways by it. 
If they are not in harmony with this rule let us not extenuate nor 
follow them, but "ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and 
walk therein."— Jer. 6:16.— Sel. 



R705 : page 8 

"The nearer a soul is to God, the less its perturbations, as the point 
nearest the center of a circle is subject to the least motion." 



"WHATSOEVER we bestow let it be given with a cheerful 
countenance; a man must not give with his hand and deny with his 
heart." 



ARE we growing in the knowledge of what Christ is to us? It is a 
happy life this; for it is not a mere self emptying, it is a process of 
Christ filling." 



page 8 

BIBLE STUDENT'S HELPS. 

YOUNG'S GREEK, HEBREW AND ENGLISH CONCORDANCE. 

This work is at once a Greek and Hebrew Lexicon giving the 
meaning of the original terms in English, and also a Concordance 
giving each word of Scripture and the words which they translate. 
The value of the work is becoming more apparent daily, as theorists 
attempt to palm off a private interpretation under a guise of "a 
better definition of the original." 

In this superb volume every word is arranged under its own Hebrew 
and Greek original, exhibiting 311 ,000 references and 30,000 
various readings. Its size is large quarto, 1094 pages. 

A similar work, "Englishman's Greek and Hebrew Concordance" (3 
vols.) sold at $22, in cloth binding, only seven years ago, and 
usually reached only the hands of scholars; but the present work, by 
one of the ripest scholars of the age (Prof. Young, of Edinburgh, 
Scotland), has been printed in immense quantities, and its present 
price brings it within the reach of almost all self-sacrificing 
students. Indeed, it seems providential that it should be provided so 
cheaply at a time when it can be of so great service to truth-seekers. 
No Bible student can afford to be without a copy. It is of more 
value than two years' study of the Greek and Hebrew languages. 

The regular price was for a time depressed by competition, but now 
the English publishers have obtained full control and put the price 
at $5, which they claim is but half its value. 

Knowing beforehand of the advance, we have made such 
preparation as enables us to offer about 100 copies to our 
subscribers at $2.25 each. If sent my mail, the postage should be 
added, viz.: 54c, and 10c. additional if you wish it "registered." 
This is the latest revision.-"THE AUTHOR'S EDITION." 

We cannot send these to our European subscribers, because too 
heavy for the mail, and too expensive by express. 

There is an imperfect edition of this work on the market. Hence all 
should see that they get the "AUTHOR'S EDITION." 



THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 

For the benefit of new readers we would state that this is a Greek 
Testament. Under each Greek word the corresponding English 
word. It is thus the most literal translation of the New Testament. 
Besides this, it has in another column alongside a very clear and 
emphatic translation, showing the emphasis of the Greek, which is 
generally lost to the English reader. 

The regular price for the work in cloth is four dollars— which, 
everything considered, is not too high; but by special arrangement 
we are enabled to offer it at $1.50 per copy to our subscribers. 

We cannot take postage stamps in pay, as we must pay cash. 



LEESER'S O.T. TRANSLATION. 

The Hebrews have prepared recently an English translation of the 
Old Testament Scriptures which we commend to those desirous of a 
critical translation for COMPARISON in studying. We have 
procured a small lot and can furnish them at $1.65 postpaid, which 
is less than the usual price. 



PITTSBURGH CHURCH MEETINGS. 

The place of meeting has been changed and is no longer at "Curry 
Institute Hall," but has removed to the "Grand Army Hall," No. 101 
Federal street, Allegheny City, just across the river. Readers and 
friends will be warmly welcomed at our new and more comfortable 
hall. Preaching every Lord's day afdternoon at 3.30 o'clock, and 
Bible Class at 2:30 o'clock of the same day. 


