From Our Readers
Single Parent Households  I greatly appreciated the article “Young People Ask . . . Will I Be Normal With Just One Parent?” (July 8, 1990) My father left us when I was only two years old. This affected my emotional development. I became hyperactive and could not make friends. I began suppressing all emotion and eventually was taken to a psychiatrist. So growing up in a one-parent household is not a favorable situation for all youths. But acceptance and understanding by fellow Christians, particularly peers, can lessen the stress some emotionally distressed youths feel. I really had to put myself out in order to gain such friends. And now, with a balanced schedule in which I spend time with my mother and newfound friends, I no longer feel sorry for myself because my family was “damaged.”
T. A., United States
Four years ago my husband ended our marriage. As I read the article with my daughter, she said: “Well, I feel normal. I just have parents in separate houses!” The article also made me feel normal as a single parent, lifting from me the burden of anxiety and guilt I felt toward my child.
J. C. P., United States
Carbohydrate Snacks  A special thanks for the small item on carbohydrate snacks. (July 22, 1990) I often prepare my family a pasta dish for lunch. I would become tired and need to rest afterward. Now I understand why. Changing our diet will take less of a toll on my physical resources and leave me better equipped for my afternoon evangelizing activities.
J. W., Federal Republic of Germany
European Ecumenical Assembly  Thank you for the article “Judged out of Their Own Mouth.” (March 22, 1990) By their own admission, religions of today have missed the theme of the Bible and failed to look to God’s Kingdom. You can truly say that ‘by their words they are condemned.’​—Matthew 12:37.
D. P., New Zealand
Rosary  What you say about the Rosary (June 8, 1990) is only half of the truth. A good part of the prayers are based on Bible stories or are direct Bible quotations. Saying the Rosary is therefore a good start for spiritual life. There are positive results, such as peace of mind and happiness in this world of problems.
H. W., Italy
The use of the Rosary is dear to the hearts of many sincere Roman Catholics. Nevertheless, our article focused on the issue of whether the practice is pleasing to God or not. And while a memorized prayer may contain Scriptural thoughts, remember that it was Jesus himself who said at Matthew 6:7, 8: “When praying, do not say the same things over and over again.”​—ED.
Asthma  I am grateful for the article on asthma. (March 22, 1990) I am 16 years old and have suffered from this disease almost since birth. I was unaware that emotional tension and certain foods could trigger attacks. Now I am going to put your advice into practice.
A. D., Spain
The article was of interest to me as a chronic asthmatic who has been rushed to a hospital by ambulance as many as 12 times in three months. I used to treat my asthma as an event rather than as a serious disease. But after suffering three respiratory arrests in one night, I decided to take my medication regularly. I have not been hospitalized now for three years.
S. M., Australia

