‘Our Shame Is Clear to the Whole World’
THE New York Times of July 20, 1990, carried a headline: “Canadian Prelate Quits in Clerics’ Sex Scandal.” What was the story? Yet another case of clergymen being accused of sexual abuse of boys. On this occasion the scandal was in the province of Newfoundland, Canada, and the clergy were Catholic. What made it different?
The Times reported: “The Archbishop of Newfoundland has resigned after charges that the Roman Catholic Church’s hierarchy ignored or failed to deal effectively with three years of scandal involving allegations of sexual abuse against altar boys, orphaned youths and others by Roman Catholic priests and church laymen.” First accused of gross indecency in 1979, one priest was recently sentenced to four years in prison after pleading guilty to 36 charges!
Usually these cases are hushed up, and no significant disciplinary action is taken. Perhaps a priest is transferred to another parish or duty, where the depravity might start again. On this occasion the archbishop was moved to resign after stating: “We are a sinful church. We are naked. Our anger, our pain, our anguish, our shame are clear to the whole world.”​—Compare Revelation 17:15-18.
A judicial inquiry showed that accusations had been made over a period of 15 years, but the police and government officials failed “to act decisively against the offenders.” And even worse, the church hierarchy failed to act decisively. They were accused of being more concerned about the offending priests than about the victims. Yet, what does the Catholic Bible say about such immoral practices?
Regarding those who committed perversion, the New American Bible, St. Joseph Edition, states: “God delivered them up in their lusts to unclean practices; they engaged in the mutual degradation of their bodies, . . . and the men gave up natural intercourse with women and burned with lust for one another. Men did shameful things with men . . . They know God’s just decree that all who do such things deserve death; yet they not only do them but approve them in others.”​—Romans 1:24-32.
What does the Catholic Bible say will happen to any such unrepentant ones? “Can you not realize that the unholy will not fall heir to the kingdom of God? Do not deceive yourselves: no fornicators, . . . no sexual perverts . . . will inherit God’s kingdom.” Yet, for such individuals there is a Bible-based discipline: disfellowshipping from the Christian congregation, even as Paul stated: “I wrote you in my letter not to associate with immoral persons . . . , not associating with anyone who bears the title ‘brother’ if he is immoral . . . It is clear that you must not eat with such a man. . . . ‘Expel the wicked man from your midst.’”​—1 Corinthians 5:9-13; 6:9, 10, NAB.

