From Our Readers
Parents Separating  Your article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Survive My Parents’ Separation?” (October 22, 1990) seemed to be made for me, and it encouraged me. I am 16 years old, and my parents are separated. At times I feel sad and depressed, but Jehovah is my intimate Friend, and he has helped me very much. I understand that it is of no use to worry obsessively over my parents’ separation. I have found good friends within the Christian congregation. I also find meetings and other Christian activities to be edifying.
D. B. G., Brazil
Hubble Trouble  Your comments in “Watching the World” (December 8, 1990) made it sound as if the Hubble telescope was a complete failure. However, they have overcome some of its initial problems, and it is able to see things with much greater clarity than earthbound telescopes.
D. N., United States
It was not our intention to call the Hubble telescope a “complete failure” but to call attention to the tremendous disappointment in the scientific community when the instrument’s primary mirror was found to have a significant flaw.​—ED.
Instant Gratification  Thank you very much for your articles entitled “Having It All, Having It Now!” (January 22, 1991) They seemed to be an answer to my sincere prayers and gave me much food for thought. I particularly appreciated the thought-provoking questions you asked. They will prove invaluable if I am tempted to follow a course of instant gratification.
P. D., United States
Awake! Commended  Literature that brings together subjects of extreme importance to our society (such as medicine, sociology, and ecology), that is put across in a nonpolitical way and with a slight religious touch, and that relies on the Book of books for its explanations​—such literature is very hard to find these days. I therefore request that it be officially recorded in the Minutes that Awake! receive a vote of praise, specifically for its November 8 and 22, 1990, issues about UFO’s and the immune system.
N. B., Municipal Council of Tietê São Paulo, Brazil
Immune System  I thought I understood the words of Psalm 139:14: “I shall laud you [God] because in a fear-inspiring way I am wonderfully made.” But thanks to your clear, concise articles on the subject “Our Immune System​—A Miracle of Creation” (November 22, 1990), I now know the full force of that scripture! The world of cells inside us is awe-inspiring. Our Creator’s works are truly wonderful. Thank you for your tireless, continuous research on these types of subjects. The articles were truly faith strengthening.
D. J., United States
The articles were simply delightful and very educational. While reading them, I couldn’t help but marvel at Jehovah and how wonderfully he made us. It’s hard to believe that some people think all of this happened by chance.
Y. S., United States
I do not know how to thank you for those marvelous articles. I have never heard or read an explanation so simple, yet detailed. Since I am ill with one of the diseases you mentioned, I can better understand what my doctor told me and deal with my health problem.
M. R. O., Brazil

