World Cup Soccer​—Sport or War?
By Awake! correspondent in Italy
THE world’s attention focused on soccer. From June 8 to July 8, 1990, the eyes of hundreds of millions of people were glued to their television screens to follow the event of the year​—the World Cup soccer championships held in Italy. A total worldwide television audience of 30,000,000,000 people watched in the course of 52 games​—that’s six times the world’s population!
This television spectacle was made possible by an unprecedented high-technology organization​—a TV production center serving 147 networks representing 118 nations, with 180 television cameras, 38 production units, and 1,500 technicians. Also present at the games, held in 12 Italian soccer stadiums, were 2,515,000 spectators and 6,000 journalists from all over the world. The figures, however, do not tell the whole story. In order to describe this gigantic “escape from reality,” as some termed it, writers, sociologists, psychologists, artists, and even theologians commented on the event.
However, did World Cup soccer contribute to international harmony and sportsmanship? United by their passion for this sport, did the millions of people who watched the games via satellite manage to overcome their nationalistic antagonisms during those 30 days? Did soccer serve as a force for unity?
Sport or War?
Let us consider just one aspect typical of so many modern sporting events​—violence. This phenomenon occurs frequently at soccer matches​—on the field, in the stands, and outside the stadium. Psychologists, sociologists, and journalists agree that in a world so intensely violent, sport is no exception. Fundamental moral values are being relentlessly subverted. As an attempt to whitewash the violent realities of modern sport, the use of phrases such as “sport is an honest encounter,” “the spirit of friendship,” or “brotherhood” doesn’t work.
The World Cup championship was no exception. Some time before they began, alarming reports were heard. “Violent Soccer Fanaticism Scares and the Tourists Desert Italy,” read a headline in La Repubblica 18 days before the first match. The most feared were the notorious hooligans, a segment of English soccer fans known all over Europe for their vandalism before, during, and after every game.a
The June 1, 1990, edition of Turin’s daily La Stampa analyzed the causes of the violence in the stadiums and the boorish behavior of the hooligans, commenting: “In the soccer tribe, by now there are no half measures. Adversaries are no longer just adversaries but ‘enemies’; a clash is not the exception but the rule, and it must be hard, as hard as possible.” But why? “‘Because we hate one another,’ answered some soccer hooligans from Bologna.” Attempting to explain the logic behind such hatred, sociologist Antonio Roversi said: “The stadium kids suffer from the ‘bedouin syndrome.’ Those suffering from this syndrome consider their friend’s enemies to be their enemies, their enemy’s friends to be their enemies, and, vice versa, the friend of a friend is a friend and the enemy of an enemy is a friend.”
Hatred, violence, rivalry, vandalism, the “bedouin syndrome”​—the World Cup soccer championships had yet to kick off, and already the atmosphere was that of a declaration of war. In spite of this, Italy prepared for the event in a festive mood.
Papal Blessing
Even the pope, who is not one to miss out on a massive audience, visited the World Cup “temple,” the refurbished Olympic Stadium in Rome, and blessed it. He said: “Apart from being a festival of sport, the World Football Championships can become a festival of solidarity between the peoples.” He added that modern sport must avoid terrible dangers, such as the obsessive quest for material gain, excessive emphasis on the spectacular, doping, fraud, and violence. He hoped “that the efforts and sacrifices made will make ‘Italia ’90’ a moment of growth in brotherhood for your fellow citizens and for all people.” Jesuit Paride Di Luca, an ex-soccer player, echoed the pope’s feelings in his ‘Soccer Fan’s Prayer’ when he said: “Come, O my God, and see the World Cup.”
But was the World Cup really a great festival? Would the God of the universe be concerned? Let us take a look at sport as it really is, at the values it exalts.
Sports Hooligans
Because of the hooligans, cities such as Cagliari and Turin lived under a state of siege for all of the first phase of the championships. Here are some of the newspaper headlines: “Rimini Shaken by the Warfare”; “Cagliari, War Breaks Out”; “Violence at Turin: A German and a Briton Knifed”; “A Day of Rioting Between English, German, and Italian Fans”; “Save Us From the English Fans​—The Mayor of Turin Launches an Appeal”; “Nights of Clashes Between Extremists. The Mayor: The Ones From Turin Are the Real Hooligans.” Here is another chilling example: “‘How to Stab an Opposing Fan’​—Published in England, the Manual of the Perfect Hooligan.” These headlines are enough to give a picture of the situation. But such things are only a natural product of a society that feeds on violence.
The great sporting event did not end on a happy note. The derogatory whistling of the Italian fans at the Argentinean team and its champion, Maradona, for having eliminated the Italian team, overshadowed the joy of the final and ruined the closing match. That July evening, there was no “great sporting brotherhood” in the Olympic Stadium; the World Cup “temple” was profaned. Il Tempo of July 10, 1990, commented: “Out on the field, they offended the game​—in the stands, they sullied the sport.”
A sad conclusion to an event that some had hoped would make the world a “global village” without barriers for at least 30 days. But if soccer cannot establish peace and harmony on or off the field, is it realistic to think that it can influence world peace?
A Balanced View of Soccer
La Stampa exalted soccer, describing it as “a sacred residue of ancestral struggles, the football as the symbol of unpredictability, the essence of all sporting contests.” Considering this line of thought, how should a sincere Christian view soccer? Indeed, how should a Christian view all professional sports?
‘Those who do not love soccer are missing something in their lives,’ Bertrand Russell is alleged to have said. Of course, playing soccer or any other sport may be both enjoyable and healthy, especially when so many people live a sedentary life. But does this mean that there are no dangers involved?
The Bible states: “Let us not become egotistical, stirring up competition with one another, envying one another.” (Galatians 5:26) The World Cup championships amply demonstrated how violence and the win-at-all-costs attitude often go hand in hand. This is the negative side of professional sports. In order to avoid such “works of the flesh,” Christians, both participants and spectators, must keep their spirit in check, especially concerning the desire to be number one. (Galatians 5:19-21) Remember the poet’s expression: “For when the One Great Scorer comes to write against your name, he marks​—not that you won or lost—​but how you played the game.”
Another aspect that should not be overlooked is the time factor. Are you among the millions of assiduous television viewers who spend endless hours watching sports events? In contrast, how much of your time do you spend doing physical exercise? Balance​—this is the key word. It means finding time for physical exercise and recreation, without neglecting the more important spiritual activities. The apostle Paul gave young Timothy counsel that is even more valid today: “Bodily training is beneficial for a little; but godly devotion is beneficial for all things, as it holds promise of the life now and that which is to come.”​—1 Timothy 4:8.
[Footnotes]
One explanation of the origin of the word “hooligan” states: “A man called Patrick Hooligan, who walked to and fro among his fellow-men, robbing them and occasionally bashing them.”​—A Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional English, by Eric Partridge.
[Picture Credit Line on page 10]
Photo Agenzia Giuliani

