Announcements
◆ Offer for May: ‘Know Jehovah’ book along with one booklet, for a contribution of 50c. June: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and Is This Life All There Is? (or some other small book) for a contribution of $1.25. July: God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good, for a contribution of 25c.
◆ District assembly lapel cards in English and Spanish and celluloid holders should be ordered on the Literature Order Blank. These are cash items.
◆ The Society is not arranging any convention tours. Those interested in details of assemblies overseas can write to the branch offices (not Brooklyn) for information. Branch office addresses appear in the back of the Yearbook.
◆ It is important for congregations that are incorporated to make sure that, if it is required by the state authorities that annual reports be made, this is done to ensure the continued existence of the corporation. There may also be a requirement that an annual request be made through some report for continued tax exemption. Lack of being alert as to these matters may cost congregations, not only legal existence of the corporation, but also tax-exempt status.
◆ There are still congregations unable to cover their assigned territory regularly. Also, in some areas congregations could be started with additional help from elders, ministerial servants and pioneers. We request that any whose circumstances would allow them to go elsewhere for a few weeks or on a permanent basis write the Society, supplying the information requested on page 135 of the Organization book. Please give your letter to the presiding overseer. He, along with the other committee members, will review it, and they will probably recommend that the branch office consider your availability. However, if anyone does not qualify, the service committee will kindly inform the applicant of the reasons why they cannot recommend him and they will not send the letter to the Society’s office. (Same basic arrangement as outlined for pioneers, per page 137 of the Organization book)
◆ The two Jersey City, N.J., Spanish-language district assemblies, July 10-13 and 17-20, have been canceled by the management. These have been replaced by one Spanish-language district assembly at Elmont, N.Y., July 31-August 3, 1975. Please note that all of the district assemblies listed in the February 1, 1975, Watchtower will be held as scheduled with the exception of the above change and that there are only two English-language district assemblies at Elmont, N.Y., August 7-10 and 14-17.
◆ New Publications Available:
“Make Sure of All Things; Hold Fast to What Is Fine”​—Efik, German, Italian
Sermon Outlines​—Greek
◆ Available Again in U.S.A.:
“Your Will Be Done on Earth”​—English
◆ Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
The Watchtower bound volumes for 1974​—English, Spanish
Awake! bound volumes for 1974​—English, Spanish
Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Divine Purpose​—Spanish
From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained​—Spanish

