Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
All of us who are enjoying a share in the evangelizing work are encouraged very much as we see how Jehovah is making everything grow. (1 Cor. 3:6) From our viewpoint here at Bethel, there has never been anything like it. Last year in the United States 81,588 persons were immersed; and this service year, to the end of February, 32,845 have been immersed already.
Distribution of literature containing the good news keeps increasing. The Brooklyn Bethel family who work in producing the Bibles and other books are personally aware of the growth. During the 1973 service year we were privileged to make 28 million copies. In 1974 we made 45 million. Amazingly, during the first six months of the present service year we have made 30 million books, including Bibles, but still there are some publications out of stock. As of March 1 we had unfilled orders on hand at Brooklyn for 32 million more books.
In trying to meet the demand for literature to use in the evangelizing work, the Bethel family at Brooklyn and Watchtower Farms was increased by about 400 members, so now there are over two thousand members in this family. New bindery equipment has been ordered that will double the production capacity, the bindery lines being increased from ten to twenty. A total of 85 new machines are being purchased this year for making books. Also five more rotary printing presses are on order.
As the new machinery comes in, there will be a real need for more single brothers to serve at Bethel and produce publications for the evangelizing work, so we extend an invitation to those who are in good health and willing to do this kind of service to write to Office of the President, 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201, requesting an application. The age requirement for these single brothers is that they were born in 1956 or prior thereto and are not over 35 years old. Are you one who can join our family and help to supply your brothers with needed things to do the evangelizing work? We hope to welcome many more into the Bethel family in the near future, for we have faith that Jehovah will continue to make the congregations grow.
Here at Bethel we find the increase exciting and we appreciate the privilege of serving you who are in the congregations everywhere. We pray that you will continue to have Jehovah’s blessing and good success in evangelizing with the good news for all mankind.
Your fellow servants,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

