Evangelize with the Welcome Good News
1 The birth of Jesus was good news to God-fearing persons who heard about it, news worthy of being announced far and wide. (Luke 2:10) Jesus proved to be the long-awaited Messiah, and he gave more good news to pass on to others​—the news of the Messianic kingdom that will bless all mankind.​—Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20.
2 Today the evangel we declare to all mankind tells of the Kingdom’s establishment. It is an exciting announcement. So all servants of Jehovah should have the evangelizing spirit! Are you taking advantage of your opportunities to be an evangelizer? Do you schedule time for field service? Are you striving to improve your ability and effectiveness as an evangelizer? Do you really cultivate interest and show a willingness to take on the responsibility of a Bible study? Truly, if we have the evangelizing spirit we will definitely schedule time to evangelize on a regular basis and we will constantly strive to improve in presenting the good news. We will also take advantage of the many opportunities to engage in informal witnessing, appreciating that we are servants of Jehovah all the time!
3 From May 2 through 11 we should schedule time to distribute Kingdom News No. 20, fittingly entitled “Would You Welcome Some Good News?” It would be fine if we could get a copy of this tract into every household in our territory. So plan to have a share in the tract distribution. For the rest of the month we will follow up on this special tract distribution by scheduling time for house-to-house work, using the book “The Nations Shall Know that I Am Jehovah”​—How?
4 Are you prepared to present the ‘Know Jehovah’ book? Why not arrange some practice sessions? And we do not want to overlook the new publishers, do we? Be sure to include them in some of your practice sessions and invite them to join with you in this most important evangelizing work.
5 Many new studies can be started during May as we follow up on the special distribution of the tract. Search out those who welcome the good news. For study, use whatever publication will interest the householder and answer his questions best.
6 What an exciting time in which to live and do evangelizing work! And what joy we have in seeing so many joining us in this work. So, keep your evangelizing spirit strong and help others to join us in this most important work of evangelizing with the welcome good news.
[Blurb on page 1]
Evangelizing with Good News for All Mankind.

