Get the Spiritual Benefits
1 The circuit overseer is coming! When that announcement is made in your congregation it is something special. Everyone​—elders and ministerial servants charged with responsibility in the congregation, all Kingdom publishers and the many new ones associated with the congregation—​should begin to think of how this provision through Jehovah’s organizational arrangement can be of spiritual benefit personally.
2 In the first century the Christian congregation and the traveling overseers looked forward to their opportunity to be together. (Rom. 1:11) Such a personal visit meant an opportunity to learn from an older brother in the Lord.
3 When the news reaches you that the circuit overseer is coming, it is a good time to think of your spiritual need. Is there something on which you would like to have spiritual help or counsel? In checking your service activity you may find that you have not been in the house-to-house work for several weeks. Is it because of some problem in making a presentation? Do you use the Bible in house-to-house service? The circuit overseer and his wife, if he is married, are doing this kind of work almost every day and have gained wonderful experience. So if you detect a need for improvement in your preaching work, plan on a definite time when you will be able to accompany one of the visitors in the field service.
4 Are you making return visits? Are you having any difficulties in starting home Bible studies? Especially in the afternoons there are excellent openings for making return visits with the circuit overseer or his wife. You may even enjoy having the circuit overseer or his wife conduct your home Bible study on this visit. This may be just the help you need.
5 Some of the publishers have found it possible to plan on doing temporary pioneer service at the time of the visit of the circuit overseer, and thus they are able to share in field service on more than one occasion during the visit.
6 The circuit overseers are older brothers who have some spiritual good things to impart in the meetings. Plan well ahead of time, keeping the dates clear, to be sure these spiritual benefits at meetings will not be missed. The congregation elders particularly have an opportunity to gain benefits from the visiting overseer. A definite outline of points to be considered should be prepared in advance for the elders’ meeting. If there are any problems to be overcome or things that the elders want to improve in the organization of the congregation or in the field, it will be a good time to raise these questions. Hence elders can wisely arrange time during the meeting for the circuit overseer to comment on points under consideration.
7 Congregation elders may wish to mention to the circuit overseer on the first day of his visit what they feel is needed in the way of help in their congregation. Thus the circuit overseer can take this into consideration in arranging his work during the week and may be able to aid some of those in the congregation who need it the most.
8 Use the visit to attract newly interested ones to the Kingdom Hall. The week of the visit should mean blessings to the organization in the field activity and in the congregational meetings. But beyond that, it can mean great personal spiritual blessings to every individual Kingdom publisher. Make the most of your opportunity and get the spiritual benefits.

