Presenting the Good News​—With the June Offer
1 Once again we have the pleasure of presenting the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures to people in our territory. During June we will offer it with the book Is This Life All There Is? for a contribution of $1.25. Here are a few suggestions you may want to try if you feel they would work in your territory.
2 If highlighting the Bible, you could say, after first identifying yourself: “Life is a very precious thing, isn’t it? [Allow householder to answer.] Yes, we enjoy being alive even though we may have problems. And isn’t it true that the more knowledge we gain about life and handling life’s problems, the happier we are? The best source of counsel on how to cope with life’s problems is God. We have his word in the Bible. But do you realize that God’s Word shows that the right kind of knowledge not only helps us now, but even leads to everlasting life? Note Jesus’ words at John 17:3. [Read.] Also, Jesus illustrated the need for us to put spiritual knowledge ahead of material needs at Matthew 4:4. [Read.] Our purpose is to encourage everyone to get the knowledge that leads to everlasting life. It is found right here in God’s Word. [Show Bible.] We leave this modern-English translation, the New World Translation, along with this Bible study aid Is This Life All There Is?, for a contribution of only $1.25.”
3 You may wish to highlight Is This Life All There Is? at some doors. It is easy to present and covers a variety of subjects. But here is a suggestion you could try, after identifying yourself to the householder: “Have you ever longed for good health, even perfect health, that would never leave you? [Allow householder to answer.] With perfect health, life could be so much more enjoyable. And did you know that God, at Revelation 21:1-4 in the Bible, promises us that the time will come when sickness and even death will vanish? [Briefly comment on verses 1-3 and lead into reading Revelation 21:4 if possible.] This is what people pray for when asking for God’s kingdom to come and his will to be done on earth. Wouldn’t you like to learn more about this wonderful promise? This new Bible study aid [show book] has an entire chapter with the title ‘An Earth Free from Sickness and Death.’ I am sure you will enjoy it. We leave it along with this modern-English Bible translation, both for only $1.25.”
4 Of course, you may find other ways to present the offer for June that are successful in your territory, and, if you do, then use them. Also keep in mind other Bibles to offer, such as the Diaglott, The Kingdom Interlinear Translation, Byington’s translation and the large-print edition of the New World Translation. When you make a return visit you may wish to show your own copy to someone who is interested. Also, some have found people who may be satisfied with their own Bible but who are interested in Bible study aids such as “Make Sure of All Things,” the “All Scripture” book or even the Aid book. So any of these excellent publications could be used in connection with the June campaign.

