Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING MAY 11
12 min: Song 92. Introductory comments and points from Branch Letter.
25 min: ‘Advertise the King and the Kingdom.’ Have certain book study groups prepared to comment on these points. Discuss the importance of zealously proclaiming the “good news.” The 1975 Yearbook, page 119, paragraph 2, to page 144, paragraph 2, will provide the basis for their comments. The publishers can center their conversation around the following questions: (1) What developments in 1919 proved that Jehovah wanted his people to be busy in advertising the King and his Kingdom? (Pp. 120-122) (2) How was The Golden Age used to spread the “good news”? (Pp. 123-125) During the period from 1919 to 1921 what publications were used in bringing the Kingdom message to people’s homes? (Pp. 125-128) (3) In view of what happenings in connection with printing operations can we say that the use of literature in the field has had divine backing? (Pp. 128-130) (4) How did the second Cedar Point assembly serve as a grand stimulus for increased activity in door-to-door preaching? (Pp. 131-135) (5) How have Jehovah’s servants on earth been involved in the fulfillment of thrilling apocalyptic prophecies? (Pp. 135-139) (6) How was the radio used to advertise the King and the Kingdom? (Pp. 139-144) In concluding, emphasize that it is a marvelous privilege to share in the field service​—a work being done under angelic direction. (Rev. 14:6, 7) This should certainly encourage us to continue zealously advertising the King and the Kingdom.
13 min: “Evangelize with the Welcome Good News.” A talk. Include any interesting experiences, especially in distributing Kingdom News No. 20.
10 min: Concluding comments. Mention number in congregation baptized this service year. With assembly time approaching, some may be considering baptism. Still time to consider the 80 questions in Organization book. Song 103.
WEEK STARTING MAY 18
15 min: Song 62. Introductory comments based on Question Box. Two elders discuss and show how overseers must teach in a variety of ways. A good example of an overseer who teaches is the circuit overseer.
30 min: “Get the Spiritual Benefits.” Discuss material with audience participation. Include following demonstration:
Family at home comments on announcement of circuit overseer’s visit. Very happy to learn of visit. Family head encourages all to review service activity to see how they could benefit. Son mentions his house-to-house work weak; hasn’t had much success recently, so has been making only return visits on Sundays. Could use help from circuit overseer on this. Daughter has no Bible study, would like to conduct one. Feels circuit overseer might help her on several calls possibly to start a study. Wife has been wanting to temporary pioneer and feels this would be a good time. Could work with circuit overseer and wife during week. Wonders how they could work it out. Father comments all could work together to help on meals and other chores. Could have light easy-to-prepare meal in evening rather than usual large dinner. Suggests they buy meat that could be used for several meals, making it quicker to prepare evening meal. All agree would be fine to work together and help so wife could temporary pioneer during visit. Father plans to work with circuit overseer on Saturday or Sunday. All agree visit should help them as a family to progress spiritually; looking forward to visit very much.
15 min: Concluding comments. May mention how last visit by circuit overseer helped. Include comments on day’s text and brief report on congregation accounts. Song 36.
WEEK STARTING MAY 25
10 min: Song 91. Introduction, including comments from audience on day’s text.
15 min: Talk on June theme, “Persisting in Faithfulness as Our Way of Life.”​—1 Cor. 4:2. Include several local experiences to illustrate faithfulness in face of difficult situations involving school, employment, etc. Also could interview one or two older brothers or sisters who have served faithfully for many years in Jehovah’s service.
18 min: “Presenting the Good News​—with the June Offer.” Audience discussion. Demonstrate paragraphs 2 and 3, showing how presentations would best fit local territory.
17 min: Concluding comments. Include appropriate Announcements. Mention that applications are available for any who decide to temporary pioneer during summer. Remind congregation to bring Organization book for next week’s service meeting. Song 35.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 1
10 min: Song 74. Introduction, also items from Theocratic News. Possibly read text and comments.
10 min: “Attend the ‘Divine Sovereignty’ Assemblies.” Brief talk, with some audience participation, covering points in article.
28 min: “Understand Deeper Things.” Question-and-answer coverage of article. Also include discussion of pages 100 and 101 of Organization book under the subheading “Congregation Book Study.” Show how congregation book study is valuable meeting that Jehovah has arranged.
Also include brief demonstration of publisher preparing for book study at home, speaking as one thinking aloud. First asks himself question at bottom of page, then repeats to be sure he understands it. Then he notes points in paragraph that would answer question and underlines key words as he notes them out loud. Observes Scripture reference not quoted, so takes Bible and looks up ‘reference, reading it out loud. Then asks himself: “How does this apply to paragraph?” Immediately sees point and comments on how it applies. [Publisher can do two paragraphs in this way if time permits.]
Chairman then encourages all to prepare in this way each week in order to participate, being sure they understand questions and looking up scriptures not quoted. Also parents should help children to prepare answers before coming to study. Conclude by encouraging all to attend book study every week to benefit from the deeper things Jehovah has for us to learn.
12 min: Concluding comments. Encourage all to finalize assembly plans, also to obtain ‘Know Jehovah’ book for book study if do not already have it. Song 107.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 8
Elders can arrange own program or adjust June service meeting schedule to allow for attending district assembly.

