Forward, You Ministers of the Kingdom!
“Do the work of an evangelizer, fully accomplish your ministry.”​—2 Timothy 4:5.
 1. What is the contrast between the spiritual condition of Babylon the Great and that of Jehovah’s Witnesses?
TODAY, in many lands, the spiritual pastures of false religion have withered and the waters on which Babylon the Great is sitting are drying up. It calls to mind a prophecy of Isaiah that is being fulfilled in our time, namely, that found in Isaiah 65:13: “Look! My own servants will eat, but you yourselves will go hungry. Look! My own servants will drink, but you yourselves will go thirsty. Look! My own servants will rejoice, but you yourselves will suffer shame.” This is so because Jehovah’s people indeed are seeking first the Kingdom, making every effort to see to it that the good news of God’s kingdom in the hands of his King-Son, Christ Jesus, is proclaimed earth wide.​—Revelation 14:6-8; 16:12; 17:5, 15.
 2. Who are under obligation to go forward as ministers of the Kingdom?
2 The commanding call in our day is ‘Forward, you ministers of the Kingdom!’ To heed this call as a body of followers of our Lord Jesus Christ all of Jehovah’s Witnesses, those in positions of oversight, as well as all others, men, women, young boys and girls, are under obligation to stand up for the kingdom of God. (Psalm 145:10-12; 148:12, 13; 2 Timothy 4:2, 5) This is so even though some, due to circumstances, are not able to do as much as others. Yet their activity calls to mind the widow who gave her all though it amounted to only two coins of small value.​—Luke 21:1-4.
 3. To what extent does mankind need the good news of the Kingdom at this time, and what does the Kingdom message include?
3 Does mankind today need the good news of God’s kingdom? Oh, how they need that good news! They need it, not only to bring an end to pain, sickness, sorrow and death, but also to bring an end to all unrighteousness, all wickedness, all crime, violence and war, yes, to bring an end to all injustice, all discrimination. (Isaiah 9:7) By our going forward as ministers of the Kingdom we are giving people something to hope for, something to sustain them until Armageddon puts an end to Satan’s system of things. Because of the increasing of lawlessness we must go forward, not only with a message of love and hope, but also with a warning message regarding ‘the day of vengeance on the part of our God.’​—Isaiah 61:2.
 4. What should be the primary motive causing one to be an active minister of God’s kingdom?
4 How, though, in a world filled with improper motivations and a prevailing spirit of self-interest, can we carry on with a spirit of self-sacrifice in being ministers of God to the world? First of all, in view of Jehovah’s loving-kindness expressed toward us, we should want to go forward out of love for him, out of appreciation for all he has done, is doing and will yet do for us. As the apostle John reminds us, to love God is to keep his commandments, and one of his commands is to preach the good news of his kingdom. (Matthew 24:14; 1 John 5:3) Too, Jehovah God is being blamed for mankind’s troubles and is being slandered as a God of eternal torment. Surely love for Jehovah, our loving heavenly Father, will move us to go forward as his ministers, helping to clear his name from such wicked slander.
 5. What additional motive do we have to cause us to go forward as God’s ministers?
5 Love for our fellowman will also cause us to go forward as ministers of the kingdom of God. Love for our neighbor will cause us to put his spiritual interests, his eternal destiny, ahead of our own creature comforts. Love will move us to cover our territory time and again and to do so thoroughly. Love will motivate us to make return visits and to accept the obligation of conducting weekly home Bible studies with lovers of truth. This means we want to be kind, long-suffering, mild and tactful, manifesting fellow feeling and empathy.
 6. How would neglecting our ministry rob us of joy?
6 Do we really believe God’s Word? It tells us that “there is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.” (Acts 20:35) If we neglect field service we show by our actions that we really do not believe those words of Jesus. We are also assured that ‘if we sow bountifully we will reap bountifully’ and ‘the generous soul will prosper’ and ‘he that waters will be watered.’ These are not mere pleasant platitudes but are inescapable truths and principles that test our love for Jehovah God and for our neighbor, our loyalty to God’s kingdom.​—2 Corinthians 9:6; Proverbs 11:25.
 7. How can a person prove himself free of the blood of all men?
7 But not only are the lives of others involved. We must go forward as ministers of God’s kingdom in order to be free from bloodguilt. Remember the words of Ezekiel 33:2-4: “Son of man, speak to the sons of your people, and you must say to them, ‘As regards a land, in case I bring upon it a sword and the people of the land, one and all, actually take a man and set him as their watchman, and he really sees the sword coming upon the land and blows the horn and warns the people, and the hearer actually hears the sound of the horn but he takes no warning at all, and a sword comes and takes him away, his own blood will come to be upon his own head.’” We want to be able to say as the apostle Paul did: “I am clean from the blood of all men.”​—Acts 20:26, 27.
How the Ministry Is Accomplished
 8. What questions are properly asked about how this ministry is accomplished?
8 How is it, though, that we go forward? In our own strength? With a proud, self-confident bearing? Trusting in the arm of flesh? Or, with the other extreme, being timid, half-hearted and manifesting the fear of man? Shall we go forward independently, ignoring the direction of those taking the lead among us? Absolutely not! There are three points especially to bear in mind:
 9. (a) How does one go forth in the ministry in the strength of Jehovah? (b) What direction does 1 Peter 3:15 give regarding our conduct in the ministry?
9 The first is: We go forward as ministers of God’s kingdom in the strength of Jehovah God, looking to his spirit to motivate us, to enlighten and strengthen us. Going forth in the strength of Jehovah we can manifest that freeness of speech, that outspokenness, that boldness that Peter and John manifested in dealing with the religious officials of their day. (Acts 4:13) At the same time we want to be careful to present our message with mildness of temper and deep respect.​—1 Peter 3:15.
10. (a) What does it mean for one to be a ‘clean bearer’ of the message of Jehovah? (b) What is the advice of Philippians 1:10, 11 in this regard?
10 The second is: We want to go forward as clean bearers of Jehovah’s message, in keeping with what we read at Isaiah 52:11: “Keep yourselves clean, you who are carrying the utensils of Jehovah.” Jehovah’s utensils today, the precious truths of his Word, are pure, clean, beautiful and righteous. So all of those bringing them to the people should keep themselves morally clean and spiritually beautiful. Are we not inviting people to clean themselves up morally, to get rid of the works of the flesh, as Jesus did, ‘calling sinners to repentance’? (Luke 5:32) Then should we not set them a fine example along these lines? Remember, Paul counseled the Christians at Philippi: “Make sure of the more important things, so that you may be flawless and not be stumbling others up to the day of Christ, and may be filled with righteous fruit, which is through Jesus Christ, to God’s glory and praise.”​—Philippians 1:10, 11.
11. (a) How important is grooming to a minister of God? (b) Whose good example should we be able to follow in this regard?
11 The third is: In going forward we should always want to be properly groomed. Why any servant of Jehovah should want to imitate the styles that characterize the immoral, rebellious elements of the Devil’s world is difficult to understand. Why try to be like the world that you tell people is coming to an end by the righteous acts of God? Why try to be like the world and so stand out as different from Jehovah’s people? Should we not, rather, appear like Jehovah’s people, and so stand out as different when among worldlings? Whom are we trying to please? Whose favor are we currying? Why not take a cue regarding well-arranged dress and grooming from the mature brothers and sisters who are among us in the congregations? Can we not take a hint and imitate their good example?​—1 Timothy 2:9; 1 Peter 3:3, 4, 16, 17.
12. While the house-to-house ministry may be difficult, what benefits does it provide for those sharing in it?
12 Granted, it is not easy for some to go from house to house with the good news of God’s kingdom. But the value and effectiveness of doing so has been demonstrated time and again. (Matthew 10:7, 11-13; Acts 20:20, 21) Our making good use of the house-to-house method of preaching has stamped it as a “trademark” of Jehovah’s true servants. And not only is it effective in our bearing witness to others, but house-to-house activity of itself benefits greatly all of us who engage in it. The very fact that our flesh may shrink from it makes it a victory every time a Christian minister engages in it.​—1 Corinthians 9:16, 27.
Family Care and Oversight
13. Added to one’s ministerial obligations, what responsibility falls upon many, calling for what balance?
13 Added to our obligation to be ministers of the Kingdom is another responsibility that falls upon those with families. Forward-going ministers of the Kingdom with families must, by reason of their God-given role as parents, teach their own children. Each year a goodly number of those who get baptized are young people whose parents reared them “in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.” (Ephesians 6:4) Sad to say, this obligation and opportunity has been neglected by some, to their great sorrow. Surely to be forward-going ministers takes balance. We do not want to neglect house-to-house activity with the excuse that we do informal witnessing; nor do we want to slight opportunities for informal witnessing because we go from house to house. Similarly, parents should not allow field service or congregation responsibilities and other duties to take up so much time that they neglect their families. After all, giving attention to both the family’s spiritual and material needs is their primary obligation.​—1 Timothy 5:8.
14. (a) How can those who are parents lose their investment of time, care and money in rearing their children? (b) What need continues in rearing children from infancy to young adulthood?
14 Yes, children require time, attention and money. It has been estimated that it takes thousands of dollars to raise a child to adulthood. A sure way to lose that investment of money, as well as of time, is to fail in giving proper spiritual oversight to those we bring into the world. The bumper crop of delinquent young people today attests to the fact that most children are left on their own by their parents. (Proverbs 29:15) Babies and small children often are fussed over by parents, relatives and others. ‘How smart they are! How pretty they are! Mother’s little girl, and Daddy’s little boy!’ All of that may be very true. But parents need to remember that as these children grow into the teenage years, and, thence, into manhood and womanhood, they continue to need care and attention, love and discipline, spiritual training and education. (Deuteronomy 11:18-21) That is the parents’ Christian responsibility. Ministers of God will not forget this obligation they have resting on their shoulders.
The Earth-wide Unity of God’s Ministers
15, 16. (a) How can we be sure the Kingdom message we preach is distinct and clarion-like to those hearing it? (b) What help do we have to assist us to speak in unity earth wide?
15 However, consider another responsibility of Christian ministers. “If the trumpet sounds an indistinct call, who will get ready for battle?” (1 Corinthians 14:8) With those words the apostle Paul called on followers of Christ to use their tongues in such a way that others could understand what is spoken. In our day if the message of the Kingdom we preach is to be distinct, a clarion-like call to mankind, then we must of necessity speak in agreement. Isaiah 52:8 says: “Listen! Your own watchmen have raised their voice. In unison they keep crying out joyfully.” To share in such a unifying call takes humility and brotherly love. We know that for our witnessing to be effective we must all preach the same message, featuring Jehovah’s name, his wisdom and love and his Kingdom as mankind’s only hope. At 1 Corinthians 1:10 Paul counseled that we all want to speak in agreement.
16 We must not let our message be muffled by any indistinctness. We have the command as ministers of God. Isaiah 61:1, 2 sets out clearly what our message is about. Jehovah’s faithful and discreet slave makes every effort to help us to speak with a unified voice, publishing Bibles and Bible helps in scores of languages so that people can be reached with a message that can be understood. We can do our part by seeking to spread the “good news” as a unified body of worshipers of Jehovah.​—Psalm 66:1, 2; 68:11.
Will We Spend the Time?
17. What honest self-examination should we make regarding our part in the ministry?
17 As to our individually going forward, could it be that we might make more progress in the amount of time we devote to our ministry? Each one of us who is a congregation publisher in good health and without the obligation of rearing children or taking care of aged loved ones would do well to ask: What is keeping me from the full-time service? Could it be a failure to appreciate fully the importance of the Kingdom ministry? Could it be a failure to have the spirit of self-sacrifice? If you cannot see your way clear to serve as a regular pioneer could you make room for the auxiliary pioneer service in your life? If you could do so you would certainly be moving forward as a Christian minister. Honest self-examination may reveal to you just what you individually can do in regard to increasing the time you spend each month serving the interests of the Kingdom government of our heavenly Father and his Son.​—Psalm 26:1, 2, 11, 12; Mark 12:28-34.
18. What will help us to maintain a good relationship with Jehovah and Christ Jesus?
18 Jehovah God and Jesus Christ have set the example for us by being forward-looking and forward-moving. For us individually to do the same we need, first of all, to have a good relationship with Jehovah God. Do we strive hard to keep a good conscience, never getting careless regarding anything that might defile our conscience? Do we make good use of the precious privilege of prayer, persevering therein? (Romans 12:12) Are we giving time to personal study and meditation? Maybe there are some changes due in our life-style so that we can give these more important things the attention they need, so that our ministry takes first place in our life in word and in deed.​—Ephesians 4:22-24.
19, 20. (a) What is the “word of God” discussed in Hebrews chapter 4? (b) How has this “word” proved to be alive and sharper than any two-edged sword, and why will we review some of the work done during the 1981 service year?
19 It is a pleasure to report that, worldwide, ministers of Jehovah have been busy and active in declaring this good news of the Kingdom in the past year. The message has made a deep and lasting impression on the lives of tens of thousands of persons. Wonderful changes have been made in the lives of such ones as a result of the transforming power of God’s Word. There is no doubt that the message of “good news” is alive and that it exerts power and is sharper than any two-edged sword. (Hebrews 4:2, 12, 13) Also, when the word of God does its good work in the hands of qualified ministers, then Jehovah’s name is glorified and his kingdom is put on high as mankind’s only hope.​—Ephesians 6:17.
20 To give you some insight as to what Jehovah’s Witnesses have been able to accomplish in the 12-month period of the 1981 service year, the information that follows will set out what has happened in that time due to the unified efforts of this small band of Christians operating in 206 lands and islands of the sea. (Proverbs 25:25) We are sure you will enjoy this quick review of the work of God’s ministers in this 20th century.
[Picture on page 18]
We look to Jehovah to strengthen us for his service
[Picture on page 19]
Well-arranged dress and good grooming befit Christian ministers
[Picture on page 20]
Forward-going ministers rear their children ‘in the discipline of Jehovah’
[Picture on page 21]
Elderly ministers of the Kingdom keep going forward

