How Can Religion Ease Tensions?
OPPRESSION, hunger, falling moral standards, drug abuse, the threat of nuclear war​—these are some of the issues being addressed by the political activism of some ordained ministers of religion. Clearly, all Christians are concerned about such matters. But is political involvement the way to ease world tensions?
Religious leaders get involved in politics because they want to set a “moral tone” or to warn when governments take the “wrong path.” What, though, when they take the wrong path themselves? Recently, for example, in the cause of Serbian nationalism, a Serbian priest bombed the home of a Yugoslav consul in the United States. Surely, such an act of terrorism is wrong, especially when committed by a priest! Regardless of what his motivations are, the priest claims to represent God. Yet God’s Word plainly cautions all who believe in Him: “Do not avenge yourselves, . . . for it is written: ‘Vengeance is mine; I will repay, says Jehovah.’” (Romans 12:19) Acts like that of the priest weaken the moral lead that some religions are trying to give.
Moreover, even in the Catholic Church, many have serious doubts about the priests and the nuns who get involved in revolutions. A Colombian Jesuit said: “The first people to suffer in an armed rebellion would be the poor themselves, not the clergy or the bishops. How can we support such a position?” The pope himself has tried to curtail certain political activism, saying that it is the duty of a priest or a nun to minister to the spiritual needs of the flock, rather than organize them for rebellion.
The contributions of the World Council of Churches to revolutionary groups similarly gave rise to controversy, particularly when it appeared that some of the groups receiving donations had a record of persecuting missionaries! The Salvation Army suspended its membership in the Council over the issue.
Even the Protestant pressure groups in the United States have been criticized. A magazine editor observed: “In the activities of the Christian right, all that remains of Jesus is his name.” Evidently the editor felt that by getting involved in politics, such persons were acting more like unscrupulous politicians than like ministers of religion. This reminds us of the admonition of the Bible writer James, that a true Christian should keep himself “without spot from the world.”​—James 1:27.
Hence, religious activism raises difficult questions in the minds of thinking persons. But what if religious leaders limit themselves to giving “discreet” advice on specific government policies? Even this causes problems, since these leaders give contradictory advice. It does nothing to relieve tensions.
In the United States, for example, some religionists encourage disarmament. Others, however, want to see their country have the “strongest military since Creation.” The Moral Majority works for the “survival of America,” along with its capitalist system. However, an official of the World Council of Churches wrote: “A world revolution is needed to deliver mankind from destruction, waste, exploitation and oppression, which the capitalistic system has generated.” He went on to praise the Cuban version of this “world revolution.”
Even in matters of sexual morality, religious leaders give differing opinions. So how is the outsider to know which is the “moral” standard to be maintained and which is the “wrong path” to be avoided? Is “right” or “wrong” dependent on the nation in which a person is born, the political party to which he belongs, the color of his skin or his economic status? Or has God set a standard that applies to everyone everywhere?
In many ways, religion’s involvement in politics has caused confusion rather than introducing a “godly” element into world affairs. Does this mean that religion has no role to play? Has it no contribution to make toward easing tensions in the world?
The Finest Way to Help
The fact is, true religion can make an enormous contribution. But in order to see what that contribution is, we must understand some basic facts.
First, in order to be of value, religion has to speak with God’s voice, not man’s. How can it do this? The Bible says: “All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness, that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.” (2 Timothy 3:16, 17) If a religious minister expresses his own opinion, even if he is holding a Bible in his hand, that opinion is of no more value than the opinion of anyone else. However, if what he says is actually what is stated in the Bible, or “Scripture,” it represents God’s thoughts.
Second, Jesus said: “My kingdom is no part of this world.” (John 18:36) Hence, the true, Bible-based religion is neutral as to the world’s politics. It is neither for nor against any nation, race, political system or economic arrangement. Christians are promoting God’s kingdom, not some “kingdom” of this world. A Christian should not take sides in the political disputes of this world any more than Jesus took sides in the festering controversies between the Jews and the Romans of his day.​—Mark 12:17.
Like Christians today, Jesus gave physical help to the sick and needy when he could. But he did not get involved in politics. His main work was preaching “the good news of the kingdom.” (Matthew 9:35) Preaching this same “good news” is the finest way that a Christian can help his neighbor in view of today’s difficult world conditions.
Why is this better than getting into politics? Because, as any realist must acknowledge, the problems of mankind will never be solved fully by political action, despite the diligent and sincere efforts of some politicians. It will take superhuman authority and power to eliminate poverty, sickness, corruption and all our other ills. And the Bible explains that such will be accomplished only by God through his kingdom, his heavenly government with Jesus Christ as king.​—Jeremiah 10:23; Daniel 2:44.
Hence, the commission Jesus gave to his followers was not to try to influence the politicians of the world, but to make disciples, which they do today by preaching “this good news of the kingdom” in all the inhabited earth. (Matthew 24:14) They are to inform mankind why that kingdom will remove tensions, and how we know it is very close now. Their work is to tell others about the blessings that are to flow from that kingdom both now and in the future, and they are to help people to become disciples of Jesus Christ, which will enable them to share in these blessings.​—Matthew 28:19, 20; 1 Timothy 4:8; Revelation 21:3, 4.
This message is of the greatest value to those who accept it. It answers their most perplexing questions, removes their doubts, helps them to cope with the tensions that now beset them and, hence, shows them how to gain the “peace of God that excels all thought.”​—Philippians 4:6, 7.
Is This Enough?
Some seem to feel that this is inadequate. A politically active religious minister in a Western country that is being flooded by secularism and immorality said: “There’s going to have to be a get-tough activist attitude on the part of Christians . . . or we’re through.” But will Christianity be defeated if professed Christians do not become political activists?
Some missionaries in poor countries also feel that preaching the “good news” is not enough. They believe the people need help now. Hence, they take part in revolutionary efforts. Yet surely any efforts to overthrow established governments go against the Bible’s counsel: “Let every soul be in subjection to the superior authorities.” (Romans 13:1) It is also the very opposite of the conduct of Jesus and his immediate followers, who were “no part of the world.” (John 17:16) It serves only to increase tensions.
Jesus promised his true followers: “Look! I am with you all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.” (Matthew 28:20) During the first centuries after Jesus’ death, professing Christians believed that promise. They kept out of politics. And, although persecuted and surrounded by unbelief, the Christian faith survived.
Today, Jesus is still with his followers. He is still able to preserve true Christianity without Christians having to get involved in politics. And he will accomplish God’s purpose to transform the earth into a paradise filled with happy, tension-free people, despite the fact that so many persons today feel that they are the ones that have to change the world.​—Daniel 2:44; Revelation 21:4.
But is the “good news” enough for the poor people of the world? One of Jehovah’s Witnesses who was a missionary for several years in the Far East said:
“It is true that we were often saddened by the poverty we saw. But how would it have helped if we had encouraged the poor people to rebel? Who could have guaranteed that the next government would have done any better?
“So we drew attention to a government we knew would do better, God’s kingdom. And when those poor people accepted the good news about this kingdom, they sensed a new relationship with God. They felt he really cared for them and they experienced how he helped them in the crises of their lives. This gave them a sense of dignity and a confidence in the future.”
Another one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, who spent many years preaching “the good news of the kingdom” in Central America, agreed. He added: “Poor people who accepted the ‘good news’ abandoned their former superstitions and their vices, such as smoking, gambling, drunkenness and the chewing of betel nut; and their material circumstances often improved because they made better use of their resources. And as they put spiritual things first in their lives, their material poverty became less of a burden to them. They were no longer jealous of the wealthy, because they realized they had something that many wealthy people did not have.”
Yes, it is natural to be concerned about the spread of godlessness, the widespread oppression and hunger and the other ills of this system of things. The continued existence of these problems demonstrates mankind’s urgent need for God’s kingdom. This is the only hope anyone has for seeing a happy future, and only the true, Bible-based Christian religion is really helping people to put faith in it. In doing so, it is giving the finest help possible toward easing modern-day tensions.
[Blurb on page 6]
Some religionists want to see their country have the “strongest military since Creation”
[Blurb on page 9]
“We drew attention to a government we knew would do better, God’s kingdom”​—A MISSIONARY
[Picture on page 7]
Jesus taught his followers to make disciples, not to be political activists
[Picture on page 8]
The Bible’s message helps people to cope with the crises in their lives

