





We Learn About God From His Prophets

In the past, God gave his prophets important messages for humankind. Can these messages show us how to receive God’s blessing? Yes, they can. Let us see what we can learn from three faithful prophets.



ABRAHAM

God is impartial and wants to bless all humans.
God promised the prophet Abraham that “all the families of the ground will certainly be blessed by means of you.”​—Genesis 12:3.
What do we learn? God loves us very much and wants to bless all families​—men, women, and children—​who obey him.



MOSES

God is merciful and blesses those who make an effort to know him.
The Almighty gave the prophet Moses the power to perform great miracles. Yet, Moses prayed: “Make me know your ways, so that I may know you and continue to find favor in your eyes.” (Exodus 33:13) God was pleased with Moses’ request and blessed him with more knowledge and understanding of His ways and qualities. For example, Moses learned that the Creator is “a God merciful and compassionate.”​—Exodus 34:6, 7.
What do we learn? God wants to bless all of us​—men, women, and children—​if we strive to come to know him better. He shows us in the Holy Scriptures how to worship him and that he is eager to grant us his favor and blessing.



JESUS






Jesus compassionately cured all kinds of ailments




We can enjoy God’s everlasting blessings if we learn about Jesus and what he did and taught.
God’s Word contains many details of Jesus’ life and teachings. God gave Jesus the power to perform many powerful miracles, such as curing the blind, the deaf, and the lame. He even brought the dead back to life. Jesus thus demonstrated the blessings that God will bring to all mankind in the future. He explained how each of us can enjoy those blessings: “This means everlasting life, their coming to know you, the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.”​—John 17:3.
Jesus was compassionate, tender, and kind. Men and women, young and old, flocked to him in response to his warm invitation: “Learn from me, for I am mild-tempered and lowly in heart, and you will find refreshment for yourselves.” (Matthew 11:29) Unlike others of his time who mistreated women, Jesus treated women with kindness, dignity, and respect.
What do we learn? Jesus showed profound love for people, and he set an outstanding example of how we should treat one another.



JESUS IS NOT GOD

The Holy Scriptures teach that “there is actually to us one God” and that Jesus Christ was God’s humble messenger. (1 Corinthians 8:6) Jesus stated clearly that God is superior to him and that God sent him to the earth.​—John 11:41, 42; 14:28.a



To learn more about Jesus Christ, see sections 8 and 9 of the brochure Real Faith​—Your Key to a Happy Life available online at www.jw.org.

