Announcements
◆ The literature offer for December is the New World Translation and the book Is the Bible Really the Word of God? for $1.25.
The offer for January through April will be a year’s subscription for The Watchtower, with one of the bound books copyrighted in 1961 or earlier, for $1.50. Subscriptions for both The Watchtower and Awake! may be offered, with two of the older bound books, for $3.00. Reimbursement of individual publishers and of congregations for such books given free with new subscriptions will be handled in the same manner as during October. The Society still has on hand a sizable stock of What Has Religion Done for Mankind? and “New Heavens and a New Earth.” There is a more limited supply of You May Survive Armageddon into God’s New World and “Your Will Be Done on Earth.” Congregations may order these. We encourage you to use such books as premiums with new subscriptions until all of them are in the hands of the public. Then we will again give a premium of three booklets.
◆ The January 1 issue of The Watchtower, with which we will begin our 1973 Watchtower subscription campaign contains especially fine material on the life and ministry of Jesus Christ and how it should affect us today. The principal article title is “Get a Firm Hold on the Real Life.” We encourage you to obtain an extra supply, as many as you can use, and then offer them enthusiastically. Now is the time to place your order for extra copies.
◆ In correspondence to the Society regarding congregation matters, please be certain that the name of the city and the congregation name are shown. In this regard, please see page 86 of the School Guidebook and page 147 of Qualified to Be Ministers.
◆ It is requested that, during December, the elders review the situation of any pioneers in the congregation and send reports to the Society in those cases specified on the Personal Qualifications Report (Form S-326). Order number needed. See what is stated on pages 66 and 67 of the Organization book. Where there is only one elder and he is a pioneer, the circuit overseer can submit the report when he visits the congregation.
◆ After December 21, 1972, congregations may submit orders for the 1972 bound volumes of The Watchtower and Awake! These will be available in English, Dutch, French, German, Portuguese and Spanish. Volumes are $2.50 each. There are no pioneer rates. Some have inquired regarding older bound volumes for libraries. We have the following stock available in English only: 2,000 1970 Awake!, 17,000 1971 Watchtower and 26,000 1971 Awake! volumes. We suggest ordering these with your current bound volume order. We will fill orders for older volumes as long as they last.
◆ The new public talk to be given by the circuit overseers starting in February includes eighty color slides on the very timely subject “Assemble All the More as the End Draws Near!”
◆ Regular and special pioneers who take one of the tours outside the United States and Canada next summer will not be required to reach the hour goal for that month.
◆ Regular pioneer report cards (S-200) that are needed by the regular pioneers are to be ordered by the presiding overseer.

