Branch Letter
Dear Fellow Publishers:
It has been a real joy for us here at the Brooklyn printing plant to work on the 1973 Yearbook. It brings us special pleasure because we know that you will greatly enjoy reading it and that it will do much good in helping persons with whom you are studying the Bible. Here in Brooklyn we are printing 952,500 copies of the English edition, and should you need more copies we will be glad to print an additional supply. We are also printing the Spanish, Italian, Portuguese and French editions, totaling 442,600. Germany is printing 152,000 Yearbooks in German and 35,000 in Dutch.
The first part of the Yearbook gives you an armchair tour of the progress of the Kingdom work in many parts of the world. Also delightful are the extended reports on five different countries. For example, the report from the British Isles will give you a real eye-opener as to the tremendous amount of work done in preaching the good news even in the early days of the Kingdom work there. And when you read about Ghana, you will be encouraged by the fearlessness on the part of our brothers in standing up for the truth in the face of opposition. The report from Japan will give you a picture of the careful organizing that has been involved in getting the good news of the Kingdom to every part of the country.
Brother Knorr, recently returned from a visit to Guatemala and Mexico, where he helped on arrangements for next year’s international assemblies there. You will be happy to know that work will soon begin on the building of a new branch building in Mexico.
We know that you are very much interested in our Malawi brothers. The Society, as you know, has sent funds to help them. It is most practical to have the relief work cared for right there in Africa, as it would take a long time to ship clothing and other things from here to that part of the world. A report from the brothers in Zambia early in November tells that they have been able to ship in to the brothers from Malawi who are now at the Sinda Misale camp over forty tons of supplies, including tarpaulins, blankets, clothing, food and other things that were supplied by the brothers in Zambia and South Africa.
Here in Brooklyn we are privileged to have the Kingdom Ministry School in session again. Fifty students reported on November 5, and a total of about seventy-five were scheduled to begin school at the other three school locations in this country. The course is a new one, completely revised to bring it into line with the organizational changes that have taken place and with the needs of the congregations and the field. The new Kingdom Ministry School Course is written in outline style with large print. The students here are enthusiastic about the new course and appreciate the pleasant pace at which it proceeds.
May Jehovah bless all of you as we ever move forward unitedly under theocratic organization.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

