Move Forward Unitedly
1 We are on the move forward! Jesus foretold that “this good news of the kingdom” would be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness, and that is what is now being accomplished. In over 200 lands Jehovah has his Christian witnesses. It is true that the Devil has instigated vicious persecution against them. Scores of nations have tried to stop the preaching work. But this only accomplishes God’s will, the separating of people of all nations. Nothing in heaven or on earth can thwart the purpose of God. And, just think, we are privileged to have a share in it by serving with His organization.
2 How do we know what God’s will is? By studying the Bible with the help of God’s spirit and His theocratic organization. Yet most persons have never read much of the Bible, and the majority who have a Bible do not read it with understanding. One reason is the seventeenth-century language of some older translations. Appropriately, then, during December in the field service we will offer the easy-to-read, modern-language New World Translation. Reading this Bible has helped literally hundreds of thousands of persons to take in accurate knowledge of Jehovah and Christ Jesus and to move forward in God’s service, with eternal life in view. Remember, for those who desire it, the New World Translation is also available in large print for $5.
3 Of course, many persons today do not believe that the Bible really is God’s Word. In fact, it is commonly believed that such accounts in the Bible as Adam’s sin and the Noachian flood are myths. But we know better. Why, the very reason for Jesus’ giving his life is because Adam did sin. (Matt. 20:28) And, as for the Flood, Jesus and his apostle Peter referred to it as being just as real as the end of this present system of things. (Matt. 24:37-39; 2 Pet. 3:5-7 ) People need to know that. So, along with the Bible, it is appropriate that we offer the book Is the Bible Really the Word of God? And if the householder does not take the Bible, we can offer just the 25-cent book.
4 At times we find people who say they accept the Bible but are not interested in studying the Bible with the aid of some other book. In such a case, why not endeavor to start a study using just the Bible, looking up scriptures on a subject of interest? Possibly after a few weeks, when the person sees how much he is learning, he will want to have a regular study with the use of a Bible study aid such as the Truth book.
5 We realize that without the Bible’s guidance people are heading for certain destruction, and we want to help them to benefit from Jehovah’s provisions. (John 3:16; 2 Pet. 3:9) We truly love Jehovah. We know that it is his will for all sorts of men to be saved, and we want to help them to gain salvation. (1 Tim. 2:3, 4; 4:16) So it is our privilege to share as fully as possible in the lifesaving work of Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making.
6 It is vital that we all work wholeheartedly in this lifesaving activity, and we look to the elders in the congregation to set a fine example of zeal in the field ministry. When they unitedly take the lead, this has a beneficial effect on the rest of the congregation. When they display wholesome concern for the entire congregation, as well as zeal in promoting the work of Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making, Jehovah’s blessing becomes manifest on the entire congregation as it unitedly moves forward.
7 What is your own attitude toward God’s organization? Are you moving forward unitedly with it? Do you take time to read and apply the wholesome counsel it regularly provides in abundance? When you do, you benefit greatly, don’t you? And, when you liberally share with others the good things you receive you are doubly blessed by Jehovah.​—Prov. 11:25.
8 We do need one another. There is a variety of abilities that persons in each congregation have, so no one should feel that what he does is not needed or is not worth while. The Bible appropriately likens the congregation to a human body, all the members of which are vital. (1 Cor. 12:19-26) So, the important thing is not that we be able to do what others do, but rather that we use whatever capabilities we do have in Jehovah’s service. At the same time, take note of the fine qualities your fellow workers have. Let them know that you appreciate their love, their willingness, their endurance. Thank Jehovah, too, for the privilege of serving alongside these who are precious in His eyes. Thus, we will be drawn ever closer together, and we will continue to move forward unitedly toward God’s new order, which is now O so very near!
[Blurb on page 1]
Move forward unitedly under theocratic organization.
[Blurb on page 8]
Offer the Word of Life to everyone.

