Presenting the Good News​—Presentations for the Watchtower Campaign
1 What is more important than for people to get to know who Jehovah is? How fitting, then, that during the 1973 Watchtower subscription campaign each issue of The Watchtower will contain an article that in some way is designed to help people to get to know God. It is also suggested that, in our discussions with householders, we feature the theme “Getting to Know God.”
2 Surely we could not wish for a better theme, one closer to our hearts. Having truly come to know Jehovah God, we love him and we want others to know who he is and how good he is, do we not? He deserves to be known for his fine qualities and for his many works, past, present and future. And does not everlasting life depend upon our taking in knowledge of him and of his Son?​—John 17:3.
3 How might we feature this theme in our field ministry? We could begin with some reference to world or local conditions. Or we could call attention to problems such as many families have. Then we might ask: ‘Is this the way life is meant to be? [Let householder reply.] To answer that in a satisfying way we really need to take God into account. In fact, we need to know his purpose for man. That is one reason why Jesus Christ came to earth. The things that Jesus taught originated with his Father. [Read John 8:28, 29.] So, Jesus himself is not God, is he? But Jesus helps us to know God and His purpose for us. Jesus shows how God makes it possible for us to find satisfaction in living now. He also shows that, very soon, God is going to clean wickedness out of this earth and make it a wonderful place in which to live. These things are of interest to all of us, and they are discussed in this January 1 issue of The Watchtower, in the article “Get a Firm Hold on the Real Life.”’ Direct attention to some points of interest in the article, and then enthusiastically offer a subscription for a year.
4 Or you might say something like this: ‘My name is​——​———. I’m a minister, one of Jehovah’s witnesses. I know you weren’t expecting me, so I’ll be brief. Have you ever wondered whether it is possible to get to know God better? [Let householder comment.] To many people, God is very far away. As for the things that God has said he is going to do, they feel these will never happen in their lifetime. But note what the Bible says here at 2 Peter 3:9. [Read.] So, what does this tell us about God? [Wait for comment.] If we appreciate the reason for his patience, we won’t miss its purpose. We will use the opportunity we have to get to know his will for us. That is why The Watchtower is published.’
5 In presenting the good news, do so in a warm and friendly way and endeavor to draw the householder out with questions. Only if he freely expresses himself will you get to know his thinking well enough so that you can discern what direction your further remarks should take. And after he has expressed himself and sees that you are interested in his viewpoint, he may be more willing to listen to what you have to say.
6 We have the most important message being preached today. We have ever so many reasons for preaching it and so we want to make the best possible use of all our opportunities. Feel free to use more scriptures where householders are ready to listen; then, if they do not take any literature, at least they will have had a witness. Of course, the nature and length of your discussion will depend on the circumstances.

