Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 10
10 min: Song 16. Introduction, text and comments. Warmly encourage attendance at the congregation book study to benefit from fine material in the “Paradise​—Theocracy” book.
15 min: “Move Forward Unitedly.” Two publishers discuss article. Demonstrate how to present the literature offer. Discuss with audience what to do during holiday season when persons say they are busy.
25 min: Study December 1 “Watchtower” article “How Much Do You Care About People?” Read scriptures and paragraphs to the extent that time permits.
10 min: Concluding comments. Include comments on Branch Letter, appropriate Announcements, also brief reminders on local service arrangements. Song 117.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 17
10 min: Song 5. Introduction. Family discusses text; can be before, during or after meal. Might beneficially include brief comments on how the context helps us to understand the scripture, how the information affects our lives as individuals and as a family, etc.
10 min: Questions from Readers, from December 1, 1972, issue of “The Watchtower.” To be handled by an elder, preferably a married man. After brief introductory comments pointing out that we live in a morally depraved world and that we need to be on guard as not to accept its corrupt standards, read the Questions from Readers material as published.
20 min: “Kingdom Ministry” insert. Cover material down to, but not including, the subheading “Parents Can Provide Fine Encouragement.” Questions and answers; audience participation. In reading paragraphs, group them, taking a full subheading at a time.
20 min: Choice portions of the new “Yearbook.” Group of three or four publishers share with one another some of the information they have read in the “1973 Yearbook.” Where appropriate, comment on how the material considered might beneficially affect our lives.
Brief concluding remarks by chairman of the group, encouraging zealous participation in the field ministry. Comment on “Vacation Opportunities.” Song 13.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 24
12 min: Song 4. Introduction, text discussion with comments from audience. Include items from Theocratic News.
13 min: “More Good Things in the Ministry School.” Audience participation. Invite publishers to comment on why they enrolled in the School and how they have benefited from being enrolled; arrange in advance for at least one of these comments.
20 min: “Kingdom Ministry” insert, from subheading “Parents Can Provide Fine Encouragement” to the end. Could have group of persons who are now pioneers or who have been temporary pioneers discuss the material. Really cover well the printed material, reading at least a few of the key paragraphs. Can comment on future plans for temporary or regular pioneer service and invite others to share in such activity if their circumstances will permit.
15 min: Concluding comments by Bible study overseer. Tell congregation how many home Bible studies are being conducted, apart from those with members of their own immediate families. Encourage cooperation of the entire congregation in searching out persons who would like to have a home Bible study. If any publishers have a good prospect for a study but need help in developing it, the Bible study overseer will be glad to help them personally or will arrange for someone else to do so. Ask publishers to inform Bible study overseer of good prospects for whom they personally are unable to care. Include experiences enjoyed in making return visits and conducting Bible studies. Song 92.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 31
15 min: Song 44. Introduction, text and comments. Talk on new yeartext and how it should affect our personal lives. (See yb73 pp. 260, 261.) Invite audience to share in reading scriptures.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News.” Cover article with audience participation. Have two demonstrations of how to engage householders in conversation on the theme “Getting to Know God” and how subscription offer can be tied in with presentation. Get suggestions from audience as to various things they will be doing and why. If some want to use a presentation that is different from what is demonstrated, they should feel free to do so. Encourage publishers to use what works in their territory.
10 min: Consider “Question Box.” and have accounts report read.
15 min: Why Go from House-to-House. To be handled by field overseer. After brief introductory remarks about the field service activities of the congregation for the past month, invite audience to comment on the following points: (1) How important is the work described at Mark 13:10? (2) How does our house-to-house work benefit those to whom we witness? (3) What effect does repeated coverage of the territory have on the people? (4) Why do we work our territory with various literature offers? (5) How does regular participation in the house-to-house work affect our own spiritual lives? (6) How does it help to accomplish Jehovah’s will in connection with his name? Have one or two brief experiences, if time permits, showing the blessings that are enjoyed in this feature of the field ministry. Encourage publishers, where possible, to share in the house-to-house work every week. Persons with limited health may be able to call at only a few doors; others may be able to devote several hours. Ask for comments from individuals as to when they personally engage in house-to-house activity. When do they find people at home? Discuss congregation arrangements for house-to-house witnessing. Song 10.

