VOL. XV. JULY 1, 1894. NO. 13. 

"THE PRIZE SET BEFORE US." 



ALL who are familiar with the Scriptures 

well know that the Christian course in 

the present life is represented therein as a race-course 

at whose farther end is a prize for all 

who so run as to obtain it. In the WATCH 

TOWER and in MILLENNIAL DAWN we have frequently 

pointed out this fact and, upon all professing 

to be God's people, have urged faithfulness 

in running the race. 

But in showing the Divine Plan of the Ages 
—from Eden lost to Paradise restored— it has 
been both necessary and proper to point out 
that the prize set before us in the gospel is a 
different one from that before Israel after the 
Flesh, during the Jewish age, and different 
also from that which will be set before mankind 
in general during the Millennium. And 
now something more upon the subject seems 
necessary from the fact that some have misunderstood 
us, and gotten the idea that there 
are two or three prizes, any one of which may 
now be run for successfully, and equally to the 
Lord's pleasing. These are defined to be, 



(1) The high calling, to divine nature and 
glory; (2) Spiritual nature of a lower order 
than the divine nature; (3) Human perfection 
by restitution. 

The advocates of the errors referred to proceed 
to explain three sets of conditions or 
terms to be complied with, and that which of 
the three prizes is won at the end of life's 
journey, will depend upon which of the three 
sets of conditions has been followed. (1) To 
gain the chief prize requires a full consecration 
of heart, followed as absolutely as possible, 
in thought, word and deed. To this we assent. 

(2) To gain the second prize, say they, one 
should live a good, honorable, Christian life, 
but need not specially sacrifice the good-will 
and esteem of worldly people. In other words, 
an honorable and generally esteemed Christian 
is supposed to be running for this second prize 
—successfully, whether he knows it or not. 
From this view we dissent, and will give our 
reasons later. (3) They hold that for the 

third prize little or no running is necessary, 
that if one merely feels his own unworthiness 
and trusts in the merit of Christ as the ransom 
for all, accepts the restitution promises, and 
avoids open wickedness, he will get this prize. 
Some, indeed, take credit to themselves in the 
matter, erroneously considering that they are 
cultivating the grace of humility,— saying, I 
don't aspire to be a king on the throne of 
God's Kingdom. Oh, no! a humbler place 
will do me. From all this also we dissent. 
The facts are these:— 

(1) There is but the one prize held out by 
the Scriptures as an offer during this age, as 
there was a different one held out previously, 
and as there will be a still different one held 
out during the Millennial age. The Scriptures 
are very definite respecting this one prize of 
the Gospel age. See Eph. 4:4; Col. 3:15. 

(2) None of God's laws or regulations conflict 
with Justice: they all harmonize with it. 

And hence God could not require less than a 
full consecration to him and his will, on the 

R1668: page 212 

part of all whom he accepts into his family— 

either on the divine or human plane. Nor 

could he accept as satisfactory or worthy of 

any prize the self-pleasing or the world-conforming 

rules above laid down for the second 

and third prizes. 

Things are either right or wrong; and the 
right side is always God's side. The reason 



that the path of the "little flock" is declared 

to be a narrow or difficult one at present, is, 

that it is God's path— the right path; and the 

world being wrong,— out of harmony with God, 

and consequently out of harmony with righteousness 

—is in opposition, directly and indirectly, 

to all who are in harmony with God 

and righteousness. And the more progress we 

make into harmony with God and righteousness 

the more the worldly minded will hate 

us, and the more narrow and difficult the path 

of life will be. Hence the Apostle's words: 

"The friendship of the world is enmity with 

God." (Jas. 4:4.) Can anyone suppose that 

God offers prizes of any grade or degree to 

those at enmity against him even to the extent 

of sympathy and harmony with his enemies 

and opponents? Surely not. Hence this one 

text alone would contradict all this theory respecting 

a second and a third prize being now 

offered. 

We repeat, what we have previously stated 
many times, but evidently not yet often 

R1669: page 213 

enough, that precisely the same requirements of 
God's law will be in force during the Millennium 
as are now in force. Nothing less could 
be accepted; for God's requirements of the 
Church are as moderate as justice would permit, 
at any time, viz.: (1) faith in Christ as 
Redeemer; (2) obedience, as far as possible, 
to his law of Love. 

We ask, Could God either ask or accept less 
than this, and yet be just,— either now or at 
any time? Assuredly not! 

But while the Gospel age requirements and 
those of the Millennial age will differ nothing, 
there will be another point upon which there 
will be a difference— viz., obedience to that 
law will be easier in the next age than now; 
because then Satan will be bound, and blind 
eyes opened to discern right from wrong on 
every subject. Hence the Lord has attached 
a greater prize to the call made during the 
Gospel age, which he designs shall select not 
only those who love righteousness and truth 
and the divine favor, but who so love them 
that they would sacrifice all else for the sake 
of these. 

True, we have taught that there will be a 
second class or company of saints saved 
during this Gospel age— the tribulation saints 
of Rev. 7:9-17— but we have nowhere intimated 
that they will be accepted upon any 



other terms than those given the overcomers, 

the first class. The terms for all who will attain 

to either class will be full consecration, 

even unto death. The difference between the 

two classes on account of which the one class 

gets the prize and the other class is "saved so 

as by fire" is that the overcomers have more 

zeal; they pay their consecration vows gladly. 

The tribulation saints fail to get the prize, because 

although consecrated lovers of the Lord, 

their love lacks the proper fervency to hold 

their lives constantly up to the point of self-sacrifice, 

where their own preferences would 

be yielded always and promptly to the Lord's. 

Because they lack this fervency of love they 
are not "overcomers," and cannot be rewarded 
as such with the great prize. But they have 
a measure of love and consecration, and they 
trust in the merit of Christ's great sacrifice, 
and thus abiding under the shadow of the New 
Covenant they are not wholly rejected by the 
Lord, although unworthy to constitute members 
of his "bride" or "body," joint-heirs of 
his glory, honor and power. 

In order to bring such of these as can be 
brought into full fervency of spirit and to a 
right estimate of their covenant, the Lord's 
rod of affliction is brought to bear upon them, 
until the souls melt in the furnace and the 
dross is separated, so that the precious element 
may be saved. 

But it may be asked, Is not this the experience 
of every Christian? And if these tribulation 
saints, the second or "great company" 
are to be purified from dross as well as the first 
company or "overcomers," why should they 
not be all of one class or company? 

R1669: page 213 

Yes, we answer, it is true that the majority 
of Christians are of the tribulation class, that 
is the reason it is called "a great company," 
while the overcomers are called a "little 
flock." The difference between them is not 
in the degree of purity finally attained, but in 
the manner of obtaining it. God has a special 
pleasure in those who delight to do his will, 
and who do not need to be whipped into an 
appreciation of right and wrong. These he 
calls "overcomers." These have the likeness 
of the Lord (Phil. 3:21; 1 John 3:2; Col. 3:4), 
and are accounted worthy to be with him 
where he is and to share his honor, glory and 
Kingdom and power.— Rev. 17:14. 

It is not because the "little flock" of "overcomers" 



suffer more than the great company 

of tribulation saints that they are to get the 

prize, but simply because they suffer gladly, 

willingly, self-sacrificingly. The tribulation 

saints doubtless suffer as much as the "overcomers" 

or more; and the "overcomers" 

have so much pleasure, in the divine favor, in 

connection with their sufferings in this present 

time, that it makes their willing services 

and sacrifices seem but light afflictions which 

are thus working out for them a far more 

exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 

As for the Restitution race and prize: No 
one can run for it until it is offered. There is 
no such offer for the present age. True, there 
may be children and others now living who 
will continue down through the "great time 
of trouble" and into the time of the reign of 
the great Restorer and Life-giver, and some 
droppings and showers of restitution favor are 
already manifest, but the fact remains that 
full restitution is not yet offered as a prize, 
and cannot be offered until the Church shall 
first be perfected in glory. 

It is true that restitution was the prize held 
before fleshly Israel, but that offer ended with 
the end of their Law Covenant. 

But the misapprehension on this subject 
quite possibly arose from our showing in the 
DAWN and elsewhere that justification, the first 
step into the New Covenant and present high 
calling is the equivalent of restitution. Justification 
by faith is indeed a restitution by faith. 
As a race we had fallen from divine favor into 
sin and degradation, and God could no longer 
deal with us, for we were unworthy. But after 
Christ had redeemed us— bought our formerly 
possessed rights and privileges— the offer was 
made to whoever believed this and desired to 
act upon it, that upon their mental acceptance 
of this they would be counted or reckoned in 
God's sight as though freed from all sin, as 
though restored to the perfection and divine 
favor enjoyed by Adam before he sinned. Thus 
it is true that the honest-hearted believer who 
accepts Christ stands in the divine sight as 
though fully restored. 

But why reckon him thus? Why not let 
all wait until the Millennial age, and then actually 
start their feet in the way that leads to 
full restitution? 

It is in order to make them eligible to the 
call of the present age. As shown above, the 
call of the present time is a call for willing 
sacrificers to present themselves as joint-sacrifices 
with Christ, in the service of God (his 



people and his truth). And since Christ was 
a lamb without spot or blemish, and since no 
blemished sacrifice could be accepted upon 
God's altar, and since we by nature, actually 
are blemished, therefore it was necessary that 
we should be either actually or reckonedly made 
perfect men, before we could be invited to become 
joint-sacrifices with Christ and thus to 
become joint-heirs of his glory. 

God chose to justify us or restore us or make 
us right reckonedly or by faith, instead of actually, 
so that those who chose might draw back 
after being justified by faith. All who, after 
being justified, draw back and refuse to use 
their reckoned justification for the purpose intended 
merely show that they received the 
grace of God that far in vain. (2 Cor. 6: 1,2; 
Heb. 12:15-17.) Their reckoned justification 
lapses or becomes void, —not being used as a 
stepping-stone to full consecration, as God 
had intended. 

The Gospel age as the great antitype of the 
Day of Atonement, must first close, its "better 
sacrifices" (the Church, Head and body) 
must be finished to the uttermost and be accepted 
before God, before the great High 
Priest can or will lift up his hand [power] to 
bless the people with the restitution call and 
blessings. 



R1670: page 214 

"WITH A PURE HEART FERVENTLY." 



"Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth 
through the Spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren, 
see that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently; 
being begotten again, not of corruptible seed, but 
of incorruptible, by the Word of God, which 
liveth and abideth forever."— 1 Pet. 1:22,23. 

"LOVE is the fulfilling of the law" of God, 

and God himself is love. So all creatures 

in his likeness, whether human or angelic, have 

this same chief characteristic. Love presides 

and rules in their hearts, always exercising itself 

in ministries of kindness and benevolence. 

Its most refined and exalted impulses are necessarily 

toward the fountain of all goodness 

and grace and glory, but in sympathetic solicitude 

it reaches out to help and lift up the 

degraded and vile, while with tender and 



fervent appreciation it regards the fellowship 
of all kindred minds. Thus, God-like love may 
be viewed in its three aspects— first, the love 
of reverence, which is centered in God, whose 
supreme goodness calls it forth; second, the love 
of fellowship or affinity for all those actuated by 
the same sentiments; and, third, the love of 
pity and sympathy toward all those who have 
fallen below the standard of moral excellence, 
or who suffer in any way. While we love God 
with supreme reverence, surpassing the love of 
self or of our fellow men, he also graciously 
condescends to take us into fellowship with 
himself; and all such are co-workers together 
with him in benevolent kindness for the lifting 
up of the fallen, whom God so loved that 
he gave his only begotten Son to redeem them, 
and then highly exalted him and gave him all 
power in heaven and on earth to restore them. 
-John 3:16; Phil. 2:8-11; Matt. 28:18. 

As members of the fallen race we do not 
inherit this God-like quality of love. It is only 
in obedience to divinely revealed truth that 
we acquire it, being purified thereby from the 
downward and selfish tendencies of our fallen 
nature. In other words, as the Apostle here 
expresses it, by the incorruptible seed of divine 
truth, which liveth and abideth forever, 
we are begotten again, and have become new 
creatures in Christ, so that now as new creatures 
we partake of the new, loving, glorious 
nature imparted through the Word of truth. 

Yet, since we still have this new treasure in 
the old, marred, earthen vessel (2 Cor. 4:7), 
it behooves us to take heed lest we lose it, and 
lest the old selfish nature of the earthen vessel 
again rise up and re-assert itself. Consequently, 
we must be diligent in the exercise and 
cultivation of the powers of the new nature, 
that it may thereby develop strength sufficient 
to ever keep the old nature under full control, 
so that none of its evil propensities may rise 
and gain the mastery. Therefore, "See that 
ye love one another with a pure heart [with 
disinterested benevolence] fervently." 

The language here is addressed not merely 
to babes in Christ— though it is wholesome 
counsel to them also— but to those of some 
degree of advancement, to such as have purified 
their souls unto unfeigned (not merely 
professed) love of the brethren. Let all such 
cultivate this grace more and more, that the 
whole body of Christ may be firmly knit together 
in love. 

The tendency of all divine truth is to purify 
the heart. "He that hath this hope [the 



hope that the truth alone inspires] in him, 
purifieth himself." Otherwise, though he may 
for a time hold the truth theoretically ,~hold 
it in unrighteousness—he cannot hold the 
hope; for the hope springs up in the heart only 
through obedience to the truth. 

Righteousness, and the hope of the rewards 
of righteousness through Christ, are the legitimate 
effects of the truth upon the heart that 
truly receives it. But where it is only received 
into the head, and is resisted in the heart, it 
only deepens the dye of sin by hardening the 
heart, thus bringing additional condemnation, 
and a fearful looking for of judgment. -- 
Heb. 10:27. 

This purifying of the heart by the truth is 
both an instantaneous and a gradual work. 
When a man is truly converted to God, 
there is necessarily a purifying of the heart 
(the will, the intentions)— a full turning away 
from sin and evil, and an unreserved surrender 
of the whole being to God. But as the constant 
tendency of the old, sinful nature is to 

R1670: page 215 

re-assert itself, the purifying influences of the 
truth must be continually applied that the 
heart may be kept pure and acceptable with 
God. But let none make the mistake of presuming 
that the pure in heart are necessarily 
free from all imperfections. As long as we 
have this treasure in the earthen vessel we shall 
be conscious of its imperfections; yet if the 
heart, the will, the intentions, be pure, holy 
and true and loyal to God as the mariner's 
needle to the pole, we are pure in heart, holy 
and acceptable with God through faith in 
Christ Jesus, whose imputed righteousness fully 
supplements all the imperfections of our 
earthen vessels. 

We notice also that this special love of fellowship, 
to which the Apostle here refers, is 
not to be exercised toward the world,— to 
whom belongs only the love of pity and sympathy, 
nor toward Satan or any of the wilful 
enemies of the Lord and his cause, against 
whom true love and loyalty to God ever arrays 
us in vigilant and determined opposition, 
—but toward the brethren— toward them of 
like precious faith and hope, and of one mind 
with us, and the Lord. Fervent love, the love 
of true brotherly fellowship, should indeed exist 
among all such. They should be in fullest 
sympathy and co-operation. They should bear 
one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of 



Christ; they should in honor prefer one another, 
and in love each esteem the other better 
than himself. They should love as brethren, 
be pitiful, courteous, kind, gentle, true 
and loyal. As Jesus said, "Love one another 
as I have loved you."— John 13:34. 

May the love of Christ more and more 
abound among his people, until the whole body 
of the Anointed, knit together in love and 
made all glorious within by its purifying power, 
is "made meet for the inheritance of the 
saints in light." 



R1673 : page 215 
RETROSPECTION. 



"Thou shalt remember the way which the Lord thy God 
led thee." "Cast not away, therefore, your confidence, 
which has great recompense of reward. "-- 
Deut. 8:2; Heb. 10:35. 

He was better to me than all my hopes, 

He was better than all my fears; 
He made a bridge of my broken works, 

And a rainbow of my tears. 
The billows that guarded my sea-girt path, 

Carried my Lord on their crest; 
When I dwell on the days of my wilderness march, 

I can lean on his love for the rest. 

He emptied my hands of my treasured store, 

And his covenant love revealed; 
There was not a wound in my aching heart, 

But the balm of his breath hath healed. 
Oh, tender and true was the chastening sore, 

In wisdom that taught and tried, 
Till the soul he sought was trusting in him, 

And nothing on earth beside. 

He guided my path that I could not see, 

By ways that I have not known, 
The crooked was straight and the rough made plain, 

As I followed the Lord alone. 
I praise him still for the pleasant palms, 

And the water-springs by the way; 
For the glowing pillars of flame by night, 

And the sheltering cloud by day. 

And if to warfare he calls me forth, 

He buckles my armor on; 
He greets me with smiles and a word of cheer 



For battles his sword hath won; 
He wipes my brow as I droop and faint, 

He blesses my hand to toil; 
Faithful is he, as he washes my feet, 

From the trace of each earthly soil. 

There is light for me on the trackless wild, 

As the wonders of old I trace, 
When the God of the whole earth went before 

To search me a resting place. 
Has he changed for me? Nay! He changes not, 

He will bring me by some new way, 
Through fire and flood, and each crafty foe, 

As safely as yesterday. 

Never a watch in the dreariest halt, 

But some promise of love endears; 
I read from the past that my future shall be 

Far better than all my fears,— 
Like the golden pot of the wilderness bread, 

Laid up with the blossoming rod, 
All safe in the ark with the law of the Lord, 

Is the covenant care of my God. 

—Anna Shipton. 



R1670: page 216 

THE CONCISION AND THE CIRCUMCISION. 



"Beware of the concision; for we are the circumcision, 
which worship God in the spirit and rejoice in Christ 
Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh."— Phil. 3:2,3. 

THE Lord and the apostles take special care 
to point out to the Church the serious significance 
of her present position, upon which 
the weighty considerations of her eternal 
welfare depend. They mark out the specially 
perilous times, and forewarn us what to expect 
in the way of persecution and fiery trials 
of faith and patience, and then minister to us 
beforehand all the words of counsel, warning, 
encouragement, hope and promise that are 
necessary to enable us to war a good warfare 
and lay hold upon eternal life. 

But while the Lord promises grace sufficient 
for every time of need, he never encourages 
any to rest supinely upon his promises: the exhortations 
are always to activity, alertness and 
indomitable energy and perseverance. While 
he says, "I will instruct thee and teach thee 



in the way which thou shalt go," he also adds, 

"Be not as the horse or as the mule, which 

have no understanding, whose mouth must be 

held in with bit and bridle." (Psa. 32:8,9.) 

In this intelligent and proper attitude he 

would have us beware—be cautious, careful 

and watchful— against all the deceptions and 

dangers that beset our way; because we have 

a wily adversary who is the leader of the hosts 

of darkness against the Lord and against his 

anointed— "For we wrestle not against [mere] 

flesh and blood [the visible tools of the adversary], 

but against principalities, against 

powers, against the rulers of the darkness of 

this world, against spiritual wickedness in high 

places [under the power and control of the 

prince of this world, Satan]." The exhortations 

to beware of dangers are quite numerous 

-"Beware of false prophets" (Matt. 7:15-20); 

"Beware of [evil] men" (Matt. 10:17); 

"Beware of the leaven [the false doctrine] of 

the Pharisees and of the Sadducees" (Matt. 16:6,12); 

"Beware of covetousness" (Luke 12:15); 

"Beware lest any man spoil you 

through philosophy and vain deceit" (Col. 2:8); 

"Beware lest ye, also, being led away with the 

R1671 : page 216 

error of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness' 

(2 Pet. 3:17); and, in the words of 

the above text, "Beware of dogs, beware of 

evil workers, beware of the concision," etc. 

While the wholesome dread of all these 
should be ever before our minds and keep us 
continually on guard against sudden attacks 
of the enemy, the Apostle in our text calls 
special attention to three things against which 
he would have us on guard. In the Scriptures, 
dogs are generally used as symbols of evil, the 
reference being, not to our domesticated and 
often noble animal, but to such as are more 
common in eastern countries, which are indeed 
disgusting creatures— lazy, filthy, greedy, 
snapping, snarling, treacherous and generally 
pestiferous— apt symbols of a very dangerous 
and wicked class of people. Beware, then, of 
all such dispositions, no matter by what name 
they disguise themselves. If any man be an 
idler— delinquent in his own duties, but busy 
in those of other men; if he be filthy, breeding 
spiritual contagion wherever he goes; if he 
be greedy— self-seeking; if his disposition be 
to snap and snarl, to bite and devour, or to 
treacherously lie in wait to deceive,— beware of 
that man. He is not fit company for a child 



of God: his influence is contaminating. "Evil 
communications corrupt good manners." 

And "give not that which is holy [the 
truth] unto the [such] dogs; neither cast ye your 
pearls before swine [the two being classed together], 
lest they trample them under their 
feet, and turn again and rend you." (Matt. 7:6.) 
"Light [truth] is sown for the righteous," 
and not for those of the dog and swine 
disposition. When, therefore, we find any 
such, we are to beware of them— be cautious, 
and on guard against their contaminating influence. 
The only preaching proper for such 
is, "Repent and be converted, that your sins 
may be blotted out;" and "Flee from the 
wrath to come;" for "God will bring every 
work into judgment with every secret thing." 
"He will reward righteousness and punish 
iniquity." 

R1671 : page 217 

Beware of evil workers: of those who go 
about to do evil, who have no bridle on their 
tongue, but who are given to evil-speaking 
and evil-surmisings which are improper. Indeed, 
evil surmising and evil speaking have 
become so common that very many professed 
children of God seem to think nothing of it; 
and little by little the habit grows, crowding 
out all spirituality; and thereby many are defiled 
and great reproach is brought upon the 
cause of Christ. Beware of all such evil workers: 
shun them as you would a pestilence; for 
it is a moral pestilence, most ruinous and fatal 
in its character. Our communications with 
such should be only to the extent of reproving, 
and, if that should fail, of exposing the evil 
work. The spirit that leads to slander is a 
murderous spirit, and should be recognized and 
dealt with accordingly. 

"Beware of the concision," says the Apostle, 
—of those not fully and truly consecrated 
to God; but who stir up strife and factions in 
the Church; "for we are of the circumcision" 
—whose circumcision is in the heart. Yes, let 
us beware of all such; for the influence of the 
semi-worldly mind is often more subtle, and 
therefore more dangerous, than that which 
makes no profession or effort toward godliness. 
The works of the flesh are covetousness and 
ambition— for money, fame or any or all of the 
desires common to the natural man. But the 
works of the truly and fully circumcised heart 
are the opposite of all these: they are faith, 
love, joy, peace, heavenly hopes and aspirations, 



and the daily crucifying of the flesh. 

No natural man of the fallen race ever had 
a fully circumcised heart. And such as have 
it are dead to the world. Its hopes, aims and 
ambitions are crucified to them, and they are 
alive toward God. Any one who has the realization 
of such a condition of heart has in this 
fact a blessed evidence of his acceptance with 
God and of his heirship of all the exceeding 
great and precious promises— if so be that he 
so continue, faithful even unto death. 

But let all such beware of the concision, 
the spirit of strife and division; for in 
the fiery trials of this evil day all such will 
surely fall, and only such as worship God 
in spirit and in truth can stand. Already 
the test of endurance is proving a severe test 
for some; and it will surely be yet more severe. 
"Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, 
striving against sin." There is no assurance 
whatever that any will be able to stand in this 
evil day who have not devoted themselves fully 
and unreservedly to the Lord. But those 
who have done so, and who are still faithful 
to their covenant, have cause to rejoice in 
Christ Jesus, whose grace is sufficient for them, 
and whose precious blood purchased their 
ransom. 

"NO CONFIDENCE IN THE FLESH." 



Like the Apostle, we are to have "no confidence 
in the flesh"— in any works of the flesh 
or advantages of fleshly inheritance. Our confidence 
rests in God who accepts us through 
the merit of his beloved Son. 

A very false construction, often put upon 
these words of the Apostle, infers from these 
words that he did not trust himself or anyone 
else;— that he put no confidence in any human 
being;— that he was always ready to be 
suspicious. 

That this is a wrong view of the Apostle's 
words is very clear: (1) from the fact that in 
his various epistles he repeatedly expresses 
confidence in himself and in other believers, 
and (2) from the context of this passage. 
The following verses (4-9) show that the 
Apostle meant that his confidence toward God 
was not based upon his being a circumcised 
Hebrew, nor on his zeal for God and his law, 
etc. These things in which he did have confidence, 
once, he now counts as loss and dross. 
He no longer has confidence therein, but rejects 



them as so much "loss" and "dross" 
and "dung." His confidence now is based 
upon faith in Christ's great sacrifice, and a full 
consecration to his service.— Verses 10-14. 

Let us be like-minded, and have great confidence 
in God and Christ and in all who have 
their word and spirit; and let us put no confidence 
in works of the flesh— in anything that 
we or others have done or can do aside from 
the salvation which God has provided in Christ 
Jesus, "through faith in his blood." 



R1673 : page 218 

"WHAT SHALL I RENDER?" 



"What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits 
toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, and call 
upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto 
the Lord, now, in the presence of all his people." 
-Psa. 116: 12- IN- 
GRATITUDE is the responsive chord to 
benevolence in every truly noble heart, 
and no harmony is sweeter or more inspiring 
to noble deeds and lofty purposes. God would 
have his children cultivate for their own sake, 
as well as for the sake of others, all the graces 
of true nobility and moral excellence. It is 
therefore fitting that we should keep in mind 
a careful record of all deeds of love and kindness 
toward us, and be careful to return the 
gratitude due. How often does love go unrequited 
because selfishness crowds out the 
nobler instincts of the soul. 

While human kindnesses often draw largely 
upon us for the exercise of this grace, how 
much more does the constant and disinterested 
benevolence of our Heavenly Father. To him 
we are indebted for every good that we possess; 
and as his consecrated children we are 
also the special objects of his grace. Which 
of us cannot trace a long line of special providences 
on our behalf? Let us call to mind 
how he brought us up "out of the horrible pit" 
of condemnation to death, and "out of the 
miry clay" of personal sin, and "set our feet 
upon the rock" Christ Jesus; and then by his 
truth "established our goings." Yea, and 
he hath put a new song in our mouth, even 
praise unto our God."— Psa. 40:2,3. 

How wonderfully God has helped his people: 



they are his constant care; no good thing 
doth he withhold from them; and all things 
are made to work together for their good. In 
the smallest and in the greatest affairs of life 
he is ever watching for our interests, and the 
evidences of his care are all about us. 

What, then, shall we render unto the Lord 
for all his benefits? What, indeed, have we to 
render that we have not received of him? 
Nothing. But the inspired penman suggests 
what we may acceptably render as follows:— 

(1) "I will take the cup of salvation." 

Just as a parent loves to see his child gratefully 
and appreciatively accept his favors, so God 
regards our acceptance of his great salvation, 
—the gift of his love purchased for us at great 
cost. Therefore we will obey his call and take 
the cup of salvation through faith in Christ 
the Redeemer. 

(2) "And call upon the name of the Lord." 
He has invited our confidence and has proved 
his worthiness of it; therefore will we trust 
him and not be afraid. He who has redeemed 
us at a great price is both able and willing to 
perfect in and for us his great salvation. Yes, 
let us give him our fullest confidence. 

(3) "I will pay my vows unto the Lord, 

now, in the presence of all his people." This also 
the Lord will regard as an expression of gratitude. 
To render our consecrated hearts and 
talents, in glad and cheerful service, is but a 
reasonable return for all his goodness. Let 
us, therefore, do it gladly and with zeal and 
energy. It will be but a small return at best, 
but the measure of love and zeal that goes 
with it will indicate the measure of our gratitude. 
And let us do it promptly— "now"— 
and to such an extent that it will be blessedly 
realized by the Lord's people specially— "in 
the presence of all his people." 



R1671 : page 218 

"IN THE DAYS OF THY YOUTH." 



"Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, 
while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh 
when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them."— Eccl. 12:1. 

THOSE of the Lord's children who early gave 
their hearts to him and committed their 
way to his guidance can all bear testimony to 



multiplied blessings as the results of that early 
start in the right way. And we are glad to 
see some very young people among us now 
taking the first steps in the ways of life. To 
all such young pilgrims we would say, God 
bless you! You are starting out as young 
soldiers of the cross, and we want you to be 

R1671 : page 219 

brave and true soldiers, and to remember that 
the first duty of a soldier is obedience to the 
Captain— Jesus Christ. Give close attention 
and try to understand what he would have you 
do, and then be very prompt to obey, whether 
or not you are able to comprehend the wisdom 
of his directions. 

It is a question with many how early in life 
a child may give its heart to God and be fully 
consecrated to him. But the Scriptures make 
very plain the fact that they may and should 
be consecrated to the Lord by their parents 
before their birth or even their begetting, that 
thus their pre-natal influences may insure them 
a mental and spiritual inheritance tending to 
godliness, and that with the dawn of intelligence 
this disposition should begin to be cultivated 
and warmed into vital, active piety, so 
that at a very tender age the little ones may 
intelligently ratify the parental covenant of 
entire consecration to God. This they should 
be expected and led to do as early as possible. 

Of such early consecration to the Lord we 
have many notable examples in the Scriptures. 
Of John the Baptist it is said that his parents 
"were both righteous before God, walking in 
all the commandments and ordinances of the 
Lord blameless," and that John was given 
them in answer to prayer— "filled with the 
holy spirit, even from his mother's womb." 
(Luke 1:6,15,44,66,80.) Paul was similarly 
endowed from his birth (Gal. 1:15; Acts 26:4,5), 
and was zealous toward God long before 
his conversion from Judaism to Christianity. 
(Acts 22:3,4.) So also were Timothy 
(2 Tim. 1:5; 3:15), Samuel (1 Sam. 1:11,24-28; 
2:11,18,19) and Moses.-Exod. 2:1. 

Those thus early devoted to the Lord escape 
many a snare and many an entanglement, 
which in later years bring distress and trouble 
to so many. They do not have to reap the 
bitter harvest that always comes from the sowing 
of "wild oats;" they do not find it so 
much against the current of their nature to live 
godly lives; and they have in later years the 
strength of character born of continued self-discipline 



and self-restraint, and all the blessed 
advantages of a long acquaintance with God 
and of the instructions of his Word and 
of the leadings of his gracious providences. 
How wise is the counsel, "Remember thy 
Creator in the days of thy youth— while the 
evil days come not," etc. Those evil days of 
bitter disappointment and despair never will 
come to those who in youth commit their ways 
unto the Lord, and trust him to guide their 
paths. His ways are ways of pleasantness, 
and all his paths are peace. They are not 
by any means smooth and easy ways, but they 
are always peaceful and pleasant, because he 

R1672: page 219 

who has said, "I will never leave thee, nor 
forsake thee" (Heb. 13:5), is always present 
to comfort and to bless, and to make all things 
work together for good to those who love God 
—the called ones according to his purpose. 

Those of the consecrated who have children 
and young people under their care have much 
to do in shaping their course and in leading 
them to Christ, by throwing around them the 
influences of their own consecrated lives, and 
imparting to them such instruction as their 
own acquaintance with the truth and their 
more matured experience and judgment can 
give. Such efforts, properly directed, are not 
lost upon the young. 

Let them see both in your example and teaching 
how distinctly the line is drawn between 
the consecrated believer and the world;— that 
there is no compromise with the world: that 
to follow Christ is to renounce the world with 
all its ambitions, its gayety and its pleasures 
and companionship. Let them see the hollowness 
of worldly pleasures, and improve occasions 
for calling attention to the dissatisfaction 
and unrest of those who pursue the delusions, 
and the peace and joy of those who have 
left the world to follow Christ. It is helpful 
also to tell to others how graciously the Lord 
has led us, to speak of the various turning 
points in our course, where the friendly crook 
of the Good Shepherd kept us from straying 
away into the wrong path; or how when once 
we strayed his mercy tenderly pursued us and 
brought us back to his fold; how he has shielded 
us from evil; comforted us in sorrow; satisfied 
our longing souls with the joys of his 
salvation; and made us to sit down with him 
in heavenly places. 



R1672: page 220 

Before the mind becomes engrossed with the 
frivolities of this world it is easily led by wise 
and loving hearts; and none should lose these 
precious opportunities, which a few years later 
may bring forth a rich harvest to the Master's 
praise. Our object, however, is not to turn 
aside the saints from the great work of harvesting 
the mature wheat of this age, to the less 
important work of instructing the rising generation; 
but, rather, to point out the wayside 
privileges of very many who otherwise might 
not observe them. Many consecrated parents 
have these privileges every day; and many 
others come in contact with the young and 
forget to let their light shine upon them, under 
the erroneous impression that they cannot 
be expected to understand or to have any 
spiritual aspirations. 

It is a great mistake to presume that the 
young must first run in the race of pride, ambition, 
frivolity and folly with the world, and 
then be converted to God. It is the business 
of those who have to do with them to shield 
them as far as possible against such influences, 
and to help them to center their affections and 
hopes in God before the world throws its ensnaring 
charms about them. 

To all the dear children and young people 
who have given their hearts to God, and who 
are trying daily to follow Jesus, the WATCH 
TOWER sends its greeting. We know some of 
the very little ones who love Jesus, and who 
are not ashamed to stand up for Jesus among 
other children who do not love him or try to 
please him; and who are brave and true to 
God, even when laughed at and thought peculiar 
by their school-mates to whom they tell 
the good news of the Kingdom. And we are 
rejoiced to see some young people, who have 
bravely renounced the world and its ambitions 
and pleasures, among the most faithful of those 
who have consecrated their lives to the Lord. 
Some of our Office helpers as well as many of 
the successful colporteurs are still young in 
years. 

May the good work go on in the deepening 
and widening course. Let the young rejoice 
in the prospects of a lengthened campaign and 
great usefulness in the Lord's service; let those 
of maturer years bear up bravely and wisely 
under the burden and heat of the day, doing 
valiant service as veterans in the army of the 
Lord; and let the aged pilgrims, leaning upon 
the staff of divine truth and rejoicing in 



its steadfastness, stand as beacon lights to 
others and at the end of their course be able 
to testify, "I have fought a good fight, I have 
kept the faith." 



R1672: page 220 
PLEASING IN HIS SIGHT. 



A brother inquires:— Does God look with 
displeasure on those who, knowing his plan 
thoroughly, as laid down in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, just give up sin of all kinds, while 
still retaining their love of the good things 
of this life? Before reading MILLENNIAL 
DAWN I was a professing Christian; but, I 
see now, in name only. While trying to 
lead a pure life, I do not feel ready to enter 
on to a life of self-sacrifice. Do you think 
there is anything wrong in this course? 

To this we reply:— We do not believe that 
the Lord looks with displeasure upon a life 
which seeks to avoid sin, and which recognizes 
the merit of Christ's righteousness as the 
ground of acceptance. Nevertheless we hold 
with the Apostle, that it is but a "reasonable 
service" on our part to present our bodies a 
living sacrifice to God; for we judge that, 
Christ having died for us, we should live the 
remainder of our lives in his service.— 
2 Cor. 5:14,15,20. 

The spirit which would permit us to please 
simply ourselves, to the neglect of others who 
might be greatly blessed by the same truths 
which have so refreshed our hearts, would certainly 
be the spirit of selfishness— the opposite 
to the spirit of love. I trust, therefore, that 
your reception of the truth will lead to the development 
in you of the spirit of the truth- 
love; for we know that this spirit alone is the 
holy spirit— the spirit of God, the spirit of 
Christ— and that whoever does not sooner or 
later develop a spirit of love will not be accounted 
worthy of everlasting life, either as a 
member of the little flock, or of the great company 
or of the world during the Millennial age. 
None will be accounted worthy of everlasting 
life except he have the spirit of Christ. "If 
any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is 
none of his."— Rom. 8:9. 

Nevertheless, as we said before, the Lord is 
very merciful through Christ, and those who 



at first merely shun sin and accept the Redeemer 
will be recognized of God and patiently 
dealt with, that perchance the fruit of the spirit 
may ultimately be developed. "The fruit of 
the spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, 
gentleness, goodness, fidelity, meekness, self-control." 
--Gal. 5:22,23-Diaglott. 

R1672: page 221 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I want to get 
out of Babylon; but, if I meet not with the 
Church to which I have been attached for 
years (Disciple), I feel lost. I realize the 
necessity of close fellowship with spiritually 
minded people. And, now, the following 
please answer as fully as you can, either by 
letter to me personally or through the 
WATCH TOWER. If a man attempt the 
race for the "high calling," what is the nature 
of the sacrifice he must make? You 
say (MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I.), he is not 
only forbidden sinful things, but must deny 
himself the "good things" of this life. 
Please make this plain. Be explicit. Please 
come down to particulars. Again, are there 
any in the world doing so at present, to your 
knowledge? Any who are suffering for 
righteousness' sake? I say suffering; because 
to be slighted and misrepresented for 
the truth's sake does not cause one much 
"suffering." It is more of the nature of 
"sorrow." 

I stand amazed at the wonderful, wonderful 
light, which beams from the pages of 
the three volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

God help me in the way I should go. 

Your brother, EMORY A. SADDLER. 

REPLY:— What we mean by "suffering" is 
not the infliction of wounds or other injury to 
the person, but self-denials. The suffering is 
small— "not worthy to be compared to the 
glory to follow;" but it is the result of the ignoring 
of the hopes, ambitions and feelings of 
the sacrificer. 

Since it is to be a sacrifice, the things to be 
sacrificed are not specified in the Scriptures; 
nor may we speculate as to what you should 
sacrifice; but each one should seek to sacrifice 
something of comfort, pleasure or luxury in the 
service of the Lord, his truth and his Church. 

A person of means might deny himself several 
hundred or thousand dollar's worth of 
luxury in a year— luxury which he foregoes 
simply in the interest of the truth, that the 
means may be used in a better way. A poor 



brother, for instance, recently sent in $2.00 to 
the Tract Fund, saying it was the result of his 
walking instead of riding to daily work, and 
other small extras which he had willingly denied 
himself to be able to share in the spread 
of the truth. 

These both represent self-denials, self-sacrificings; 
the one of much out of much, the other 
of less out of little; but both, if done from 
the same pure, worthy motive, alike acceptable 
to God. See Mark 12:41-44. 

Then there are other forms of sacrifice, -- 
the practice of economy for the truth's sake, 
the sacrifice of time and strength in doing 
good, feeding the physically or spiritually 
hungry, the spending of time and energy in 
preaching the Word, either by voice or pen or 
printed page— tracts, etc. Any service rendered 
to God, his people, or his Word, which 
costs the flesh something, is a sacrifice, acceptable 
in God's sight through Christ. But a 
whole burnt-offering, the giving of all that 
we have and are to the Lord, is most pleasing 
to him, and our reasonable service. When 
practicable (i.e., when previous obligations as 
husband or wife, father or mother, do not 
prevent), this often leads to the Colporteur 
work, or some other service which ignores 
worldly ambitions; but where impracticable, the 
Lord equally accepts the will with lesser deeds, 
when they are faithfully done as unto him. 

Glad that you are able to take joyfully the 
spoiling of your goods; for amongst all the 
possessions of this present life, a good name 
is one of the chief.— EDITOR. 



page 221 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1673 : page 221 

THE BIRTH OF JESUS. 



III. QUAR., LESSON II., JULY 1, LUKE 2:1-16. 

Golden Text— "Unto you is born this day in the city 
of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord."— Luke 2:1 1. 

That our Lord Jesus existed prior to his 
incarnation, and in a more exalted nature 
and condition, is clearly stated in the 
Scriptures. See John 17:5; 2 Cor. 8:9; 
John 1:1-3,10; Eph. 3:9; Col. 1:15-17; 
Heb. 1 :2; Rev. 4:11. See also WATCH 
TOWER of August 1888 and April 15, 1893. 

This change of nature was a miracle, the 
philosophy of which, like that of all miracles, 
transcends the limits of human thought; 
and, like all other miracles, it was performed 
to meet an emergency for which no natural 
law could otherwise provide. The philosophy 
of the divine plan of redemption which 
required it is, however, very manifest to 
the thoughtful mind guided by the Scripture 
statements. The Son of God was made 

R1673: page 222 

flesh that he might give his flesh— his humanity 

—for the life of the world; that as 

by a man (Adam) came death, so by a man 

("the man Christ Jesus") might come the 

resurrection of the dead. (John 1:14; 6:51; 

1 Cor. 15:21.) In other words, he was transformed 

from the spiritual to the human nature, 

so that in giving his life for the world's 

redemption he might give the exact equivalent 

or corresponding price for that which 

was lost. 

For the sake of brevity we must of necessity 
pass by many points of interest connected 
with this narrative of our Lord's 
birth, e.g., the prophecies of his coming 
(Gen. 3:15; 22:18; 49:10; 2 Sam. 7:12-16; 
Isa. 9:6,7; 11:1-9; Dan. 9:24, etc.); the announcement 
of his coming (Luke 1); the 
date of his birth (See M. DAWN VOL. II., 
page 54); his human lineage as a Son of 
David and of Abraham, and his divine origin 
as the only begotten Son of God; and, 
lastly, the condition of the world at his advent. 
But these the student can with profit 
look up for himself. On the last point, 
however, we would have none fail to observe 
the evidences of the Lord's preparatory 
overruling providence in so shaping 
the world's affairs as to accomplish the purposes 
of his plan at that time. (1) The 



world was then for a time at peace, and 
quiet, the Roman dominion having brought 
all the world under its powerful control; 
and as all men were in expectation of Messiah's 
advent (Luke 3:15) according to the 
Jewish prophets whose fame had gone out 
into all the world, the sudden announcement 

R1674: page 222 

of his birth attracted wide attention, as it 

would not have done in less peaceful times. 

(2) The Greek language, noted by all scholars 

as the most nearly perfect, exact and precise 

medium for human speech, had at that 

time been fully developed and widely disseminated. 

Thus was prepared in due time the 

very best medium for the communication of 

the gospel of the new covenant. 

(3) The Old Testament had been translated 
into the Greek language three centuries 
before Christ (This version is called 
the Septuagint); and the Jews had been 
dispersed among all peoples, carrying the 
O.T. with them and bearing witness to its 
prophecies of a coming Messiah. (4) It 
was a time, too, of increased intellectual activity, 
which was ready to operate on this 
and every other question of public interest. 
Thus the circumstances of the time were 
peculiarly adapted to the announcement of 
this wonderful event,— the advent of the 
world's Redeemer. The fulness of time 
had come, and, under the overruling providence 
of God, the conditions were ripe. 

It is worthy of notice that the announcement 
of the Savior's birth was not made to 
an assembled world, in whose most vital 
interest he had come; nor even to assembled 
Israel, the chosen people of God; nor 
yet to all of those who, like Simeon and 
Anna, with devout hearts had long been 
looking for the hope of Israel. But it was 
made to only a few devout shepherds who 
were watching their flocks by night. The 
grand truth was one to be received by faith; 
and it was sent through humble, but trustworthy, 
human agents, who were the honored 
instruments in God's hands. And any 
who proudly despised the instruments were 
unworthy of the good tidings. 

The announcement was one which modern 
"orthodoxy" could not justify; for it 
was the very reverse of its bad tidings of 
great misery to nearly all people. The 
Angels' message was, "good tidings of 



GREAT JOY TO ALL PEOPLE; for unto you is 
born this day in the city of David a Savior, 
which is Christ the Lord." 

The tidings are of redemption and restitution 
and everlasting life for all who will 
accept this blessing on the terms on which 
it is offered;— viz., faith in Christ as the Redeemer, 
and full repentance from sin, which 
of necessity implies the forsaking of sin and 
the cultivation of righteousness. Christ was 
born to be a Savior by subsequently giving 
his life a ransom for all. These good tidings 
—this miracle of divine goodness and mercy 
to fallen and doomed men— met a marvelously 
cold and indifferent reception. The 
world in general, though apprised of the fact 
and its import, manifested no faith nor interest 
in it, while it is written that he came unto 
his own people (the Jews), and they received 
him not. But the jubilant heavenly 
hosts, who were capable of appreciating 
what fallen men could not appreciate, and 
will not until their blind eyes are opened 
and their deaf ears unstopped, broke out in 
a rapturous strain of heavenly melody, saying, 
"Glory to God in the highest, and on 
earth peace, good will toward men."* 



*This expression— "good will toward men"— as rendered 
by a majority of translators is confirmed by the 
latest found manuscript, the Lewis manuscript of the 
Gospels, discovered in 1892 in the convent at Mt. Sinai. 

R1674: page 223 

The full import of this song will not be fully 
realized by men until the Millennial reign 
of Christ shall proffer them full emancipation 
and deliverance from sin and its entailments. 

R1674: page 223 

PRESENTATION IN THE TEMPLE. 



III. QUAR., LESSON II., JULY 8, LUKE 2:25-38. 

Golden Text— "A light to lighten the Gentiles, and 
the glory of thy people Israel."— Luke 2:32. 

VERSES 25-31. Simeon was one of the 
kind of characters to whom God reveals 
his truth— a just and devout man, waiting 



in faith for the consolation of Israel. "Light 
is sown for the righteous, and joy for the 
upright in heart." And the holy spirit was 
upon him, so that, being thus inspired, he 
prophesied concerning the infant Jesus. 

VERSE 32. Under divine inspiration, 
therefore, Simeon declared this child to be 
a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the 
glory of Israel. John also pointed to him 
as the true light which lighteth every man 
that cometh into the world. (John 1:9.) 
And Paul adds, "This is good and acceptable 
in the sight of God our Savior, who will 
have all men to be saved [from their blindness 
and deafness], and to come unto the 
knowledge of the truth." (1 Tim. 2:4.) As 
the vast majority of mankind have never 
been thus enlightened, and thousands more 
have been only partially so, it follows logically 
that the full enlightenment of the 
world tarries until the Millennial reign of 
Christ shall call forth all that are in their 
graves—when "the Sun of righteousness 
shall rise with healing in his wings." Then 
he will enlighten the whole world, and believing 
Israel will glory in him. 

Simeon's further prophecy of verse 34 is 
partially fulfilled. The world has witnessed 
the fall of Israel from divine favor, and their 
sad condition as outcasts for nearly two 
thousand years, because of their rejection of 
Christ. And now the time for their rising 
again has come (beginning A.D. 1878): and 
they will be raised up nationally to all the 
favor from which they fell nationally. Today 
we are witnesses of the regathering 
of Israel, preparatory to the turning away 
of their blindness and their coming again 
into divine favor and blessing. 

"And for a sign which shall be spoken 
against." This has been true all through 
the age; and the reproach of the cross has 
not yet ceased. 

VERSE 35 had reference to Christ's tragic 
death, and the test of faith thereby instituted, 
both in that day, and even to the end 
of the age, thus (by the test) revealing the 
thoughts of many hearts,— proving which 
are loyal and faithful to God as true soldiers 
of the cross, and which are not. It is not 
probable, however, that Simeon, who spoke 
thus under divine inspiration, understood 
fully the import of his words. 

VERSES 36-38. Anna, a prophetess, 
another devout, faithful soul, recognized and 
pointed out the infant Redeemer. It will 



be observed that she was of the tribe of 
Aser— another evidence of what we have 
frequently called attention to in connection 
with the Anglo-Israel question, that the entire 
house of Israel (twelve tribes) was represented 
at Jerusalem in our Lord's day, 
and not the tribes of Judah and Benjamin 
only. See TOWER, Dec. '91. 

R1674: page 223 

VISIT OF THE WISE MEN. 



III. QUAR., LESSON III., JULY 15, MATT. 2:1-12. 

Golden Text— "They saw the young child with Mary 
his mother, and fell down and worshipped him."— 
Matt. 2:11. 

VERSES 1,2. That even the Gentile 
world was in expectation of the coming 
Messiah (Luke 3:15) is manifest from this 
visit of the wise men (Greek Magi, sages) 
from the east— possibly from Persia. The 
term originally belonged to a class of priests 
among the Medes and Persians who constituted 
the king's privy council and who 
cultivated astrology, medicine and occult and 
natural science. Ancient authors make frequent 
reference to them. Later the term 
was applied to all eastern philosophers. 

In the far east, the Chinese and Japanese 
and other nations have cherished a very 
ancient tradition that God would descend 
to the earth in visible form, to enlighten 
men and to redeem them from their sins. 
Tacitus, Suetonius and Josephus all testify 
that there prevailed throughout the entire 
East at this time an intense conviction, derived 
from ancient prophecies, that ere long 
a powerful monarch would arise in Judea 
and gain dominion over the world. Virgil, 
who lived a little before this, tells that a 
child from heaven was looked for who 
should restore the golden age and take away 
sin. Confucius, in China, about B.C. 500, 
prophesied the appearance of such a deliverer, 
and a deputation of his followers 
going forth in search of him was the means 
of introducing Buddhism into China. Zoroaster 

R1674: page 224 

taught the Persians that a pure virgin 



would bring forth a child, and that as 
soon as the child would be born a star would 
appear, which he added, "follow wheresoever 
it leads you, and adore the mysterious 
child, offering your gifts to him with the 
profoundest humility. He is the Almighty 
Word, which created the heavens." 

These expectations doubtless arose from 
the intermingling of the Jews with foreign 
nations. The Prophet Daniel was himself 
associated with some of their wise men. 
(Dan. 2:48.) His prophecies were made 
known to them, and the calculations by which 
he pointed to the time of Messiah's advent. 
These in course of time were woven into 
their literature. Nearly all of the ancient 
religions are confessions of human need: and 
in their blind gropings in the dark, they reveal 
the depths of man's degradation and 
misery. 

The miraculous star in the east, for which 
some of the Gentile wise men had been 
taught by a mere vague, groping superstition 
to look, finally made its appearance, 
and guided those blind feelers after God to 

R1675: page 224 

the wonderful light of the world. Thus 
kindly God condescends to human ignorance 
and weakness. "A bruised reed 
will he not break, and smoking flax will 
he not quench." All men will in due time 
have full, clear testimony to establish their 
faith in the Holy One of Israel and all who 
love righteousness will gladly accept him. 
Those who now can walk by faith have all 
the evidences which hopeful, loving faith 
requires. But none the less shall all the 
doubting Thomases and all the now blinded 
world in due time have the more tangible 
evidences in store for them. But more blessed 
are those who can now walk by faith.— 
John 20:29. 

The inquiry of the wise men (verse 2) 
betokened a proper condition of heart— (1) 
It showed that they had respect and reverence, 
and that they desired to render homage 
to the mighty God of Israel, and to his 
messenger to men. (2) It showed faith in 
the divinely inspired prophecies which had 
been irregularly interwoven with their own 
vague ideas and traditions. (3) It showed 
their zeal as truth-seekers, and their humility 
of heart in leaving their own philosophies, 
etc., and coming to inquire of the 



God of another nation. They seemed to 
desire truth on the great subjects of God 
and of human destiny, regardless of all 
other considerations. And they accordingly 
declared their disposition to render the 
homage due to the appointed ambassador 
of Israel's God, when they should find him. 

Jesus was born to be a king as well as a 
savior. The latter term includes the former; 
for the great salvation is secured by both 
his humiliation (even unto death) and his 
exaltation (as a king and deliverer). By 
his vicarious sacrifice our salvation was 
made legally possible; and by his glorious 
reign it will become an accomplished fact. 

VERSES 3-6 show the faith-though it 
was an irreverent and selfishly jealous faith 
—of Herod and his official staff in the God 
of Israel and in the words of his inspired 
prophets; and also the thorough acquaintance 
of the Jews with the prophecies. Without 
hesitation they pointed to the predictions 
of time and place and repeated Christ's 
foretold mission. Indirectly, we have here 
strong evidence of the esteem which the 
Hebrew Scriptures everywhere commanded. 
Herod's selfish faith, which sought the infant 
king that he might kill him, was in 
strong contrast with the reverent and devotional 
faith of the wise men. Fearing the 
overthrow of his own power, he was moved 
with envy toward the infant rival who was 
already attracting the world's attention. 
But, as usual, the wrath and duplicity of an 
evil man was overruled for good; for the 
king gave to the wise men the directions 
from the Jewish prophets— to go to Bethlehem, 
—an additional assurance to that of 
the star that they were being rightly guided, 
and that too by the God of Israel. 

VERSES 7,8,12 show the duplicity of 
Herod's wicked heart, which the wise men 
could not discern, but which God knew 
and guarded them against by a warning 
dream. The devout wise men obeyed the 
warning and, disregarding the kings command, 
departed into their own country 
another way, bearing the good tidings with 
them. 

VERSES 9-11. Leaving the king's presence, 
they observed that the star also led in 
the direction of Bethlehem, and, standing 
over where the young child was, the miraculous 
luminary had accomplished its mission: 
the infant Redeemer and King was 
found and reverently worshipped and presented 



with the choicest and most costly gifts. 

Thus even in his infancy this light that 
was to lighten the Gentiles began to shine 
into some waiting and devout Gentile hearts. 



page 226 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1677: page 226 

CAN IT BE DELAYED UNTIL 1914? 



Seventeen years ago people said, concerning 
the time features presented in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, They seem reasonable in many respects, 
but surely no such radical changes could occur 
between now and the close of 1914: if you 
had proved that they would come about in a 
century or two, it would seem much more 
probable. 

What changes have since occurred, and what 



velocity is gained daily! 

"The old is quickly passing, and the new is coming in. 

Now, in view of recent labor troubles and 
threatened anarchy, our readers are writing to 
know if there may not be a mistake in the 
1914 date. They say that they do not see how 
present conditions can hold out so long under 
the strain. 

We see no reason for changing the figures— 
nor could we change them if we would. They 
are, we believe, God's dates, not ours. But 
bear in mind that the end of 1914 is not the 
date for the beginning, but for the end of the 
time of trouble. We see no reason for changing 
from our opinion expressed in the View 
presented in the WATCH TOWER of Jan. 15, '92. 
We advise that it be read again. 



TRACT NO. 21. -DO YOU KNOW? 



We published one hundred and fifteen thousand 
copies of this tract, and have sent samples 
to all our TOWER readers. It seems to give 
general satisfaction, and orders from all quarters 
are large. We advise the circulation of 
this tract by all of you— on street cars, steam 
cars, at hotels and depots, and Sundays on 
the street-corners,— until everyone within your 
reach has been supplied. Order all that you 
will agree to use. Never mind the money. 
Many have opportunity for distributing sample 
copies of Old Theology Tracts who have no 
money to spare to pay for their printing, etc., 
but others, again, who have less opportunity for 
distributing tracts, take delight in meeting the 
publishing expenses, and thus help to preach 
the "good tidings of great joy, which shall be 
unto all people." 

The first edition, although large, is already 
exhausted; but we have another edition of over 
two hundred thousand under way which will 
be ready in about ten days. Send in your 
order and have a share in this feature of the 
harvest work. There should be a million copies 
of this tract in circulation within a year. 



R1675 : page 227 
