Does God’s Goodness Attract You?
DO YOU have a very close friend? If so, did you ever reflect on what attracted you to that person? Was it his (or her) looks? Was it the fact that you were interested in the same things? Or was it deeper qualities, such as kindness or wisdom? If the quality that cemented your friendship was goodness, then you have a rich relationship indeed. Genuine goodness is rarely found today when, for the most part, people are “without love of goodness.”​—2 Timothy 3:3.
For a Christian, the most important relationship in life is not with another human but with God. So when you think of this relationship, have you ever considered: ‘Which of God’s qualities draws me most to God?’
God’s Chief Attributes
In fact, the Bible describes many outstanding qualities of God. Usually the four that are highlighted are his love, his justice, his wisdom, and his almighty power. (Deuteronomy 32:4; Job 12:13; Psalm 147:5; 1 John 4:8) If we had to choose among these four outstanding qualities, perhaps we would say that God’s love attracted us the most. Closely associated with his love, however, is his excelling goodness. Bible writers wrote eloquently about this, and such goodness can draw humans into a healthy, pleasant relationship with their Creator.
For example, late in the sixth century B.C.E., the prophet Zechariah exclaimed of Jehovah: “How great his goodness is, and how great his handsomeness is!” (Zechariah 9:17) Many years before Zechariah, Isaiah similarly praised God when he wrote: “The loving-kindnesses of Jehovah I shall mention, . . . even the abundant goodness to the house of Israel that he has rendered to them.”​—Isaiah 63:7.
Three centuries earlier, King David had written very movingly about God’s goodness. David wrote from experience, having enjoyed this goodness all through his life. God was extremely good to David, especially after his very serious sins in connection with Bath-sheba and her husband Uriah, when God showed him mercy. (2 Samuel 12:9, 13) At Psalm 31:19, David declared with appreciation: “How abundant your goodness is, which you have treasured up for those fearing you!”
Do you value God’s goodness as much as those ancient worshipers did? If so, you will experience the real “peace of God that excels all thought,” as well as be deeply moved to do God’s will at all times. (Philippians 4:7) Let us consider for a few moments now what God’s goodness includes and how amazing its scope is. This will surely deepen our appreciation for our loving heavenly Father.

