The Handwriting on the Wall​—Do You See It?
“From his own hand foresees his fall, . . .
’Tis like the writing on the wall.”
WITH these words, 18th-century Irish writer Jonathan Swift described a banker. Besieged by clients wanting their money back, he sensed that his end was near. For centuries, the expression ‘the handwriting on the wall’ has implied imminent danger.
But the original ‘handwriting on the wall’ appeared more than 2,500 years ago. And its speedy fulfillment changed the course of history. To examine further the origin of the expression ‘the handwriting on the wall,’ we must turn to the Bible book of Daniel. This will help us to see the value of warnings contained in the Scriptures, and it should move us to heed a critical warning in our day.
From the Pinnacle of Power
It is the night of October 5, 539 B.C.E. Babylon’s residents are drinking and dancing. Though the Medo-Persian enemy is at its gates, the city seems secure. Its walls are impregnable, so let everyone enjoy himself. Why, the sounds of banqueting may well indicate to the besiegers that the city can resist for a long time!
In the great hall of his palace, and doubtless with much pride, King Belshazzar surveys the important people he has called together for the occasion. He has his servants bring in the gold and the silver vessels that his grandfather, King Nebuchadnezzar, took from Jehovah’s temple in Jerusalem decades earlier. ‘From these vessels let us drink wine to the praise of our gods!’ Belshazzar may well be exclaiming.​—Daniel 5:1-4.
To Complete Ruin
Suddenly, Belshazzar’s face pales with fright. There, in front of the lampstand near the wall, a hand appears and writes four simple but enigmatic words. At that, the music and dancing stop. The king is terrified and his knees are knocking. What does this omen mean? Call the wise men and the astrologers! Whoever can interpret this writing will be showered with honors.​—Daniel 5:5-7.
Everyone nervously waits for the wise men to say something. But they are perplexed. What is the deep meaning of that ‘handwriting on the wall’? No one dares to venture an explanation, and the king is even more frightened.​—Daniel 5:8, 9.
Hearing what is happening, the queen enters the hall. She reminds Belshazzar that in the kingdom there is a foreign wise man who has proved his ability. Accordingly, Daniel is called. Courageously, he reminds the king of what befell Nebuchadnezzar years earlier. Then, Daniel tells Belshazzar what is going to happen to him, saying:
“This is the writing that was inscribed: MENE, MENE, TEKEL and PARSIN.
“This is the interpretation of the word: MENE, God has numbered the days of your kingdom and has finished it.
“TEKEL, you have been weighed in the balances and have been found deficient.
“PERES, your kingdom has been divided and given to the Medes and the Persians.”​—Daniel 5:10-28.
A Speedy Fulfillment
Will Belshazzar have to wait long to see if Daniel’s words are accurate? Let us see what happens next and consider events that have more than historical significance.
The Medo-Persian hosts have been digging canals to divert the Euphrates River that flows through the city of Babylon. King Cyrus has waited for this evening to execute his plan, hoping that the Babylonians will relax their vigilance because of nightfall. Now the canals are opened. Once the waters of the diverted river are low enough, the soldiers file down the banks into the riverbed.
This night the city gates opening onto the river had been left open, possibly because of overconfidence. The Medo-Persian army penetrates the city by surprise. A detachment succeeds in entering the royal palace, and Belshazzar is killed. The great Babylonian empire has fallen.​—Daniel 5:30.
A Destruction Equally Sudden
The accuracy of Daniel’s interpretation illustrates the seriousness of the Bible’s warnings. Later words written by the apostle Paul show that there are other sudden and important events yet to come. In his first inspired letter to Thessalonian Christians, he writes: “Whenever it is that they are saying: ‘Peace and security!’ then sudden destruction [from God] is to be instantly upon them just as the pang of distress upon a pregnant woman; and they will by no means escape.”​—1 Thessalonians 5:3.
But just as Daniel and the Jews were saved when Babylon fell, so it is possible to survive this coming destruction at God’s hand. How? By staying spiritually awake and thus enjoying Jehovah’s protection. “But you, brothers,” said Paul, “you are not in darkness, so that that day should overtake you as it would thieves.”​—1 Thessalonians 5:4.
Paul was referring to “Jehovah’s day,” a time of divine intervention in human affairs by means of God’s Messianic Kingdom. (1 Thessalonians 5:2) When should we expect this ‘handwriting on the wall’​—the indications forewarning us of this intervention? An earlier prophecy, recorded in Daniel chapter 2, answers our question.

