Would You Benefit From Having a Personal Territory?
 1. What is a personal territory?
1 What is a personal territory? Available in congregations where territory is plentiful, it is a territory of your own, perhaps one near where you live. The Organized book, page 103, explains: “Having a conveniently located personal territory will enable you to make the most of the time you can devote to field service. Also, you may wish to invite another publisher to work with you in your personal territory.”
 2. How may a personal territory be used to supplement group witnessing?
2 To Supplement Group Witnessing: If you obtain a personal territory near your work, you can share in the ministry during your lunch break or before returning home, perhaps with another publisher who works nearby. If you obtain a territory near your home, you and your family can conveniently use it for evening witnessing. Of course, if you do not attend a meeting for field service, it is appropriate to pray for Jehovah’s direction before you start preaching. (Phil. 4:6) In addition, you should balance the time you work in a personal territory with the time you support the congregation’s group witnessing arrangements. Especially on the weekends, when many meet for field service, it is generally best to support your field service group.
 3. What are the benefits of having a personal territory?
3 Benefits: If you have a personal territory, you have somewhere to preach whenever your schedule allows. You can devote more time to preaching and spend less time on travel. The increased flexibility allows some to auxiliary or regular pioneer. Since the householders who show interest are in the same neighborhood, it is easier to make return visits and conduct Bible studies. Many find that preaching in a personal territory helps them to get acquainted with the householders and cultivate their trust, especially if the territory can be worked more than once before turning it in so that others may request it. Would working a personal territory help you and your family to accomplish your ministry more fully?—2 Tim. 4:5.

