“Give a Thorough Witness”
 1. What fine example did the apostle Paul set in the ministry?
1 “Do your service thoroughly.” (2 Tim. 4:5, Byington) The apostle Paul certainly had freeness of speech in giving this admonition to Timothy. In fact, between the years 47 and 56 C.E., Paul completed three missionary journeys. The book of Acts makes repeated mention of Paul’s bearing “thorough witness.” (Acts 23:11; 28:23) How can we do so in our day?
 2. How can we give a thorough witness when preaching from house to house?
2 From House to House: In an effort to contact householders who have never heard the good news, we may need to call at a different time of the day. The man of the house may be at home in the evening hours or on the weekend. We should endeavor to speak with someone at each residence, calling repeatedly at not-at-homes. What if your efforts to reach someone are unsuccessful? Perhaps a letter or a telephone call will yield good results.
 3. What opportunities do you have to witness publicly and informally?
3 Publicly and Informally: Jehovah’s servants today make known “true wisdom” to all who will listen. Sometimes this occurs “in the very street” or “in the public squares.” (Prov. 1:20, 21) When going about our daily routine, are we conscious of giving a witness? Can it be said that we are “intensely occupied with the word”? (Acts 18:5) If so, then we are fulfilling our obligation to “give a thorough witness.”—Acts 10:42; 17:17; 20:20, 21, 24.
 4. How do prayer and meditation contribute to our giving a thorough witness?
4 At times, though, because of personal weakness or inherent shyness, we may hold back from giving a witness. For a certainty, Jehovah understands our limitations. (Ps. 103:14) Nevertheless, when such occasions arise, we can pray to him for courage to speak up. (Acts 4:29, 31) Also, when doing personal study and meditating on God’s Word, we can focus on deepening our appreciation for the excelling value of the good news. (Phil. 3:8) This will move us to declare it with zeal!
 5. How can we share in the fulfillment of Joel’s prophecy?
5 The prophecy of Joel foretold that before the coming of the great and fear-inspiring day of Jehovah, God’s people would “keep going” and not let anything deter them from preaching. (Joel 2:2, 7-9) May we be fully involved in this never-to-be-repeated witnessing work!

