“Have Love for the Whole Association of Brothers”
The inspired words of this title were written down nearly two thousand years ago. (1 Pet. 2:17) But we need to apply them now more than ever! How can we love something as vast as a global brotherhood? And in this loveless world, how can we make sure that our love never fades? (Matt. 24:12) See if you can answer the following questions while watching the video Our Whole Association of Brothers.
(1) When did we formally become part of our Christian brotherhood? (2) What three activities do we share in common with our worldwide brotherhood? (3) How are our brothers showing their determination to preach (a) in the Alaskan wilderness, (b) in the vast harbors of Europe, and (c) in the dense forests of Peru? (4) Why should we never feel that preaching is just an ordinary work? (5) Give examples of how Jehovah’s Witnesses have comforted and supported one another (a) after an earthquake, (b) after a hurricane, and (c) during civil war? (6) In what practical ways can all of us demonstrate the great identifying mark of our Christian brotherhood? (John 13:35) (7) What are the benefits of working together to build our own Kingdom Halls? (8) How did our brothers in Eastern Europe and Russia survive spiritually when the work was under ban? (9) What extraordinary effort do many Witnesses put forth to attend conventions, and why? (10) How has this video strengthened your determination (a) to worship Jehovah at Christian meetings in unity with your brothers, (b) to help others in times of need, and (c) to preach faithfully whenever and however you can? (11) How and when can we use this video in the ministry?
Our main reason for being a part of our Christian brotherhood is our love for Jehovah. So we love to learn about him and to teach others about him. And we love the people whom Jehovah loves. When we help them in times of need, we do not expect God to thank us. Instead, we thank God because we view our Christian brotherhood as a precious gift from him. As the last days of this loveless world are winding down, may we continue to demonstrate love for the whole association of brothers!

