Announcements
● During January, most congregations will have their public talks from the book Making Your Family Life Happy. Everyone will want to bring his copy of the book to the meeting.
● Literature offer for December: My Book of Bible Stories for $2.00, or New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and any pocket-size book for $1.85. If My Book of Bible Stories and New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures are desired by householder, this combination is available for $3.50. January: Watchtower subscription for one year for $2.00 and a 384- or 416-page book or “Eternal Purpose” book free. (Publishers remit $1.90.) If your congregation does not have enough of the large bound books, you may order “The Nations Shall Know that I Am Jehovah”​—How? and Man’s Salvation out of World Distress at Hand!, which the Society has in stock.
● Congregations will want to arrange special field service activity for the two worldly holidays that come at this time of year. Care should be taken not to call at the homes earlier than when most people are up.
● The Society now has a limited supply of the following publications in Grade-two English Braille: Unseen Spirits​—Do They Help Us Or Do They Harm Us? and Making Your Family Life Happy. You may receive these publications free of charge by writing to the Braille Desk. These sets are not to be stocked by the congregation.
● In December the presiding overseer will audit books for September, October and November or arrange for another capable brother to do so.
● Correction: The book Making Your Family Life Happy is not available in the Finnish language as announced in the September 1978 Our Kingdom Service.
● After January 1, 1979, congregations may submit orders for the 1978 bound volumes of The Watchtower and Awake! These will be available in English, French, Italian, Portuguese and Spanish. Order Dutch and German after February 15. Volumes are $2.50 each. There are no pioneer rates. PAYMENT SHOULD NOT ACCOMPANY ORDERS. These will be charged to the congregation’s literature account.

