New Publication to Be Featured in December
1 In the final talk at the “Victorious Faith” International Convention this past summer, the speaker announced plans to have a campaign in December when the beautiful new publication My Book of Bible Stories would be featured. Now that we have become acquainted with the contents of this new book, what a pleasure it will be to participate in a concerted effort to share this information with others!
2 With eagerness we have anticipated this time when we can give as many persons as possible an opportunity to obtain this attractive publication with its 116 vivid stories that give the reader an idea of what the Bible is all about. As you talk to people in the territory, offer My Book of Bible Stories first. Although this book contains much that is of interest to old and young alike, you may find that some older persons will say they do not have children or grandchildren. Then it may be better to offer them the New World Translation and a pocket-size book. There may be some individuals who do not have a Bible. They may prefer to obtain the Bible and a copy of My Book of Bible Stories. So adapt yourself to the various situations that may be encountered.
COMMENTS ON “MY BOOK OF BIBLE STORIES”
3 At the time this new book was released, how our hearts were thrilled when we heard the speaker at the international convention say: “Our loving heavenly Father and his Son know the responsibility you parents in the congregation have. They want to help you. Through the faithful and discreet slave this new publication, especially for children is released: It is entitled ‘My Book of Bible Stories.’” Since then the Society has received many expressions of appreciation for this publication. Hearing some of these comments should stimulate our enthusiasm as we use this new book in the field service during December.
4 One elder stated: “How thrilling it is that the Society can now produce a book that is so visually appealing for our young ones! This splendid publication, with magnificent color pictures on almost every page, adds a new depth to our teaching. How happy we are that our children, who now learn visually in school by television, can benefit from this splendid visual aid.”
5 Some children read the whole book before the convention was over. One youth said: “It is good; it tells about all the Bible stories.” Another youngster commented: “I like it because it breaks things down so I can understand them better. In the Bible you find words you cannot understand. This book puts it in language easy for us to understand.” A parent exclaimed: “The wonderful book My Book of Bible Stories, especially designed for children, has been enjoyed equally as much by myself as by my seven-year-old son!”
6 Another sister stated: “I am an old lady, but I want to thank you for My Book of Bible Stories. I appreciate the big print and lovely pictures. This makes it easy to read at night when I am very tired.” This older sister added: “My son who is a printer has expressed his professional admiration for the quality of workmanship it contains.”
7 Another of the friends observed: “This book will appeal to the general public because its format will make it a lovely gift.” We do have, as one person observes, “an outstanding spiritual gift from Jehovah.” We pray that Jehovah will bless your efforts in using My Book of Bible Stories to help others to come to appreciate his goodness and purpose.​—Ps. 40:9, 10.

