Presenting the Good News​—As a Youth
1 A number of Christian youths have proved themselves quite effective in presenting the good news. Many times older ones will give ear to the Kingdom message presented by a youth because of the deep, positive impression of seeing a young person involved in Christian activity. Other youths tend to listen more readily to our youths. Many of these young people are seeking answers concerning the purpose of life and other religiously related matters.
2 What can you young people do to take advantage of your favorable situation to give a meaningful Kingdom witness? Many have found it helpful to become adept in using the Bible in the field. This, of course, takes more effort than just presenting the magazines or other literature without a conversation on a Bible text or two. However, it is found that a deeper impression is made on the householders when they note your skill in using the Bible. Also, this use has an enriching effect on you personality.​—Heb. 5:14.
3 When talking to older persons it helps to have a respectful approach, showing you recognize the benefits of their age. (Lev. 19:32) For example, when introducing the current Topic for Conversation to an older person you could say: “I am a student of the Bible. I am concerned about how things are going in the world. I know that you have seen much more change in the world than I have. What do you think the greatest need is if people are going to have success and contentment in life?” Then you might ask them if they feel that following the direction given at Joshua 1:8 would help the situation.
4 When you meet another youth in your field service, make a real effort to use the Bible. As indicated at our international convention this summer, many youths are showing a sincere interest in religious matters. A young scientist who conducted a revealing survey interviewed 800 schoolchildren and found that 60 percent of the children stated something to this effect: “I often concern myself with the question of God’s existence.” We can take advantage of this interest on the part of young people.”
5 For example, when we meet a youth in our  house-to-house work, could we get him involved in a discussion by simply saying: “I would appreciate getting your viewpoint on a matter. Do you think it is more logical to believe that we were created by an intelligent super-being or that we came into existence by chance? [Allow time for an answer.] The Bible shows that God created us and left directions as to how we could make a success in life.” Then discuss the point in Joshua 1:8 You could use My Book of Bible Stories or the New World Translation and Youth book. Many teen-agers have found benefit in the simple summary of the Bible in My Book of Bible Stories. Some have asked for the book simply because a publisher showed a series of pictures with brief comments on them.
6 In view of the advantages youths have in giving an effective witness to both old and young alike, they should be encouraged to have a full share in Kingdom service. There are benefits for them and benefits for those to whom they present the good news.

