Showing Appreciation for the Congregation Book Study
1 Meetings in private homes could well be the oldest and most widely attended of Christian gatherings. In apostolic times groups of Christians met in private homes to discuss God’s Word. (Philem. 2) And today, besides the tens of thousands of congregation book study groups, we find in many of the 46 lands where the work is banned that small groups of our brothers are meeting in private homes for Bible study. This, in fact, is the only kind of meeting possible in many of these lands.
2 The congregation book study is usually in a private home. How do you feel about this meeting? Are you taking full advantage of this provision, or do you regard it as less important than the other meetings? Lower attendance at the book study in many congregations would indicate that some feel this way. What about you?
3 Consider some of the following benefits of the book study arrangement of which all of us can take advantage: (1) The groups are smaller, with better opportunities for close fellowship. (2) It is easier for all to comment freely since the material to be covered is not too lengthy and the group is small; also, we can get answers to questions on points not entirely clear from our personal study. (3) It provides a convenient center for organizing field service where this can be arranged during the week. (4) Conductors can get to know you better and are in a good position to assist with personal problems, give training in field service and help you with Scriptural questions.
4 With this brief review of the benefits of the book study arrangement, how can we all best show our appreciation for it and in some way contribute toward making it a success?
5 Let’s start with you, the publisher. How can you contribute something to the book study where you are assigned? Simply being there on time, or better still, a little early so that you can upbuild the group is a loving thing to do. By advance study of the material you are prepared to incite others to love and fine works by your comments. Showing respect for the home and furniture where the study is held is also very important. What about your dress and conduct as well as that of your children? Do these reflect the fact that you are attending a meeting arranged by Jehovah’s visible organization and where his spirit is present?
6 The family in whose home the study is held would want to make certain that to the best of their ability conditions favorable for study and concentration prevail. Are ventilation, temperature and lighting conducive to relaxed, comfortable study? (Acts 20:8) Are you prepared and in your seat when the study is about to start instead of occupied in another part of the house? Do you make those attending feel welcome?
7 The book study conductor holds the key position for making the entire arrangement a success and of greatest benefit to all attending. As a conductor, have you thoroughly prepared the material? Have you read the Scripture citations? Do you ask meaningful auxiliary questions? Do you endeavor to have all participate, including the children, and yet not embarrass anyone by putting him on the spot? The conductor should be interested in the spiritual development of all in the group and that they become skillful in “handling the word of the truth aright.” (2 Tim. 2:15) He should endeavor to be well acquainted with all who are assigned to the group and make it a practice to visit them in their homes. Where it is not possible for the book study location also to be a meeting place for field service, the conductor will be sure that arrangements are made for his group to meet for service each week at a time and place convenient for them. The publishers also benefit the most when the conductor makes positive appointments to work in service with each one on a regular basis.
8 Are some groups getting too large for the location? Or is the group so small that it is discouraging to the few who attend regularly? Congregation elders will want to be alert, in such cases, to make whatever adjustments are needed. In some areas it has proven beneficial to rotate the locations for the study if there are additional homes available. In this way a burden is not placed on someone if he has had the study in his home for many years and would be happy for someone else to be the host for a time. It is a real privilege to have one of the book studies in our home and wherever circumstances allow, we should be eager for the opportunity. (Prov. 3:9) At such locations where the householder is pleased to have the study in his home and the location is quite suitable, a change would not be necessary if no other factors dictate that the study be moved. Some reports have been received that studies are being held in places that are less than adequate for the locality. Does the condition of the room set aside for the study reflect appreciation for having the study in one’s home? Elders will want to remember that the book study is an extension of the local arrangement for congregation meetings and fills an important role in our study and worship.
9 The congregation book study fills a vital need in our spiritual progress. If some of us have failed to see the reasons for the emphasis being placed on this important arrangement, it would be good to take a fresh look at our view toward the book study to which we are assigned. Do we see why we all should have deep appreciation for this loving provision from Jehovah?

