Try to Be Like Him
1 Jehovah loves people. He has shown this in spiritual as well as physical ways. Although we have many things today for our physical enjoyment, we do not want to overlook the fact that Jehovah provided a message of hope and good news as far back as when Adam was in the Garden of Eden. Should it not be the desire of all appreciative creatures to imitate God’s love for people?
HOW GOD SHOWS LOVE
2 The evidence of God’s love for people is all around us and can be seen in the physical creation itself. With what remarkable care it has been made for the health, pleasure and welfare of man! The greatest manifestation of God’s love for mankind was the gift of his faithful Son, Jesus. (John 3:16) However, where would we be if He had not provided the Bible and a means to get its message to us? The Bible provides answers to our questions on life and gives us hope for the future. We have all this and more because God loves people.
WE CAN IMITATE HIM
3 Can the quality of love be imitated by us lowly, imperfect creatures? Yes it can. Paul says: “Therefore, become imitators of God, as beloved children, and go on walking in love.”​—Eph. 5:1, 2.
4 Do you work hard speaking about God, unceasingly showing your heartfelt love for people, never allowing yourself to become inactive or even irregular in service? Many persons may yet be found through the preaching of the good news, and taught Jehovah’s way to salvation. Sometimes this means giving a little extra of our time and energy, but the rewards are great.
5 The apostle Paul willingly gave of himself in declaring the good news to others though it meant much suffering and self-sacrifice. He said: “I did not hold back from telling you any of the things that were profitable nor from teaching you publicly and from house to house. But I thoroughly bore witness. . . . I do not make my soul of any account as dear to me, if only I may finish my course and the ministry that I received of the Lord Jesus, to bear thorough witness to the good news of the undeserved kindness of God.”​—Acts 20:20, 21, 24.
6 Many of our brothers are demonstrating this same zeal and faith today and are receiving many blessings from the hand of Jehovah. In these thrilling days before the climax of this system of things, what a joy it is to receive Jehovah’s abundant love! We should make every effort to try to be like him by giving of ourselves in a full measure to others.

