Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 3
 7 min: Song 51. Branch Letter and any local announcements.
18 min: “New Publication to Be Featured in December.” Have an elder who is good with young children cover this article with audience, emphasizing December campaign and using some of the comments made by brothers around the country. He should have several young children in the congregation on the platform with their books and let them give heartfelt expressions about what they appreciated in the book. He can draw them out with appropriate questions. He should interview various ones in advance so they will know just what to expect.
20 min: “Showing Appreciation for the Congregation Book Study.” Lively discussion between a study conductor, a publisher in whose home a study is being held and one who participates in the study regularly. Discuss the benefits of the book study and what each can do to contribute something of value to the study.
15 min: Discuss talking points from our current Topic for Conversation. When reading Joshua 1:8, to what points in the scripture do you draw the householder’s attention? Depending on whether My Book of Bible Stories or the New World Translation is being featured, what would be a good transition from Joshua 1:8 to the offer? If My Book of Bible Stories is featured, you may wish to turn the householder’s attention to stories 84, 85 and 86, especially at this time of year. Demonstrate how this may be done with different householders. Song 20 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 10
 7 min: Song 23. Local announcements.
15 min: Question-and-answer discussion of article “Try to Be Like Him.” Comment on all scriptures and make appropriate application.
18 min: Talk on Watchtower article “Be of Good Cheer” (March 1, 1978, pp. 3, 4). Apply principles to welcoming new ones and others at congregation. Show how a cheerful spirit can help the brothers and those visiting the congregation. Have demonstration of brother welcoming and conversing cheerfully with one visiting the congregation.
15 min: Where Does the Bible Say It? (Part 1) Lively discussion of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century brochure. Give a brief talk (3 to 4 min.) on “What Do They Believe?” on page 12 and first two paragraphs on page 14, using the scriptures cited as an outline. In considering the chart on page 13 (cover only first half of chart), ask audience questions on as many of the subjects as is practical in the allotted time. Place emphasis on Where does the Bible say it? and How does the scripture used prove it? Every scripture on each topic need not be considered.
 5 min: Song 95 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 17
 7 min: Song 73. Announcements
18 min: “Be Aglow with the Spirit.” Scriptural discussion based on Romans 12:11. Chairman to have audience read scriptures and make application to field activity.
1. Romans 12:11: What is relationship between having Jehovah’s spirit and not ‘loitering at your business?’
2. 1 Thessalonians 5:19: How might one “put out the fire of the spirit”? What can we do to keep alive the “fire of the spirit”?
3. Isaiah 9:6, 7: For what is Jehovah zealous? How can we show we are zealous for the same thing?
4. 1 Kings 18:40: Is our assignment as difficult as was Elijah’s?
5. Revelation 3:16: What could happen if one lost his zeal for the truth?
Conclude by showing how zealous activity in Jehovah’s service not only gives one greater joy but also serves as a protection.
15 min: Discussion of “Presenting the Good News​—As a Youth.” Have a brother discuss points in the article with several youths. Have them demonstrate the use of the introductions in paragraphs 3 and 5.
15 min: Discuss with audience the article “Youths, How Do You View Elders?” To be handled by elder to whom teen-agers freely go. He should talk with a number of these beforehand about this article. He should ask them to be ready to comment freely during this discussion. He can cover questions such as: How do you think the elders can help you? What help can they give you in field service? What adjustments do you think some youths need to make in their viewpoint?
 5 min: Song 106 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 24
 8 min: Song 37. Local announcements.
15 min: “Human Kindness Essential for Happiness.” Talk from February 15, 1978, Watchtower. Emphasize need to show kindnesses to all persons. Have audience relate local experiences of how kindness shown to them assisted them to come to a knowledge of the truth.
17 min: Youths. Be Examples in Faith. (1 Tim. 4:12) This part should provide a review of some highlights from Friday’s “Victorious Faith” International Convention program. An elder along with a group of young people can cover some of the points that especially impressed them. Comments should be realistic, though it would be good to review them beforehand. In addition to the young people’s own expressions, the following are some highlights that may be covered:
(1) God must be kept in life’s activities if their life is to be a happy one. (Eccl. 12:1) (2) Important for young people to determine if their future is built around Kingdom or worldly interests. (3) Be determined to avoid misconduct that can ruin future life. (4) Wholesome goals such as privileges in Kingdom service can bring happiness now as well as in the future. Review some points from drama “Youths​—What Is Your Goal in Life?”
Younger persons may cover some of the following points: (1) What can be learned at a very young age from their parents? (2 Tim. 3:15, 16) (2) How they have learned to sit quietly at meetings, paying attention to speakers. (Neh. 8:1-3) (3) How they might accompany their mother as she takes part in the school. (4) How they are being trained to witness effectively at school.
Conclude by commending parents for effort they are putting forth to encourage all youths to be examples in faith.
20 min: Where Does the Bible Say It? (Part 2) Enthusiastic discussion of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century brochure. Cover second half of chart on page 13, “What Jehovah Witnesses Believe.” Ask audience questions on as many of the subjects as is practical in the allotted time. As in previous discussion of chart, place emphasis on Where does the Bible say it? and, How does the scripture used prove it? Not every scripture on each topic need be considered. Song 31 and prayer.

