Youths, How Do You View Elders?
1 There is much good that can be accomplished by Christian youths today. People are immediately impressed when they see youths displaying respect for others, stability in life and good moral character. Even young children bring praise to Jehovah by their fine conduct and sincere expressions about him. (Matt. 21:15, 16) It is indeed praiseworthy when young people overcome the “desires incidental to youth” and follow a course that is an influence for good upon others.​—2 Tim. 2:22.
2 The elders in the congregation have the responsibility to help all, including the youth, to grow in knowledge, faith and stability. (Eph. 4:11-15) Although the primary responsibility for helping youths belongs to the parents, elders, too, can do much to supplement the efforts of the parents. Especially is this helpful in those families where there is no father in the truth. (Jas. 1:27) For elders to accomplish this in the fullest measure, it is vital that there be a good working relationship between them and the youth. This good relationship depends much on how youths view the elders.
3 How do you view the elders in your congregation? Do you view them as experienced Christians whom you can freely approach with any question or problem? Do you view them as men who can assist you in a practical and reasonable manner? If not, why not? Some youths have implied that they feel older ones, including elders, do not understand them. But have you really sincerely tried to communicate with them? Remember, older ones were at one time teen-agers. They may appear to be narrow in their viewpoint at times, but could this be due to their having already learned the hard way that the course they are counseling against can bring harm? (Heb. 12:7-11; 13:7, 17) Listening intently to wise counsel from elders is a course of wisdom.​—Prov. 4:4, 8, 9.
4 On the other hand, elders can analyze their way of dealing with the youths in the congregation. Are they proving themselves to be approachable, “mild-tempered” and “lowly”? (Matt. 11:28-30) It is understandable that youths and others tend to be hesitant to approach them if they are otherwise. There could develop an attitude in imperfect men to overlook youths. Even the apostles fell prey to this tendency.​—Mark 10:13-16.
5 It is urgent that youths and elders maintain the right view of each other. Our youths are a force for good in the congregation. As one parent who is now a regular pioneer stated: “I can say, as a result of the good conduct of my children, and its influence on the family, we have definitely been doing all things ‘for the sake of the good news.’” It is vital that youths maintain a balanced view of elders so elders can assist them to be more productive in their lives as Christians.

