Announcements
● Literature offer for February: Any two of the older pocket-size books the congregation has in stock for a contribution of $1.00. May include Choosing, Commentary on James, “Eternal Purpose,” Evolution (old edition), Good News, Holy Spirit, Peace and Security (old edition), This Life, Truth, and World Government. March: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? for a contribution of $2.50. Small-size books are $1.25. April and May: Watchtower subscription for one year for a contribution of $5.00. If subscription is not taken, offer two magazines and a brochure for 80¢.
● On Saturday, May 7, the Brooklyn Bethel home and factory and Watchtower Farms buildings will be closed for spring cleaning. There will be no arrangements for tours or for congregations to pick up literature on that day.
● The Memorial celebration will be held Friday, April 1, 1988. Although the talk may start earlier, please remember that the passing of the Memorial bread and wine should not begin until after sundown. Check with local sources to determine when sundown occurs in your area. No other meetings are to be conducted on that date. If your congregation normally has meetings on Friday, you may want to switch those to another time of the week if the hall is available. If your Service Meeting is affected, it may be possible to incorporate into another Service Meeting any parts scheduled for that week that are particularly applicable to your congregation.
● New Publications Available:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—1987 Edition (Deluxe; DLbi12 with marginal references; black)​—Dutch
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—With References (Rbi8)—​Italian
My Book of Bible Stories​—Gun
Survival Into a New Earth​—Romanian
United in Worship of the Only True God​—Romanian
Is There a God Who Cares?​—Tongan
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (Brochure)​—Yoruba
Watch Tower Publications Index 1984​—Italian
Tract No. 13​—Finnish
Tract No. 14​—Finnish
Tract No. 15​—Finnish, German, Greek, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Swedish
Tract No. 16​—Finnish
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Joshua (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—Danish
Judges, Ruth (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—Danish
The Second of Kings (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—German
Album of Hebrew Scriptures​—Volume 2; The First of Samuel to Psalms (set of 21 tapes in an album; congregation and public: $33.25; pioneers: $21.50)​—German
Listening to the Great Teacher (set of five tapes and a book in an album; congregation and public: $11.25; pioneers: $9.50)​—German
(This item is not yet available in English.)

