Caring for Kingdom Seed
1 A farmer prepares the land and sows the seed, and then what joy and satisfaction he feels when the seed has sprouted! Even though much effort is required on his part, he will joyfully work hard with the hope of reaping a fine harvest. Jesus likened “the word of God” to seed that is sown. (Luke 8:11) Therefore, we will want to have a full share in sowing Kingdom seed, that is, “the word of the kingdom,” with the hope that it will reach persons whose hearts prove to be like “the fine soil” described in Jesus’ illustration.​—Matt. 13:19, 23; Luke 8:15.
2 Did you have the privilege of placing some of the older books last month, or did you have fine Scriptural discussions with persons in your territory? Can you do more to cultivate their interest in the Kingdom message? Return visits are an effective way to care for the interest shown. These can often be made within a day or two of the initial contact.
3 During the month of February, we have further opportunities to offer the older publications. Something contained in one of them may be just what the interested person needs to arouse his desire to progress spiritually. Also, be prepared to share some points about the blessings that the Kingdom will bring to those with receptive hearts.
4 Auxiliary pioneering will provide some with opportunity to expand their service, making return visits, and perhaps starting new studies. Each year many brothers and sisters seize the opportunity to auxiliary pioneer in March and April. This year April has five Saturdays, a marked advantage for those who may hold full-time secular jobs. Young publishers may be able to use the world’s Easter holiday period to engage in the field ministry.
5 In a number of congregations, the entire body of elders, the ministerial servants, and their wives have set a fine example by auxiliary pioneering. Last April one congregation had 83 auxiliary and 12 regular pioneers. What a source of encouragement for all the congregation! May Jehovah bless your careful planning!
RETURN VISITS COULD BECOME STUDIES
6 In order to be effective when making return visits, you will need to have made appropriate notations on your house-to-house record. These will help you to determine the subject to discuss when you call back. Some publishers like to let the householder do most of the talking on the first call and in that way find out what is on his mind and what subjects are of interest to him. Should the person express wrong ideas, it may be wise to avoid focusing on such comments at the outset but, rather, highlight the promises of the Kingdom.
7 The Bible study work is the foremost means by which persons are helped to learn of Jehovah’s purposes. You might use something in the publications that you feel would be of particular interest to the person. Ask a question, and then show how the literature readily provides the Bible’s answer. Consider several paragraphs if time permits. A positive attitude shows we are sincerely convinced that what we have is good. By keeping your objective in view, you too should soon be able to start fine Bible studies. You can use the book you placed with the householder or another one that he already has. The transition to the Live Forever book can be made as soon as you feel it is appropriate.
8 Is it not fascinating to sow literal seed and then watch the plants grow as we care for them? We will have even greater satisfaction when we see “the word of the kingdom” taking root and growing in the hearts of individuals with whom we are studying. As these come into the truth, they become a source of praise and honor to Jehovah. May he bless abundantly our efforts as we sow Kingdom seed and then care for what it produces, to his praise!

