Help the Elderly and the Infirm
1 Most congregations have publishers who are getting along in years or those who have physical limitations. They may need help getting to meetings or out in field service.
2 Some have served faithfully for many years, and they desire to continue participating in congregation activities despite their limitations. One sister in her late 80’s said: “I love Jehovah so much that I simply have to share in the service and attend meetings in order to prove this to him.” (1 Cor. 15:58) Do you not agree such ones deserve our help?
FIELD SERVICE
3 Although many of the elderly and infirm find joy in serving their Creator, some do not feel they can contribute much. “At present I feel my service isn’t much, but it is a great joy to serve my Creator,” said a 93-year-old pioneer. After working with her, a circuit overseer said: “She was more of an encouragement to me than I was to her. She more than adds to the pioneer spirit.” Is there something we can do to let such ones know how much we value them?
4 An invitation to join us in field service is often greatly appreciated. If some have difficulty walking, could we take them along in a wheelchair when doing street work? (Prov. 17:17) Could we take such publishers into territory that has apartments with elevators or residential areas without steps? Could they go with us on return visits or Bible studies? Or are we studying the Bible with someone who would be willing to go to the elderly person’s home for the study?
5 Is there anything we can do to help those confined to their home to have a meaningful share in field service? What about suggesting that they make use of the telephone? (See November 1985 Our Kingdom Ministry, pages 5-6.) Perhaps we could also provide names and addresses of people who live in restricted areas, those not at home, or interested persons to whom letters may be written. One infirm pioneer wrote: “I am very crippled with arthritis all over my body and am not able to walk. But . . . I can still talk, write, phone, and send out magazines.” She thanks her faithful brothers and sisters for helping her have a full share in the ministry.​—Heb. 6:10-12.
GETTING TO MEETINGS
6 Ephesians 4:25 says: “We are members belonging to one another.” We therefore want to help our older and infirm brothers to get to meetings. (Phil. 2:4) How can this be done? If some are fearful about driving after dark, can we pick them up in our car? Others may be able to use public transportation or even walk as long as they have someone to accompany them. Could you help in this way?
7 Some older ones who are housebound have benefited from the meetings by telephone. For others, the meetings have been recorded and then played for them at another time. One sister was asked to visit an incapacitated sister each week to review the main points of the meetings. “I spend a few minutes bringing her up-to-date with announcements and happenings in the congregation. I also take the current Theocratic Ministry School review paper. We thoroughly enjoy this time together. It enables her to keep up with the congregation even though she is absent.”
INCLUDE THEM IN OUR SCHEDULE
8 Can you take the initiative to offer assistance to older brothers and sisters? Look for ways to be of help. Offer yourself willingly. Are there other ways that you can help, such as by shopping for them or taking them to appointments? Our older brothers and sisters will be most appreciative for our concern and loving assistance.
9 Helping the elderly and infirm can prove to be very enriching. Older ones have experienced much in life and have often learned to live with difficult circumstances; thus, their views and recollections can be of great value to us. (Prov. 16:31) Enjoy the pleasure and personal benefit of helping the elderly and the infirm.​—Acts 20:35; Rom. 1:12.

