Make Meetings More Instructive
1 “One thing that impressed me was that young and old at the Kingdom Hall shared in the meetings by giving comments and looking up the scriptures.” Have you ever heard anyone say that about the first meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses he attended? (1 Cor. 14:25b) Many of us have heard such expressions. And how happy we were to have attended those meetings and to have shared in commenting!
2 When we prepare in advance, our comments become more meaningful, and the meetings are more instructive and beneficial for all in attendance. (Heb. 10:24, 25) This should impress on our minds and hearts the importance of works that are consistent with faith. That will help us to make improvements in Christian living and activity.​—Jas. 1:25.
WHEN WE ARE ON THE PLATFORM
3 A variety of subjects are covered in the Theocratic Ministry School. Sisters receive assignments in the Live Forever and Reasoning books, both of which we use regularly in our field ministry. Those who have these assignments can make the school more instructive by using practical settings to present the key points in the material. This will help the audience appreciate the information and see how they can use it in the field ministry. Brothers who have talks based on the Reasoning book can likewise emphasize points that will be particularly helpful when witnessing in local territory. Brothers who handle Bible reading assignments can make their introductions, remarks in connection with the reading, and conclusions meaningful by highlighting points of practical value. Perhaps in one of these ways you can make the school even more instructive for all in attendance.
4 We may be asked to share in a demonstration on the Service Meeting. If so, preparation is vital. What we say should be audible, so we need to use the microphones properly. (Compare 1 Corinthians 14:9.) When sharing in demonstrations, do not turn your back to the audience. Always face those in attendance. Thus, when showing the contents of a publication to a householder, the audience will see the cover of the publication. When we face the audience, they can hear us more clearly and note the expression on our face.
AS AN AUDIENCE
5 Those of us who are in attendance can make the meetings more instructive for ourselves by paying close attention. (1 Tim. 4:16; Heb. 2:1) All need to cultivate the art of listening, not letting our minds wander. Whispering to others seated near us is distracting. Getting up unnecessarily to go to the rest room or the water fountain will also interfere with our getting the most from the meetings and will distract others as well.
6 If we have small children and they are restless, we may want to sit near an aisle toward the rear of the Kingdom Hall so that they will disturb as few as possible. If they misbehave or make noise, it is proper for the parents to take them out of the main seating area of the Kingdom Hall. Otherwise, they will continue to interfere with the concentration of others who are trying to pay attention to the meetings.​—Prov. 22:6, 15.
7 If we put forth effort to make the meetings more instructive for ourselves as well as for others, we will all be helped to grow spiritually. Then it will be said of us, as it was of the Christians in Thessalonica, that our “faith is growing exceedingly and the love of each and all of [us] is increasing one toward the other.”​—2 Thess. 1:3.

