Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 31
Song 133
 8 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to share in field service on first Sunday of February.
15 min: “Caring for Kingdom Seed.” Question-and-answer consideration.
15 min: Preparing for Return Visits. Discussion: Elder and two or three qualified publishers have a practice session to consider what they will say when making return visits on persons who have shown interest.
 7 min: Literature offer for February. Discuss talking points that can be used effectively by younger and newer publishers as well as by those with more experience.
Song 211 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 7
Song 180
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Include Society’s acknowledgments of contributions. Encourage brothers to support the magazine-day activity on second Saturday of the month.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Using the Bible.” Cover by discussion with audience pertinent points in paragraphs 1-5. Thereafter, have well-prepared publisher demonstrate how we may be able to use the Bible effectively even when a person is busy and, depending on circumstances, make the literature offer, leave a tract, or pave the way for making a return call as outlined in paragraph 6. Sum up with warm and concerned advice that brothers seriously consider making greater use of the Bible in their field ministry.
20 min: “Spirit of the World.” Talk by elder from Reasoning book, pages 389-93. Apply material to needs of local congregation, highlighting importance of avoiding this world’s unhealthy spirit.
Song 174 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 14
Song 116
10 min: Local announcements, Theocratic News, and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “Help the Elderly and the Infirm.” Question-and-answer coverage of article.
10 min: How Are We Doing Locally? Discussion with audience on helping the elderly and the infirm in your congregation. Make practical suggestions to fit local needs.
10 min: How Can You Make True Friends? Talk based on September 15, 1987, Watchtower, pages 5-7.
Song 115 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 21
Song 28
12 min: Local announcements. Include one or two 30- to 60-second demonstrations featuring offer of current magazines for fourth Saturday of month. Review information in “Blood Booklet to Be Studied.” Important for all to save insert for use in Congregation Book Study.
18 min: “Make Meetings More Instructive.” Question-and-answer consideration of article by elder. Discuss scriptures cited in article. After considering paragraph 5, include five-minute discussion between two brothers highlighting need to pay close attention and cultivate art of good listening. Note information in School Guidebook, pages 25-7, paragraphs 6-14.
15 min: Local needs. Or talk with some audience participation on “Are You Looking for a Partner in Life?” in November 15, 1986, Watchtower.
Song 117 and concluding prayer.

