Presenting the Good News​—By Using the Bible
1 “The word of God is alive and exerts power.” (Heb. 4:12) To exert its power to the full and come alive, it must be read and applied. To accomplish this further, Jehovah’s organization, beginning principally in 1954, encouraged us to use the Bible in our door-to-door ministry. We were trained to give three- to eight-minute sermons in house-to-house visitations and to bring to the attention of the householders what the Bible has to say on important subjects.
2 In more recent years, Our Kingdom Ministry has regularly carried the Topic for Conversation, outlining two or three scriptures on a subject to use in the field service. For example, currently the Topic for Conversation is on the theme “Religion That Has Real Value.” The scriptures to be used highlight the difference between false and true religion.
3 To use the Bible effectively takes practice and the desire to assist people to realize that it is indeed God’s Word and is alive and powerful. While we are encouraged to use short, to-the-point presentations in magazine-day activity, we do not want to become neglectful in the matter of using the Bible in other features of the field ministry. After all, we are students of the Bible, and what better way is there to give evidence that we are such than by endeavoring to show people from the Word of God itself what Jehovah has in store for mankind and this earth?
HELP FROM THE REASONING BOOK
4 In addition to the Topic for Conversation in Our Kingdom Ministry, we have the book Reasoning From the Scriptures. As you review the introductions listed on pages 9-15, you will find references to Bible verses that can be used in introducing the Kingdom message. We have a great variety of ways in which to go to the Bible to show people what it has to say.
5 For example, if some householders are concerned about the elderly, it may be helpful to follow what is suggested in the Reasoning book on page 14 under the subject “Old Age/​Death.” How appropriate the question would be: “Have you ever wondered why we grow old and die? I would like to point out to you what an inspired Bible writer said at Romans 5:12.” Then you could say: “But while the Bible points out why we grow old and die, it also offers us a most wonderful hope for the future, as found in Revelation 21:3, 4.” The current literature offer could then be featured.
6 So often these days people say, “No, I’m busy.” Many truly are, and we must appreciate that this may be so in their case. Even then, if the circumstances are right, you could say: “I know the feeling, for these are very busy times. I would like to leave you with just this one thought, however,” and turn to one of the scriptures in our current Topic for Conversation. After reading it, you could quickly state what literature you are offering, leave an appropriate tract, or say you will be in the area again soon and will drop by to share some further information about the interesting possibility of living without dying.
7 How good it is when people see that we are students of the Bible, adept at using God’s Word in our ministry! It helps them to identify the people today who rely on God’s Word and use it in their daily lives. So, apart from magazine day, be prepared to use the Bible when making the regular literature offer. Our efforts to use the Bible will bring Jehovah’s blessing on our ministry and highlight in the minds of many that God’s Word is indeed alive, exerts power, and can affect their lives.

