





COVER SUBJECT | WHO ARE JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES?
What Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Believe?




Jehovah’s Witnesses believe that “all Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial.” (2 Timothy 3:16) We use the Bible as a practical guide to learn about the Creator and to live meaningful lives.
The Bible says: “May people know that you, whose name is Jehovah, you alone are the Most High over all the earth.” (Psalm 83:18) Therefore, we worship only Jehovah God, and as his Witnesses, we endeavor to make known his personal name.—Isaiah 43:10-12.
As Christians, we believe that Jesus, “the Son of God,”a came to earth and became the Messiah. (John 1:34, 41; 4:25, 26) After he died, Jesus was raised to heaven. (1 Corinthians 15:3, 4) Later he became King of God’s Kingdom. (Revelation 11:15) That Kingdom is a real government that will restore Paradise to the earth. (Daniel 2:44) “The meek will possess the earth, and they will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace,” says the Bible.—Psalm 37:11, 29.
“When they read in the Bible, they believe God is talking to them. Whenever problems appear in their lives, they take God’s Word and search in it for a solution. . . . For them, God’s Word is still alive.”—Catholic clergyman Benjamin Cherayath, Münsterländische Volkszeitung newspaper, Germany

Jehovah’s Witnesses believe that Bible principles can benefit people even today. (Isaiah 48:17, 18) Therefore, we adhere closely to those principles. For example, because the Bible warns us to avoid practices that pollute our minds and bodies, we do not smoke or misuse drugs. (2 Corinthians 7:1) We also avoid practices specifically condemned in the Bible, such as drunkenness, sexual immorality, and stealing.—1 Corinthians 6:9-11.



The Bible also refers to Jesus as “the only-begotten Son of God” because he was the first and only direct creation of Jehovah.—John 3:18; Colossians 1:13-15.






To learn about our beliefs, including why we do not celebrate the holidays or accept blood transfusions, go to www.jw.org, and look under ABOUT US > FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS.


