





COVER SUBJECT | WHO ARE JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES?
What Sort of People Are Jehovah’s Witnesses?




We are an international organization unaffiliated with other religious groups. Although our world headquarters is in the United States, the vast majority of Jehovah’s Witnesses live in other countries. In fact, some eight million of us teach people the Bible in over 230 lands. We do so in response to Jesus’ words: “This good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations.”—Matthew 24:14.
Regardless of where we live, we conscientiously obey the law. Yet we endeavor to remain politically neutral. This is because we observe Jesus’ direction for Christians to be “no part of the world.” Thus we do not take part in political issues and activities or support warfare. (John 15:19; 17:16) In fact, during World War II, Jehovah’s Witnesses were imprisoned, tortured, and even worse because they would not compromise their neutrality. A former German bishop wrote: “They can rightfully claim to be the only major conscientious objectors in the Third Reich.”
“[Jehovah’s Witnesses] have tremendous moral strength. We could use such unselfish people even in the highest political functions—but we are never going to get them there. . . . They recognize governmental authorities but believe that only God’s Kingdom is capable of solving all human problems.”—Nová Svoboda newspaper, Czech Republic.

Still, we do not isolate ourselves. Jesus prayed to God regarding his followers: “I do not request that you take them out of the world.” (John 17:15) Therefore, you may see us as we work, shop, and go to school in the local community.



LANDS WITH THE MOST WITNESSES
United States 1,190,000 

Mexico 800,000 

Brazil 770,000 

Nigeria 330,000 

Italy 250,000 

Japan 220,000 









Watch the video Special Convention in Israel at www.jw.org, and see how Israeli and Palestinian Witnesses have overcome national and ethnic differences. (Look under ABOUT US > CONVENTIONS)


