Announcements
DAILY BLESSING THE NEW WORLD SOVEREIGN’S NAME—Psalm 145:2.
God himself, Jehovah, is the great sovereign of the new world. That new world is his provision for those of mankind who love him, who look to him for direction and who acknowledge him as the source of all permanent good. With him is the fountain of life, and by his King Son, Christ Jesus, he administers to all who want to be on his side the blessings of light and truth. Surely, then, the name of this great Sovereign should be acknowledged and blessed every day. But is this accomplished by merely saying now and again, ‘Bless God’? No. To bless and praise God’s name is to make known what his name stands for and the provisions he makes for those of good will toward him. You are invited to bless and praise Jehovah’s name with his witnesses this month of October by presenting a year’s subscription for Awake! magazine for $1. Three Bible booklets will be given free with each new subscription. Why not share in this opportunity to bless the new world Sovereign’s name?
IGNORANCE IS NOT BLISS
The Bible stresses the importance of being aware of what is taking place. It is important to be informed as to the meaning of world events. A lazy, indifferent attitude is not encouraged. God’s Word admonishes one to keep on the alert, continuously taking in knowledge, so as to see and understand the sure evidences of the ending of this old wicked system of things. To be spared through the coming destruction one cannot be ignorant of God’s righteous requirements that must now be followed. For your aid Awake! magazine appears semimonthly with information that will prove of value in understanding the meaning of world events. By subscribing today become one of the more than a million readers of this splendid, informative magazine. The subscription rate is only $1 for an entire year.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of October 24: Lies Lead to Loss of Life.
Week of October 31: Christians Live the Truth, ¶1-15.
Week of November 7: Christians Live the Truth, ¶16-31.

