Daily Blessing the New World Sovereign’s Name
THE Sovereign of the new world is such by virtue of his being also its Creator. And he is the Sovereign and Creator not only of the new world but also of all the universe. And what is his name, the name we are to bless? Isaiah 65:13-17 (AS) tells us that the name of the one creating the new world, the new heavens and new earth, is Jehovah.a
As Christian witnesses, having made the decision to have Jehovah as our God and King, we must exalt him, set him on high in our own lives, and then we must seek to do so in the lives of others by everywhere advertising his sovereignty and kingship.
To bless the name of the new world’s Sovereign means to speak well of it and to its credit and exaltation, always keeping one’s integrity toward him and never being induced or coerced by the Devil to curse or renounce him. It means to try to remove the reproach that has been heaped upon it.
Psalm 145 tells us to praise Jehovah greatly, yes, highly. That means to give him our unstinted praise. Christ Jesus when on earth took the lead in praising Jehovah, and today we, as dedicated Christians, have ever more reasons for praising and blessing Jehovah’s name. This is the day of the establishment of his kingdom and therefore it is most fitting that we tell of its glory and speak of the power and mighty acts by which God set up that kingdom. Further, we are living in perilous times, and blessing Jehovah’s name means protection for ourselves and for all those that hear us and heed.
And how often shall we bless Jehovah’s name? “Every day will I bless you,” answers the psalmist. And is that not the way it should be? Are we not daily recipients of Jehovah’s goodness? Does not every day add up reasons why we should praise him?
Determining to bless Jehovah daily puts us in line for the full-time ministry; and, if not that, at least for daily trying to find opportunities to bless Jehovah, to speak well of him before others, and to make all our works count for him.
And not only should we daily bless Jehovah now, but it should be our resolve to ‘praise his name forever and ever,’ for he could never do anything discreditable so as not to be deserving of our praise! To those who now daily bless his name and who make it their resolve to bless it forever Jehovah will grant eternal life, that they may carry out that resolve.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, December 15, 1953.

