“The Watchtower” Gives Refugee New Hope
THE following interesting letter received by the Watchtower Society from a field representative of the American Friends of Russian Freedom certainly shows what The Watchtower has done to keep people alive and in the truth and demonstrates how people who have come from Russia have gained a knowledge of the truth of God’s Word and are now happy.
“As the North Germany representative of the American Friends of Russian Freedom, a U. S. voluntary agency working for the relief of refugees from the Soviet Union, I had the pleasure yesterday of meeting Mrs. L—— K——. Mrs. K—— is of Russian birth, and is one of thousands who sought freedom from Communist tyranny after the war by flight to the West. She lives in one of the hundreds of refugee camps which are still to be found throughout Germany.
“The surroundings in these camps are dreary enough to daunt even the most redoubtable soul, especially after years of substandard food, clothing and housing, and years of vain hope for a better life through emigration or employment. Feeling abandoned by God and man, many of these people eventually lose all ambition and sink into despondency.
“I was therefore touched at meeting Mrs. K——. She too is in impoverished circumstances, she has lost her husband, and is suffering from heart trouble, but as soon as I entered her tiny room I saw how this woman differed from most of the people I had met. The room was tidy, and she was clean and neat, and good humored and hospitable. When I remarked on seeing a copy of the Russian edition of The Watchtower on the table, she replied that it had been her strongest support in recent months, that through it she has been able to find new joy in life, and new hope. She also seeks to interest others in the camp in its message.”
The writer of the foregoing also noted that if the Society could send a food parcel or old clothing, or additional literature in Russian, it would be most gratefully received by Mrs. K——. The Society has arranged to provide Mrs. K—— with all this through its German branch at Wiesbaden.
Yes, the truth concerning Jehovah’s kingdom brings comfort to the oppressed today even as it did when first preached some nineteen centuries ago.

