Announcements
NEW WORLD SOCIETY ASSEMBLES—Heb. 10:25.
July will be a month of great activity for Kingdom publishers throughout the earth. The world assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses will hold the attention of all who are interested in the New World society. At the same time the preaching of good news will continue everywhere during this month. The offer will be three bound books on a contribution of $1.50, with three booklets given free. The New World society is on the increase and all efforts must be made to fix the attention of the peoples on the great issue now up for settlement. Those who wish to have a powerful message in compact form for helping people realize the import of these times may send for a packet of the two-color tract entitled “Awake from Sleep!” This six page tract carries a punch that will awaken people to their opportunities now. Convenient for pocket or purse. A packet of 200 will be sent for only 25c. Ask for the tract “Awake from Sleep!”
“THE KINGDOM IS AT HAND”
This book is outstanding because it deals with the basic theme of the Bible, namely, the kingdom of God. Throughout its 384 pages all the important Scripture texts bearing upon this subject are brought into view, as the book traces the Kingdom from God’s first promise concerning it through to its complete establishment. Both Hebrew and Greek scriptures are focused upon the theme. The Head of the Kingdom is identified and his activities are set forth. What is the Kingdom? When will it come? How do men today fit into the picture? “The Kingdom Is at Hand” will help you to understand what the Bible teaches concerning this important subject. Contained in the book are complete subject and scripture indexes. It is bound in attractive maroon, with gold-embossed title, and may be obtained for 50c.
BROOKLYN BETHEL VACATION
The Society’s offices, factory and Bethel home in Brooklyn, New York, will be closed from July 31 to August 10 for the annual vacation. The Bethel family will also be occupied with convention matters from July 19 to 26, although the home and factory will be open for four days following the convention, July 27 to 30, for inspection by visitors. This means that, in the period from July 19 through August 10 very little mail will be handled and few orders shipped. To avoid delays, anticipate your literature needs now and order immediately.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of July 19: The Rule of King Death.
Week of July 26: The Rule of King Death Broken.

