VOL. XXXVII. FEBRUARY 1 NO. 3 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

What Is Embodied in True Humility . 35 

Suggestions for Self-Examination . 35 

Humility the Path to Glory ... 35 

Illustration of True Submission. . 36 

Illustration of False Humility . . 36 

The Highest Standard of Obedience . 37 
Typical Experiences of Elijah and Elisha 38 

A Word of Warning .... 38 

The "Chariot"— the "Fire"— the 
"Whirlwind" 39 

What Elijah's Mantle May Signify . 39 
The Humble to Be Exalted .... 40 
Satan's Counterfeit of True Religion . 41 
Christian Communism 44 

Why Repentance Was Not Preached . 45 
Persecution's Good Results .... 46 

Error's Bitter Fruitage. ... 46 

Opposition Inspired by Selfishness . 46 

Gradual Triumph of the Light . .47 
Some Interesting Letters .... 47 

page 34 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agenciesr-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as FolIows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



1916-THE MEMORIAL SUPPER-1916 

On April 16, after 6 p. m., the anniversary of our Lord's 
death date, that great event will be duly celebrated by Bible 
students all over the world. We will give further mention 
later. 



"EUREKA" DRAMA OF CREATION 

Notwithstanding many requests, we get but few responses 
regarding the work being done by the EUREKA DRAMAS. We 
fear that many are lying idle, and this seems a great pity, in 
view of the wonderful blessing that goes forth where they 
are shown. We hope that all the dear friends are feeling 
encouraged and stimulated and becoming more and more 
active in showing forth the Master's praise. 

We wish to remind the friends that we have lecture records 
in Swedish, Danish, German, Italian, Spanish and Polish. 
These have been prepared at considerable cost, and should be 
shown. They are good records, of which no one need be 
ashamed. There are multitudes anxious to hear, and those 
who have the opportunity of thus preaching the Gospel should 
surely esteem it and use it. Although the cost is more because 
of the smaller demand for these records, we propose 
supplying them, wherever they can be excellently used, at the 
same rates we have made on the English records and slides. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR MARCH 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
March follow: (1) 187; (2) 315; (3) 108; (4) 1 10; (5) 240; (6) 
149; (7) 324; (8) 267; (9) 114; (10) 1; (11) 12; (12) 22; (13) 
165; (14) 273; (15) 104; (16) Vow; (17) 47; (18) 50; (19) 
153; (20) 240; (21) 87; (22) 199; (23) 144; (24) 14; (25) 8; 
(26) 99; (27) 5; (28) 222; (29) 154; (30) 252; (31) 130. 



R5842 : page 35 

WHAT IS EMBODIED IN TRUE HUMILITY 

"Doing nothing from party-spirit or vain-glory, but 
in humility esteeming others as excelling yourselves. 
— 'Philippians 2:3\ Diaglott. 



LOWLINESS of mind, humility, is a mental 
quality which enables its possessor to look 
up with appreciation, not only to God, but 
also to earthly beings, recognizing their 
good qualities. The Apostle urges that this 
lowliness of mind should be in all of God's 
people; this fact proves it to be a quality 
that demands careful cultivation. 

Not all of the Lord's people are lowly 
in mind. Some of them think more highly 
of themselves than they ought to think. Some of them 
may be proud of having the Truth or of their ability to 
serve the Truth. Any such pride is very objectionable 
in the sight of the Lord, and indicates that its possessor 
has a very small mind; for, with a proper estimate of 
matters, the best of us can see that we have nothing 
of which to be proud, nothing of which to boast. If we 
have received anything of the Lord, we should boast of 
our receipts, instead of glorying in something as if we 
had attained it of ourselves. 

So the Lord's people should spend earnest effort to 
stimulate and encourage humility. Some have this quality 
naturally; but the larger number have to contend 
against the reverse tendency— self-esteem, self-exaltation, 
pride— a feeling that they are superior to others. 

SUGGESTIONS FOR SELF-EXAMINATION 

When we come to consider St. Paul's injunction, "in 
humility esteeming others as excelling yourselves," it is a 
question as to just what the Apostle meant. Those who 

R5843 : page 35 

have come into Christ should make progress, and should 
therefore feel that they are better than they were before 
they came into Christ. Those who have come into Christ 
know that they are not lower than all others. Evidently 
the Apostle did not mean that the Lord's people should 
rate themselves as inferior to other men. In his own 
case he felt that he was the chief of sinners, because he 
had been an open opposer of the Truth; and Jesus had 
said that whosoever should injure one of the least of 
His disciples would transgress seriously. We cannot 
say, therefore, that we are the chief of all sinners. We 
think that few of the Lord's people could say, I am the 
chief of sinners— either from the standpoint of committing 
crime or from that of persecuting the Church. We are 
not to bear false witness against ourselves. 

In what way, then, are we to understand the Apostle's 
injunction? In this way: We are to realize that no two 
of the Lord's people are just alike. If we have the right 
focus upon the matter, we shall think of our own talents 
in a humble manner. We shall think, "I have something 
of this quality or that talent or grace; and therefore I 



have much responsibility to the Lord. I wonder whether 
I am using as faithfully as I could, this talent which I 
think is greater than that of my neighbor or my brother. 
Though they may have less than I have, they may be 
using all that they have with more resolute purpose to 
succeed than I am using what I have. If this be so, 
then he is better than I am, in this respect." 

A PROPER ATTITUDE TOWARD BRETHREN 

As we look around in the Lord's family, we are bound 
to see the weaknesses and frailties of its various members. 
We are not to allow our thoughts to dwell too much upon 
their undesirable qualities, however, but are to remember 
all their good ones, especially their loyalty of heart. With 
ourself personally, it is always a recommendation in any 
one that God has called and accepted him. Whenever we 
see one who has come into the Truth, we say to ourself, 
"Well, no matter what he may be according to the flesh, 
God saw in his heart something good, noble and true; and 
since God is dealing with him as a son, he is therefore to 
be esteemed as a brother." Although we might not be 
able to esteem that man highly according to his natural 
qualities, yet we would do him good as we had opportunity. 
He might not be one whom we would select as a companion; 
yet God may esteem that brother more highly than 
He does us. Realizing this we would try to keep very 
humble and to learn whatever helpful lessons we might 
be able to get from that brother. 

In all persons there are certain qualities that may be 
esteemed and appreciated; even as the old lady said that 
she could wish that others had as much perseverance as 
Satan. We are to appreciate good traits whenever we see 
them in others. We do not know whether in the Lord's 
sight they may not be more noble, more self-sacrificing, 
more lowly in mind than ourselves. Our duty is plain. 
We are not able to read the heart, and hence we are to 
think kindly and generously of all those whom God has 
brought into His family. "Love beareth all things,... 
endureth all things." "As we have opportunity, therefore, 
let us do good unto all men, especially unto them of the 
Household of Faith."— "1 Corinthians 13:7"; "Galatians 6:10". 

HUMILITY THE PATH TO GLORY 

The Apostles Peter and James also emphasize the 
necessity on the part of the Lord's people that they be 

R5843 : page 36 

clothed with humility. They tell us that this grace is indispensable 

to those who would abide in the Father's 

favor; for God resists the proud, while He continually 

shows favor to those who are of humble spirit. Thus He 

encourages humility and discourages pride. (" 1 Peter 5:5"; 

"James 4:6".) We can see a reason for this course. The 



Almighty sees that we have nothing whatever of which 
to be proud or to boast. Whatever we have has been of 
the Lord's providence, or favoring circumstances. 

The Scriptures give some marked instances of the evil 
results of pride. Lucifer, one of the very highest of spirit 
beings, became proud and vain in his imagination, and 
encouraging these evil qualities he lost his exalted position, 
having become Satan, the adversary of God. If 
Mother Eve had possessed the proper humility she would 
have said, when tempted of the serpent, 1 will not listen 
to this suggestion to disobey my Creator; He knows what 
is for my highest good, and I therefore submit myself to 
Him who knows all things. "Pride goeth before destruction, 
and an haughty spirit before a fall."— "Prov. 16:18". 

In contrast, we have given to us a beautiful illustration 
of the opposite spirit— humility— in the case of the Logos. 
We are shown how He humbled Himself, and how God 
has highly exalted Him— to the very position which Satan 
coveted. So if we are fully obedient to the Lord, the results 
with us will be as with the Lord Jesus, a great 
blessing, a high exaltation. After presenting this argument, 
the Apostle says, "Humble yourselves, therefore, 
under the mighty hand of God, that He may exalt you in 
due time."—" 1 Peter 5:6". 

The Heavenly Father has deeper love for those who 
are humble. This is the reason why we should humble 
ourselves. Since we find that "God resisteth the proud," 
and that humility is one of the basic principles of a properly 
crystallized character, we should more and more seek 
to develop this grace and attain to the attitude in which 
God can give us the greatest blessing. 

THE "SOUND MIND" IS HUMBLE 

To humble ourselves does not necessarily mean to 
think that we have no talent, no power, no ability. Such 
an attitude would be foolishness. But we should think 
soberly of ourselves. We should think of all our powers 
as coming from God. So if we find that we have some 
blessings more than our neighbor or our brother or our 
sister, let us be thankful; but let us not for a moment 
think that we have anything to make us proud. It is a 
gift. We should appreciate the gift, but we should not be 
puffed up over its possession. The fact that we have received 
the gift indicates that we lacked it, needed it. 

The one who has naturally a proud heart, but who 
brings himself to the point of submission, manifests 
humility. If, on the other hand, one who by nature has 
too low an estimate of himself, will submit himself to 
God, the Father will show him the proper attitude of 
mind. The Apostle speaks of those who receive the Holy 
Spirit as having the "spirit of a sound mind." In proportion 
as we seek to become acquainted with God and to 
submit ourselves to His will, in that same proportion we 
become balanced in mind. We become more and more 
sane, if you please. He who receives the mind of Christ, 



the mind of God, the holy mind, is instructed more 
thoroughly by the Word. Thus we are getting the balance 
of a sound mind, the spirit of a sound mind. Our 
reasoning faculties become more developed as we grow 
in grace and in the knowledge of the Truth. 

ILLUSTRATION OF TRUE SUBMISSION 

No one can come to the Father except through full 
consecration. We must admit that we need the Master, 
and that without Him we can do nothing. So we take 
this position: "I am nothing but a sinner; I know that 
I am imperfect, that I have nothing which I have not 
received. God provides everything; whatever I have is 
a gift from Him. Knowing all this, I gratefully accept 
these things, and humble myself under His mighty hand." 

The world says. "No! I will not submit myself; if I 
need any punishment I will take what is coming to me." 
Such is the spirit of a worldly heart that has not yet 
learned its need and its impotence. But the spirit of a 
consecrated heart is that of submission to the will of the 
Lord. Such recognize that their only source of help is 
the Almighty God, through the Lord Jesus Christ as the 
Savior. For those alone who become His disciples can 
our Lord become the Advocate; and unless He be the 
Advocate none can be accepted of the Father. We might 
have a blessing in the Times of Restitution, but nobody 
can come to God now except through the Advocate. 

The terms of discipleship are that we lay down all 
earthly rights, earthly interests. Everything must be submitted 
before the Father will accept us as disciples of 
Christ at all, before He will beget us of the Holy Spirit, 
before we can become a part of the anointed Body of 
Christ. If we would make any true progress, we must 
say from the heart, "Thy will, not mine, be done." We 
know that God's will is best, whether we understand that 
will or not. A person with large self-esteem might, as a 
natural man, think his own will better; but when he comes 
to see the Truth, he will say, "I have made mistakes before; 
but now I will do the Lord's way, regardless of 
what my judgment may be." 

Such a course would evidence real humility, no matter 
how proud-spirited one might be by nature. As he 
would progress in the good way, and see more clearly 
wherein he had made mistakes, his humility would increase. 
So we are to submit ourselves, humble ourselves, 
have no will of our own, but merely seek the Lord's will. 

ILLUSTRATION OF FALSE HUMILITY 

There is such a thing as a false submission, which 
might deceive even the person himself. One might talk 
a great deal about submission to the will of God, and yet 
be only nominally submitting while he is really doing his 
own will. We are to watch, therefore, that we are carrying 
out the profession of submission, and that in our daily 



course of life we are asking, "Is this the course which the 
Lord wishes me to pursue? Is this the will of God?" 
The most submissive will receive the greatest blessings. 

R5844 : page 36 

God will test our submission and our humility. We cannot 
suppose that our Lord Jesus, who was perfect, did 
not know that He had perfect powers. But no matter 
what His own ideas were. He submitted Himself to the 
Father, and said, "Not My will, but Thine, be done." A 
man who had no tastes or preferences would be a nonentity. 
We may know what we would will for ourselves; 
and yet. knowing this, we are to say to ourselves. "You 
cannot have your own way about this; you are to seek to 
know what is the Lord's will concerning you in this 
matter, and to carry it out, as far as in you lies." 

SUBMISSION A TEST OF LOYALTY 

Sometimes the Lord's hand is very heavy. It was in 
the case of our Lord Jesus, heavy, pressed down. But 
when the Lord felt the Father's hand pressing down. He 
meekly bowed Himself beneath the weight, in humble 
acquiescence to the will of the One whose purpose He 
had come to carry out. But the Hand did not crush Him, 
although it seemed to do so. Instead of being a crushing, 
it was the Hand of Love, testing His obedience to the 
full. When His obedience was fully tested, the same 

R5844 : page 37 

Hand lifted Him up and "set Him at His own right hand 
in the Heavenly places; far above all principality, and 
power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is 
named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to 
come."— "Ephesians 1:20-23". 

Thus it will be with us, if we are found faithful. God 
will exalt us in due time. But He cannot exalt any who 
are not humble. Submission indicates faith. We would 
not submit ourselves unless we had absolute confidence in 
God. And not faith only, but loyalty also, is necessary. 
Therefore the Father tests us in these two qualities. Without 
these, we would be quite unfit for the Kingdom; and 
so the various tests of the present time are tests of faith 
and loyalty to God, and of entire submission to His will. 
It is to those "who, by patient continuance in well doing, 
seek for glory and honor and immortality" that God has 
promised "eternal life."— "Romans 2:7". 

We should recognize Divine providences and look for 
them. We should expect God's providential leadings in 
all of life's affairs. We should not pass through life with 
the thought that we are running this, or regulating that. 
As a child would look to his parent, or a pupil to his 
teacher, or as an apprentice to his master, or a maid to 
her mistress, so should our eyes be looking to the Lord 



asking His guidance.— 'Psalm 123:1, X. 
OUR ATTITUDE IN TRIAL 

This Divine guidance we should seek in all things. 
Suppose that some business complication arises. Perhaps 
one loses his situation. A child of God who had not 
learned full submission to the Lord's will might immediately 
blame some one else or find fault with his employers. 
But the right attitude for the Lord's people would be to 
say, "The Father knows all about this matter; He could 
have prevented it and would have done so had it been 
for my best interests. There is some lesson here for me 
to learn, and I will look for it." If he should discover 
that there had been some carelessness on his part, then 
he must perceive that the logical consequence would be 
that he lose the position. 

But if after careful investigation of matters, he feels 
that he could not have been more faithful or more loyal to 
duty, then he should look further and say, "Lord, I do 
not see wherein I have deserved to lose this situation, but 
I am looking to Thee, to see what is Thy providence in 
the matter; for Thou knowest that I must have some kind 
of employment; and therefore I merely pray. Give me this 
day my daily bread. I cannot suppose that this is accidental. 
Surely Thou hast some lesson for me in this 
experience. I know not what Thy providence may be. 
Give me, I pray, the necessary grace and wisdom to perceive 
Thy will." 

As he prays thus, he should at the same time be on the 
lookout for the Lord's providences and guidance. The 
child of God who thus acknowledges the Lord, and is 
faithful to Him in all the details of life's affairs, is the 
one who will come off victorious and be participator with 
the Master in His Kingdom. This great exaltation will 
be given all who are fully submissive to God's will, 
whether their powers and talents be many or few. 

THE HIGHEST STANDARD OF OBEDIENCE 

In our context the Apostle Paul urges that the Church 
cultivate the mind of Christ. He says, "Let this mind be 
in you which was also in Christ Jesus." He had been 
reciting the qualities necessary to the Church in order 
that they could be acceptable to the Father. Amongst 
these was an eager desire to please God. The Apostle 
exhorts all such to pursue the course of humility and 
submission taken by our Lord as the only proper path 
for the Master's footstep followers. St. Paul was endeavoring 
to impress that the mind of Christ was eminently 
worthy of imitation and painstaking cultivation. 

As a further evidence of the Master's great humility, 
the Apostle brings forcefully to their attention what 
Jesus was in His prehuman existence. As the Logos, He 
was in the form of God— the spirit condition. Yet He 
was not ambitious; He was not self-seeking. On the 



contrary, He made Himself of no reputation— divested 
Himself of His former glory and honor, that He might 
do the will of the Father. His spirit was directly opposite 
to that of Satan. The Logos thought not to usurp 
the Father's place, or to claim equality with Him, but 
manifested a very different disposition— an attitude of 
humility. Then "let this mind be in you," urges the 
Apostle. "Humble yourselves under the mighty hand of 
God, that He may exalt you in due time." Consider that 
God has called you with the same High Calling, that you 
might attain to a place at the right hand of Christ, even 
as He attained to a place at the Father's right hand. 
Realizing this, permit this mind of Christ to be in you. 
God was not seeking to force this mind upon Christ, 
nor is He seeking to force it upon us. Our Lord having 
taken this position of humility, in order to be man's 
Redeemer, it was needful that He maintain that mind in 
order to work out the blessed fruitage of patience. Three 
and one half years were required for Jesus to complete 
His work; and it was not until after He reached the Cross 
and could say, "It is finished," that He was "set down 
with the Father in His Throne." If we have become 
Jesus' disciples, if we have accepted the conditions of the 
High Calling, if we have received this mind, then we are 
to let, or permit, this mind to work out in us the character-likeness 
of our Head. 

THE UNIVERSAL STANDARD OF OBEDIENCE 

We have seen that the Logos did not meditate the 
usurpation to be equal with God, but humbled Himself. 
Lucifer took the opposite course. Instead of humbling 
himself, he said, "I will be like the Most High." ("Isaiah 14:14\) 
Here we have an illustration of what we should 
not do. It is a principle of the Divine Government that 
"He that exalteth himself shall be abased, but he that 
humbleth himself shall be exalted." "Humble yourselves, 
therefore, under the mighty hand of God, that He may 
exalt you in due time."— "Luke 14:11"; v l Peter 5:6\ 

Every creature of God, whether angel or man, should 
have this humble mind. This is the only proper attitude. 
This test comes during the Gospel Age to only the 
Lord and the Church. To what extent it may ever come 
to others is a question. It would seem to be impossible for 
this test to come to all. Those who have the right disposition 
will desire to do the Father's will at any cost. 
Doubtless if any one of the holy angels were allowed the 
privilege of becoming the Redeemer of a race, he would 
be glad to do so. We do not know, however, just how it 
would have been had the angels not seen the result of 
the obedience of the Logos to the will of the Father. 

The world will be subjected to a test during the Millennial 
Age. The proper attitude for every creature 
would be to risk everything in the Father's service; it 
will eventually be the standing of the world of mankind 
—every one who shall attain everlasting life. We must 



remember, however, that Divine Justice never calls for 
self-sacrifice. It calls for obedience; and the obedience 
of the Church is the extreme of obedience— even "unto 
death." But the Father has offered a reward so high that 
such obedience has become the standard par excellence 
throughout the Universe.— 'Revelation 2: 10". 



R5844 : page 38 

TYPICAL EXPERIENCES OF ELIJAH AND ELISHA 

What a stenographer reported from 
one of Brother Russell's meetings. 

BEFORE we leave the dear friends here to go 

to another city, some of you will wish to 

say, "Brother Russell, we may not see you 

again for quite a while; and we wish you 

would say something about the hopes of the 

Church for the near future. Do you think 

that the Church will be changed very soon?" 

We answer. We do not know. We admit 

that there are many things that we do not 

know. If we knew all about the Book of 

Revelation, we would get out the Seventh Volume very 

soon. There are a few things of which we are not just 

sure. We do not like to do any guess-work. We could 

guess about some things, but we do not allow ourself to 

guess. "If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of 

God."- 1 Peter 4:1 V. 

"But, Brother Russell, what is your thought as to the 
time of our change? Were you not disappointed that it 

R5845 : page 38 

did not come when we hoped that it would?" you will ask. 
No, we reply, we were not disappointed. Two years before 
that time we pointed out in THE WATCH TOWER 
that we did not think the change would come October, 
1914. But, Brethren, those of us who are in the right 
attitude toward God are not disappointed at any of His 
arrangements. We did not wish our own will to be done; 
so when we found out that we were expecting the wrong 
thing in October, 1914, then we were glad that the Lord 
did not change His Plan to suit us. We did not wish Him 
to do so. We merely wish to be able to apprehend His 
plans and purposes. 

"What do you think of things now?" you ask. "What 
would you think are the present indications' 1 " To this 
we say. We have already mentioned in THE WATCH 
TOWER and in talks given to the friends what is our 
thought as to the type of Elijah and Elisha in the close 
of the earthly career of the Prophet Elijah. We will 
briefly refer to it again here, and perhaps might add a 



word further. We recognize that the Church of God 

is the antitype of Elijah because she is, with her great 

Head, The Christ of God. It is The Christ in the flesh 

that antitypes the Prophet Elijah. His experiences during 

his career as God's Prophet typified the experiences 

of The Christ class during all the more than eighteen 

hundred years of their earthly career. His closing experiences 

would parallel, we understand the Scriptures to 

teach, the closing experiences of the last members of the 

Christ Body in the flesh. 

PASSING OF LAST CHRONOLOGICAL POINT A TEST 

We remember that when the Lord would take up 
Elijah into the heavens He brought certain things to 
pass that would make a parallel to the taking away of 
the last members of Christ. We believe that this is a 
reasonable inference. We have seen how the Lord, upon 
the day that Elijah was to be taken away, sent him to 
four successive places— Gilgal, Bethel, Jericho and Jordan. 
At each of these different places Elijah evidently 
thought that the Lord would take him. And so it has 
been with us. During this Harvest of the Age the 
Lord, through His Word, has seemed to send His people 
to four different points of time- 1874, 1878, 1881 and 1914. 
At each of these points of time the watching saints who 
realized that the end of the Age was upon the Church 
have thought that the "change" might come. They 
watched for it. When they came to each of these points, 
the Lord said, "Go to another place." Finally we reached 
the last place of the four— October 1st, 1914. This was 
the last point of time that Bible chronology pointed out 
to us as relating to the Church's experiences. Did the 
Lord tell us that we would be taken there? No. What 
did He say? His Word and the fulfilments of prophecy 
seemed to point unmistakably that this date marked the 
end of the Gentile Times. We inferred from this that 
the Church's "change" would take place on or before 
that date. But God did not tell us that it would be so. 
He permitted us to draw that inference; and we believe 
that it has proven to be a necessary test upon God's 
dear saints everywhere. 

WHAT SMITING OF THE WATERS MAY MEAN 

Did the Times of the Gentiles end by October 1st, 
1914? It certainly looks very much as if they did. The 
great nations of the world there began to go to pieces 
under the terrible shaking process then begun. The 
shaking is still going on, day by day, week by week, and 
will continue until the work of destruction is complete. 
Do we see anything definite as yet as to when we are to 
finish our earthly course? We do not see anything 
positive thus far. If any of you find out anything, we 
wish you would tell us. 

What do we expect? We expect just what the picture 



points out. Of late we have been thinking considerably 

of what took place when Elijah and Elisha came 

to the river Jordan. They stopped there and stood talking. 

Something must be done before they could go 

further. So the Lord's people have been standing for 

a time since we came to October, 1914. Then Elijah 

took his mantle, wrapped it together and smote the waters 

of Jordan. The waters divided to right and left, and 

the Prophets went over dry shod. After they had 

crossed, they went on, talking together. They had received 

no further instructions from the Lord. They 

simply walked on. Suddenly the chariot of fire appeared 

and separated them, and Elijah was taken away in the 

chariot by a whirlwind. 

CHARIOT OF FIRE TO MAKE SEPARATION 

What does this signify in antitype? We think that 
it signifies a division between the Little Flock and the 
Great Company. We are to be careful not to form a 
judgment as to who are to be of the Great Company, 
however. Some say to us, "What do you think of such 
a brother?" We are not to judge one another. It is not 
for us to say that such a one belongs to the Great Company 
class. We are to consider all the friends as one 
people. Only the Lord knows who are His wholly faithful 
ones, and He is leaving the matter to be manifested 
at the end of the earthly career of the Little Flock. The 
Lord Himself will do the dividing. 

A WORD OF WARNING 

Right here we will give you a little illustration of 
how serious a mistake might be made along this very 
line. On one of our tours we were in a car with one of 
the Pilgrim brethren and another brother living in that 
vicinity, plainly dressed. The Pilgrim brother remarked, 
"That is Brother So-and-so, and I do not think that 
he is very much interested." He intimated that he 
thought the brother was one of the Great Company class. 
We asked him why he thought so. He replied, "I don't 
know; but he does not seem to take a very active part 
in the service nor does he attend the meetings." Now 
we will tell you the facts concerning this brother. That 
man whom the Pilgrim brother thought was probably 
a member of the Great Company class was one who had 
given about twenty thousand dollars to the Lord's work, 
and he was living in very humble circumstances and 
wearing very plain clothes because of his sacrifice in 

R5845 : page 39 

the interests of the cause of Christ. The Pilgrim brother 
knew nothing of this, and had no particular interest in 
the matter. Thus you see how any of us might be deceived 
in respect to each other. "The Lord knoweth 



them that are His." 

When the Lord's time comes for separating His Little 
Flock class. He will make no mistake. It will be the 
Little Flock that will go in the chariot, and no others. 
Let us, therefore, keep ourselves in the love of God. 
Never mind what any one else thinks. Of course we are 
to love and serve the brethren; but even when we do 
our best, some of the brethren may misunderstand us. 
But trust it all in the Lord's hands. He will take care 
of the entire matter. Do not decide about anybody else; 
but let each of us watch himself, and see to it that he 
keep his heart in the right attitude toward the Lord and 
the brethren. St. Paul says, "Judge nothing before the 
time." ( v l Corinthians 4:5'.) All will soon be manifested. 
We shall see the Elijah class taken away in the 
chariot; the others will not be taken. Then we shall 
see the radical division. We shall know all about it then. 
The Lord will attend to it. 

THE "CHARIOT," THE "FIRE," AND THE "WHIRLWIND" 

Now, as to the meaning of the fire and the chariot: 
Fire always represents destruction, and a chariot of fire 
would seem to signify some very trying experience that 
will separate the Elijah class from the Elisha class, and 
bring the deliverance of the Elijah class. 

"Brother Russell, are you not afraid of alarming us?" 
some may ask. No! We are all very desirous of getting 
into the Lord's Chariot, surely. It is the best thing in 
all the world. "But it means trouble!" Well, we desire 
trouble, if this trouble will be our chariot to take 
us Home. We are waiting for it day by day. When 
Elijah's chariot came, it was in a whirlwind that he was 
carried into the heavens, into the atmosphere, beyond 
earthly vision. What did the whirlwind signify as regards 
the Church? "Does it mean more trouble?" you 
will ask. We think it does. Dear friends, we are waiting 
for that chariot and whirlwind. "What will it be?" 
Well, we know that the Lord pictures the great time of 
anarchy that is coming as a great whirlwind. He says, 
"Behold, evil shall go forth from nation to nation, and a 
great whirlwind shall be raised up from the coasts of the 
earth. And the slain of the Lord shall be at that day 
from one end of the earth even unto the other end of 
the earth; they shall not be lamented, neither gathered 
nor buried; they shall be dung upon the ground."— 'Jeremiah 25:30-33 v 
x 30:23,24\ 

To our understanding the Elijah class will be amongst 
the first to be affected by the great whirlwind of anarchy. 
We believe it signifies that many of the Lord's people- 
all of the faithful at that time— will be taken from the 
present life in some anarchistic movement. We would 
not talk about these things to the public; for the public 
would not be interested in them. The Master said, "Cast 
not your pearls before swine." We are talking about it 
here because we think that all here are deeply interested. 



and are expecting to share in the chariot and whirlwind 
experiences. Here is the point, then. We think that our 
final experiences will be during some kind of anarchistic 
uprising. For some time we have been wondering just 
how all the Church would be taken. If the "change" 
comes to each one by death in the usual way, it would 
seem very wonderful to see the consecrated all over the 
world die suddenly. Neither can they all die of old age: 
for this would mean that some would have to live a 
good many years yet. 

R5846 : page 39 

THREE IMPORTANT POINTS 

But here is the way the Lord pictures the matter: 
First, there will be the chariot of fire. We do not know 
what this will be; but we understand that some fiery experience 
will cause a separation between the two classes 
of the Lord's people. Then will develop the whirlwind 
of anarchy. Perhaps this will be mobs that will destroy 
the lives of the faithful ones. We do not know. We 
cannot now imagine just what it will be. We do not 
wish to think anything foolish; we are merely studying 
the type, or picture. We do not intend to do anything to 
get into trouble. To do so would be like what the Devil 
suggested to Jesus: "Cast Thyself down from the pinnacle 
of the Temple." We are to be just as wise, kind, 
meek, gentle and as faithful to the Lord as we know 
how to be, and then have our minds perfectly calm and 
restful. When the Lord's time for us comes, all will be 
right. Let us rest in His love and wisdom and care. 
What He provides for His children will be the very 
best thing for us, and we shall be glad to have it. 

"Are you expecting the fiery chariot any minute now, 
or do you think it some little distance off— perhaps some 
months yet, or perhaps a year or more?" will be asked. 
At least a year, or probably more, is my thought. Something 
else is coming first, dear friends. We do not as yet 
see clearly just what it is; but this matter of Elijah's rolling 
his mantle together and smiting the waters of Jordan 
seems to mean something, and also the crossing of the 
river. This picture is not given for nothing. "What 
does it mean?" you ask. Ah, we know that most prophecies 
are understood only after they are fulfilled! We 
might, however, have a suspicion. "What would that 
be?" Something like this: In Bible symbolic language, 
water represents Truth, and it also represents peoples. 
Both of these are given in Scripture as being symbolized 
by water. ('Revelation 17: V; "Jeremiah 51:12,13*; "Revelation 17:15"; 
"22:1,2"; "Ezekiel 47:1-12"; "Ephesians 5:26".) 
Furthermore, Jordan means testing, or judging down. 
Now who or what would be judged in the antitype? 

WHAT ELIJAH'S MANTLE MAY SIGNIFY 



We answer, we believe that the peoples of earth, the 
public in general, are to be judged by the Truth. The 
peoples are represented by waters. It would seem that 
in some way the people are to be judged and tested; and 
that a division of public sentiment is to be caused, in connection 
with the Truth. Waters are to be separated 
from waters, people from people, the Truth being received 
by some and rejected by others. Elijah wrapped 
his mantle together and smote the waters; and they were 
divided. Elijah's mantle was the outward indication, or 
sign, of God's power with him, and represented God's 
power and blessing with the Church. The mantle was in 
Elijah's hand when he smote the waters with it. So 
the Church, it would seem, will use what is in their hand, 
the power and authority of the Truth, the power of God, 
in smiting the waters— peoples. 

"Do you think that this has not yet taken place?" may 
be a question in your minds. We think it has not as yet 
fully taken place. "Do you not think that the PHOTO-DRAMA 
OF CREATION has had a part in this?" It may be. 
"Will there be something more?" We do not know. 
We RATHER THINK THERE IS SOMETHING MORE. We do 
not state this positively. We are keeping watch to 
see in what way God will exercise some very wonderful 
power causing some division as respects the Truth. 
We are merely thinking aloud with you. We are looking 
for some very pronounced division on the subject 
of the Truth, something that will eventually lead up to a 

R5846 : page 40 

great hatred. You remember that in our Lord's ministry 
He presented certain truths that caused the Scribes and 
Pharisees to hate Him. It was their hatred that led up 
to His arrest and crucifixion. The hate was there. They 
said, "We must kill Him." 

We shall not do anything foolish; we shall not go 
out on the streets to stir up trouble. We are to exercise 
the spirit of a sound mind— gentleness, meekness, patience, 
brotherly4dndness and love. We are to be "wise as serpents 
and harmless as doves." CGalatians 5:22.23"; 
'Matthew 10:16\) All these instructions we must not forget. 
But when we see any trouble coming upon us when 
we are doing what is right, when we are obeying the 
Lord, then we are able to take it as from Him. If we 
do not manifest the Master's spirit, if we speak proudly 
or boastfully to people, then we shall have it to regret 
that we did not follow in the footsteps of Jesus. 

So, then, you see what we are looking for. Whether 
this will take place in a few months or in a few years 
more we may not be sure. But we think we shall see 
something that will bring a division in the sentiments 
of the people before we get into the fiery chariot. And 
now, dear brethren and sisters, we leave you with these 
thoughts, asking God's blessing upon us all. 



"Mine eyes can see the glory of the presence of the Lord; 
He is tramping out the winepress where His grapes of wrath 

are stored: 
I see the flaming tempest of his swift-descending sword: 

Our King is marching on." 



R5846 : page 40 

THE HUMBLE TO BE EXALTED 

-FEBRUARY 13.- PHILIPPIANS 2:1-1 P. - 

HUMILITY THE GREAT LESSON FOR ALL-THE ONLY BEGOTTEN 
AN ILLUSTRATION-HOW HE WAS RICH-HOW HE BECAME 
POOR-WHY HE WAS EXALTED-HOW HE WAS 
EXALTED-CHURCH WALKS IN HIS FOOTSTEPS. 

"For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though 
He was rich, yet for your sakes He became poor, that ye 
through His poverty might become 
rich."— "2 Corinthians 8:9'. 

ST. PAUL, then a prisoner in Rome, wrote 

these words of our lesson to the Philippian 

brethren, whom he so dearly loved and from 

whom he had received so many proofs of 

their love for him. No other Church is 

mentioned as having aided St. Paul in his 

times of need. Their special assistance to 

him is mentioned— twice in Thessalonica 

("Philippians 4: 16"), once in Corinth ("2 Corinthians 1 1:9"), 

and now at Rome. 

The Epistle to the Philippians has been styled an 
epistle of joy— so richly did the Apostle's heart seem to 
respond to the faithfulness of the brethren there. He 
would have them know that he appreciated their love, and 
that such love should abound toward each other and 
toward all. His joy would be filled full in proportion as 
he could realize that the brethren had the proper mind of 
Christ, its love and harmony. He exhorted, therefore, 
that they remember the conditions on which such character 
could be developed. Nothing should be done by 
them through strife or for vain-glory. All of their conduct 
should be marked by lowliness, humility and willingness 
to discern the good qualities of others— noting 
wherein others were superior to themselves. 

This would not mean that they should deceive themselves, 
but that they should be on the alert to appreciate 
true quality and character wherever found— looking for 
noble qualities in others, and generously hoping that they 
existed even when not discerned— considering the interests 
of the Lord's cause, and ignoring self-will or pride. 



Therefore they should not look merely at their own things 
or interests, but also upon those of others— the rights of 
others, the ability of others. This, the Apostle assures 
us, is a mark of the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of a sound 
mind, which comes to the followers of Jesus as they grow- 
in grace and the Master's character-likeness. 

This mind, or disposition, the Apostle declares, was 
fully exemplified in Jesus. In His pre-human condition. 
when in the form of God, a spirit being, Jesus was humble. 
He did not meditate usurpation of Divine authority to 
exalt Himself, to seek a name higher than His own, as 
Satan did. He had no thought of robbing the Divine 
glory and honor by putting Himself upon an equality 
with God the Father. On the contrary. He had the same 
spirit that He had afterwards, when He declared, "Not 
My will, but Thine, be done"; and again, "I came not to 
do Mine own will, but the will of Him that sent Me"; 
and again, "My Father is greater than all."— "Luke 22:42"; 
'John 6:38V 10:29V 14:28\ 

The Master always had this disposition of reverence 
for the Father and of full trust and confidence in the 
Divine Wisdom, Love, Justice and Power. Hence, when 
the time came that the Father had purposed— when He 
would send a Savior into the world, first to redeem it and 
later on to become its King and Deliverer— and the proposal 
to render this great service to God and to men was 
proffered to the great Logos— "the Only Begotten of the 
Father"— it was promptly accepted. "I delight to do Thy 
will, O My God!" was the response of the chiefest of all 
God's creatures. This involved a great humiliation- 
leaving the dignity of the chiefest on the spirit plane, to 
become a human being— a man amongst men— "the Man 
Christ Jesus"— not a sinful man, but a perfect one, in the 
image and likeness of God, as was the first Adam originally- 
"holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." 

"THE MAN CHRIST JESUS" 

After Jesus by the change of nature found Himself a 
man amongst men. He still preserved the same loyalty to 
the Father. He was only a child when we hear Him say, 

R5847 : page 40 

"Wist ye not that I must be about My Father's business?" 
("Luke 2:49".) Having learned that He could not attend 
to the Father's business until He reached the age stipulated 
in the Sinaitic Law, He remained quietly at home 
until nearly thirty. Then promptly He went forth to 
John the Baptist at Jordan; and by a public immersion 
He testified His full obedience to the Father's will— 
the full consecration of His life, even unto death. 

Then there came upon Him a begetting of the Holy 
Spirit, as testified by John. Then, too, God granted that 
spirit-begotten One a special mental illumination; as we 
read, "The heavens [the higher things] were opened unto 



Him." The Divine Plan was made plain which involved 
His own death as the Antitype of the serpent raised on 
the pole by Moses, as the Antitype of the bullock of sin-offering 
slain by Aaron, as the Antitype of the Passover 
lamb slain by the Israelites and eaten by them for their 
strengthening and deliverance from Egypt— delivering 
the people of God from Satan's yoke of bondage to sin. 
In all these experiences, we find that the Master was 
faithful, loyal to God, loyal to His covenant, loyal to the 

R5847 : page 41 

principles of righteousness. Thus it is written of Him, 
"Thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity; therefore 
God, even Thy God, hath anointed Thee with the oil 
of gladness above Thy fellows." ("Psalm 45:7".) The oil 
of gladness represented the holy joy of our Lord and the 
holy prospects which sustained Him during this period 
when He made Himself of no reputation, and became 
poor indeed— finally losing even His life— all in loyalty 
to God's will and the Program marked out in the Bible. 

His final cry on Calvary was, "It is finished!" His 
baptism into death was finished— His full approval for 
obedience to God and the principles of righteousness, all 
that the Father had given Him to do in the way of sacrifice, 
had been accomplished. Ah, then it was God's turn 
to act! Would He leave His faithful One in death? 
Nay, "faithful is He who promised," who performed His 
good promises to His faithful Son. 

The Apostle tells of this, saying, "Him hath God 
highly exalted, and given Him a name which is above 
every name"— a title and honor, a distinction, a place 
above all others. ("Verses 9-1 1".) He was received into 
glory; and all the angels of God worshiped Him whom 
the Father had thus exalted to His own right hand, giving 
Him, additionally to what He had resigned, glory and immortality- 
the Divine nature. Well can we understand 
the acclaim of the Heavenly ones: "Worthy is the Lamb 
that was slain to receive power, riches, wisdom, strength, 
honor, glory and blessing."— "Revelation 5:12". 

MESSIAH'S GLORIOUS KINGDOM 

But there is more glory yet to come to the great 
Redeemer. Those who crucified Him, yea, all the world 
of mankind, for whom He tasted death, are yet to be 
made aware of His great sacrifice on their behalf and of 
the great honor and high exaltation which came to Him 
as a result. He is to be the world's King of Glory and 
is to reign for a thousand years. As "Verse 10" declares, 
eventually every knee on earth will bow, and every tongue 
will acknowledge Him; and all others not willing thus to 
recognize and obey Him are to be destroyed from amongst 
the people as "natural brute beasts." ("2 Peter 2:12"; "Jude 10".) 
"And it shall come to pass, that every soul which 
will not hear that Prophet shall be destroyed from among 



the people." ('Acts 3:23'.) And all this glorifying of the 
Son will directly be to the Father's glory; for the entire 
Plan of Salvation is of the Father and through the Son, 
as the Apostle assures us.—' 1 Corinthians 8:6'. 

Now then, let us not lose the point of the Apostle's 
lesson expressed in our Golden Text. While the world 
by and by is to profit by the Redeemer's great sacrifice 
and subsequent Kingdom, and all are to have the opportunity 
of being restored to human perfection and a 
world-wide Kingdom, a special blessing of God is for 
the Church, who now accept the Redeemer, consecrate 
their lives, as He did His, to the Father's will, and walk 
in the footsteps of Jesus. They shall become His joint-heirs 
in the Kingdom, and reign with Him a thousand 
years— yea, and beyond. 

The essence of this lesson is elsewhere expressed by 
the Apostle Peter. "Humble yourselves therefore under 
the mighty hand of God, that He may exalt you in due 
time." (' 1 Peter 5:6\) Only the humble-minded are prepared 
to learn the great lessons which must be learned 
before they will be ready for exaltation that would be 
profitable to themselves or to others. The course of 
selfishness and self-seeking is illustrated in Satan, who 
has failed and is ultimately to be destroyed. The same 
self-seeking spirit is styled the spirit of the world; and 
it is about to lead the world to the great catastrophe foretold 
in the Bible— from which, however, they will be 
rescued by Messiah and His Kingdom, and will have the 
opportunity of learning the great lesson of humility and 
obedience and of getting the reward. 

Jesus, on the contrary, has illustrated to us the proper 
course which leads to glory, honor and immortality. 
namely, the course of full self-abasement and of full submission 
to whatever may be the Divine will. As the 
Savior has entered into His glory as a reward for His 
obedience, so the faithful of His people, the Church, 
demonstrating their humility and obedience, will be 
sharers. His joint-heirs in His future Kingdom of glory. 



R5847 : page 41 

SATAN'S COUNTERFEIT OF TRUE RELIGION 

"There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but 
the end thereof are the ways of death."— 'Proverbs 14:12' 

IT MAY be a subject of some surprise to learn 
that Satan has a gospel, yet such would 
not be the case if all were familiar with 
the Satan of Scripture. Unfortunately for 
themselves the great majority today are 
not acquainted with the delineation of the 
Devil which God's Word supplies. They 
know little or nothing about his motives. 



his methods, his ministers, his machinery 

or his media. To them he is either a 

hideous monster with horns, hoofs and a tail, or else an 

abstract principle of evil— the absence of good, a negation. 

The words which Goethe put into the mouth of 

Mephistopheles in "Faust," "I am the spirit of Negation," 

is the popular definition of the Devil today. He is impersonal, 

immaterial, impossible. As one has quaintly 

put it, "They spell Devil without a 'd' as they spell God 

with two 'o's.'" Good and evil is their scheme. "All 

the Devil there is, is the devil within you," is the last word 

of modern theology. 

Now, an intelligent enemy always keeps in the background, 
remains hidden, out of sight. It is an important 
factor to his success that his identity should be concealed. 
The assassin who plunges a knife into the back 
of his victim is generally hired for the purpose. The 
one who throws the bomb is merely a pawn, the master-mind 
that planned the deed is unseen and unsuspected. 
The police in some of our large cities know perfectly well 
that many of the most daring crimes are engineered by 
one who is too astute to show his hand. Those whom 
he employs to execute his plans may be caught, but the 
genius who "pulls the strings" is secure. Therefore it 
need not surprise us to find that the masses do not believe 
in the existence of a personal Devil. It would be strange 
were it otherwise. "Where ignorance is bliss 'tis folly to 
be wise" is doubtless an axiom, of the truth and value of 
which, in relation to humanity, the Devil is fully assured. 

The Word of God does not leave us in any doubt as 
to the existence of a personal Devil. It furnishes us with 
a full-length portrait of him. It gives us a comprehensive 
description of his being, his emissaries and his aims. 
Personal names are ascribed to him and personal characteristics 
attributed to him. He is represented as being 
the originator and source of all evil in the Universe, and 
the implacable enemy of God and man. His power is so 
tremendous that we are informed, "Michael, the archangel, 

R5847 : page 42 

when contending with the Devil (he disputed about 
the body of Moses), durst not bring against him a railing 
accusation, but said. The Lord rebuke thee." fJude 9\) 
His dominion is so great and his impudence so audacious 
that he offered all the kingdoms of the world to the Son 
of God, on the one condition that He would fall down 
and worship him. And our Lord did not challenge his 
right to make such an offer, but upon a subsequent occasion 
acknowledged him to be the Prince of this world. 

Moreover, the Word of God not only describes at 
length the person and power of the Devil, but it also acquaints 
us with his purposes, which may be summed up 
under two heads, namely: To deny the Word of God and 
to destroy the Work of Jesus Christ. It would be apart 
from our present purpose were we to turn aside and show 



at length how every available weapon was employed in 
the first centuries of the Christian Era to destroy the 
Bible, and how in these last days Satan is using the pens 
of the "higher critics" to destroy the authority of the 
Holy Scriptures. Suffice it to say that, from the day 
when he repudiated the words of Jehovah to Eve, until 
the moment when he is cast into the Abyss, his untiring 
energies will be devoted to the work of denying the 
Oracles of God. 

Ever since the first Messianic prediction Satan has 
tried to destroy the Work of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
First, by way of anticipation and secondly by a method 

R5848 : page 42 

of imitation. When Jehovah declared to the serpent that 

the Seed of the woman should bruise his head, it was not 

long before that old serpent, the Devil, tried to frustrate 

the purposes of God. Cain (who was of that wicked 

one) slew his brother Abel as the first attempt to destroy 

the woman's seed. Later on, God declared to Abraham that 

"in him should all the families of the earth be blessed," 

or, as the Holy Spirit's comment upon these words informs 

us, "Now to Abraham and his Seed were the 

promises made. He saith not. And to seeds, as of many, 

but as One, And to thy Seed, which is Christ." ("Galatians 3: 16".) 

When in Egypt the descendants of Abraham 

began to wax numerous and it appeared that there was 

an immediate likelihood of this prophecy receiving its 

fulfilment, Satan tried to frustrate the prophecies of 

God and destroy the channel through which that Seed 

was to come by inciting Pharaoh to issue a command that 

the male children of the Hebrew women should be destroyed. 

("Exodus 1:16".) When at a still later date 

God made known to King David that the promised Messiah 

was to be born of the royal tribe of Judah, Satan 

made a still more persistent attack to thwart God, as 

may be witnessed during the time of the divided kingdom, 

when the ten tribes made an untiring and determined 

effort to exterminate the tribe of Judah. 

When the fulness of the time was come and Immanuel 
was born at Bethlehem, Satan promptly made an effort 
to destroy the young child's life. Through Herod he 
slew all the children in Bethlehem from two years old 
and under. But his effort was in vain. For being 
warned of God in a dream Joseph had taken the young 
child and his mother and fled into Egypt. At the commencement 
of our Lord's ministry (in the Temptation), 
Satan tried to make Him throw Himself down from the 
Temple. On another occasion when, wearied out with 
the day's work, our Lord sought a few minutes' sleep in 
the bow of the boat, the Prince of the Power of the Air 
lashed the Sea of Galilee into a fury until the disciples 
feared that the little ship was doomed. And it was not 
until the Creator of the sea commanded it to be still that 
the plot of the Devil was foiled. 



Other instances could be cited in which the Devil 
sought to prevent our Lord offering Himself as a Sacrifice 
for sin. Perhaps the supreme occasion was while He 
was upon the cross itself. Weakened by His sufferings, 
tortured by His merciless enemies, hanging helpless between 
the earth and Heaven, Satan challenged Him to 
demonstrate His Deity by descending from the cross. 
"Thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three 
days, save Thyself. If thou be the Son of God come 
down from the cross." ('Matthew 27:40'.) But glory to 
His blessed Name He never faltered, He patiently and 
majestically bore His sufferings in silence until He cried 
in triumph, "It is finished!" and surrendered His spirit 
into the hands of the Father. But the Devil had still 
another card to play. His sacred body having been borne 
from the cross and laid in the sepulchre. Satan then made 
it his business to see that it was securely sealed and 
guarded by a company of Roman soldiers. Ah, Satan! 
if thou canst only succeed in keeping in the tomb that 
Body, thou hast triumphed. But no, again thou art defeated! 
The grave cannot retain its victim. Death cannot 
hold the Lord of Life. "Up from the grave He rose, 
with a mighty triumph o'er His foe— Hallelujah, Christ 
arose!" And today He lives and is alive forevermore! 

Having been thwarted and defeated at every point, 
having failed to prevent the incarnation [His being 
"made flesh," 'John 1:14'] of our blessed Lord, having 
failed to prevent His offering Himself as a Sacrifice for 
sin, having failed to keep His body in the confines of 
death, it behooves us to inquire. Has Satan given up in 
despair? Has he ceased in his efforts to destroy the 
Work of Christ? Has he changed his attitude toward 
the Son of God? or is he still perpetuating his hellish 
deeds? Is he still seeking to annul the effects of Christ's 
Work? Is he yet desirous of destroying the virtues of 
the cross? An answer to these questions is of the greatest 
importance. 

Again we need to turn to the infallible Word if we 
would obtain a reliable answer. In the parable of the 
Tares our Lord has exposed Satan's methods during the 
time of His absence from this world. After the Son of 
Man had graciously condescended to scatter the Word 
of God, Satan likewise did some sowing and went and 
scattered broadcast his Tares among the Wheat. It is 
to be noted that he sowed neither thorns nor thistles, but 
something which so closely resembles the genuine grain 
that it is not until the time of the Harvest that the one 
can be distinguished from the other. Then it is seen 
that the Tares, though resembling the Wheat in every 
other respect, bear no fruit, produce no increase. In a 
word, then, just as Satan formerly sought to destroy 
the Work of Christ by way of anticipation, he is now 
engaged in the work of nullifying the virtues of the 
Death of Christ by a method of imitation. Consequently, 
as Christ has a Gospel, Satan must also have a gospel. 
And, in the nature of the case, it must be a gospel which 



so much resembles the Gospel of Christ that it is capable 
of deceiving the unwary and deluding the unsaved. It 
will be our business now, not to expound his gospel, but, 
with the Spirit's aid, to expose it. 

The gospel of Satan is not a system of revolutionary 
principles, nor yet a programme of anarchy. It does not 
inspire wars and strife, but peace and security. It does 
not set the mother against her daughter and the father 
against his son, but promotes the fraternal spirit whereby 
the race is regarded as one great Brotherhood. It 
does not seek to drag down and degrade the natural man, 
but to improve and uplift him. To use a popular phrase, 

R5848 : page 43 

it appeals to "the best, all that is good within us." It 

aims to make this world such a comfortable and congenial 

habitat that the absence of Christ will not be felt and 

God will not be needed. It endeavors to make men so 

satisfied with this life that they shall be totally indifferent 

to the life hereafter. It propagates the principles of 

self-sacrifice, mercy, charity and benevolence, teaching 

men to live for the good of others and to be kind to all. 

For those who observe its conditions and obey its commands, 

it promises the development of certain inherent 

occult powers, the solution of the more recondite problems 

of man's constitution and the accumulation of esoteric 

knowledge which is withheld from the multitude. 

In short, it declares that all who will eat of the forbidden 

fruit shall "be as gods." 

In contradistinction to the Gospel of Christ, the gospel 
of Satan is one of works. Its fundamental principles 
are: salvation by good deeds, redemption by human 
merits and regeneration by reformation. Its sacramental 
phrase is: "Be good and do good." Its motto is: "Do 
unto others as ye would that they should do unto you." 
Its various ramifications and organizations are manifold. 
Temperance reform movements. Christian Socialist 
Leagues, ethical culture societies, "Peace" Congresses 
and various other organizations are all employed (perhaps 
unconsciously) in proclaiming this gospel of Satan 
—justification by works. The pledge card is substituted 
for Christ; social purity, rather than individual regeneration, 
is the idol of the hour; the cultivation of the 
flesh is considered more practical than the "birth" 
(begetting) of the Spirit; while universal peace is looked 
for without the interposition of the Prince of Peace. 

The apostles of Satan are not saloonkeepers and 
white-slave traffickers, but for the most part "ordained" 
ministers. Thousands of those who occupy our modern 
pulpits are not engaged in presenting the fundamentals 
of the Christian faith, but have turned aside from the 
Truth and given heed unto fables. Instead of magnifying 
the enormity of sin and setting forth its eternal consequences, 
they minimize it by declaring that sin is merely 
ignorance, the absence of good. Instead of warning 



their hearers "to flee from the wrath to come," they call 
God a liar by declaring that He is too loving to destroy 
His own children and too merciful to send one of His own 
creatures to eternal damnation [krisis, condemnation]. 
Instead of preaching that "Without shedding of blood 
there is no remission" ("Hebrews 9:22"), they merely hold 
up Christ as the great Exemplar and exhort their hearers 
to "follow in His steps." "For they being ignorant of 
God's righteousness, and going about to establish their 
own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto 
the righteousness of God." ("Romans 10:3\) "For such 
are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves 
into [imitating] the Apostles of Christ. And no 
marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel 
of Light. Therefore it is no great thing [not to be wondered 
at] if his ministers also be transformed as the ministers 
of righteousness, whose end shall be according to 
their works."— "2 Corinthians 1 1:13-15\ 

Added to the fact that hundreds of churches are without 
a leader who will faithfully declare the whole counsel 
of God and present His way of salvation, we also have to 
remember and take into consideration the lamentable and 
ominous fact that the majority in these congregations are 
in no way to learn, and have very little possibility of 
learning the Truth for themselves. The family altar, 
where portion of God's Word was wont to be read daily, 
is now— even in the homes of nominal Christians— a 
thing of the past. The Bible is not expounded in the 
pulpit and is not read in the pew. The demands of this 
rushing Age are so many that the multitudes have little 
time and still less desire to meditate upon the things of 
God. Hence the majority who are too indolent to search 
for themselves are left at the mercy of those whom they 
pay to search for them— those who betray their trust by 
studying economic and social problems instead of the 
Scriptures of Truth. 

R5849 : page 43 

In the Scripture which we have taken as the basis of 
these remarks the gospel of Satan— the Devil's Delusion 
—is described as "a way which seemeth Right unto a 
man." That is to say, it is presented in such plausible 
language that it appeals to the emotions; it is set forth in 
such a subtle manner that it commends itself to the intelligence 
of its hearers. The success of an illegitimate 
coiner depends upon how much the counterfeit resembles 
the genuine article. A lie is not so much the absolute 
denial as the perversion of the truth. Hence half a lie is 
always more dangerous in its effects than the total of the 
truth. Consequently, when the Father of Lies enters the 
pulpit, he does not flatly deny the great doctrines of 
Christianity, but he rather tacitly acknowledges them and 
then proceeds to give an erroneous interpretation and a 
false application. For example, he would not be so foolish 
as to boldly announce his disbelief in a personal God 



—he takes His existence for granted and then gives a 
false description of His character. He announces that 
God is the Father of all men, when the Scriptures plainly 
tell us we are "the children of God by faith in Christ 
Jesus." ('Galatians 3:26'.) Again, Satan would not make 
so flagrant a blunder as to ignore the central figure of 
human history; namely, the Lord Jesus Christ. Instead, 
He is acknowledged to be the most perfect person who 
ever lived. Attention is drawn to His deeds of compassion 
and acts of mercy, the beauty of His character and 
the tenderness of His teaching. His life is eulogized, but 
His Death is ignored, the all-important atoning work upon 
the Cross is never mentioned. It is a bloodless Gospel, 
and a crossless life and, in regard to His Person, He is 
merely considered as the Ideal Man. 

In '2 Cor. 4:3,4' we have a Scripture which sheds 
an abundance of light upon our present subject. There 
we are told: "If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to those that 
are lost. In whom the god of this world [Satan] hath 
blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light 
of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, 
should shine upon them." He blinds the minds of unbelievers 
by hiding the light of the Gospel of Christ in 
presenting his own version of the Truth. Appropriately 
is he designated "the Devil and Satan which deceiveth the 
whole world." ('Revelation 12:9'.) In merely appealing 
to "the best that is within man," and in merely exhorting 
him "to lead a nobler life," there is afforded a general 
platform for all shades of opinion and every shade of 
philosophic speculation. Atheists, Pantheists, Unitarians, 
and all other Sectarians can unite to proclaim this common 
message. 

Again we quote our foundation passage: "There is a 
way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof 
are the ways of death." The Devil's Delusion is that we 
can be saved by our own works, and justified by our own 
deeds. Whereas God tells us, "By grace are ye saved 
through faith,. ..not of works, lest any man should 
boast." And again, "Not by works of righteousness which 
we have done, but according to His mercy He saved us." 
"Ephesians 2:8,9'; 'Titus 3:5". 

Perhaps at this point an illustration from personal experience 
may be pardoned. Some two years ago the 

R5849 : page 44 

writer became acquainted with one who was a lay 
preacher and an enthusiastic Christian worker. For over 
seven years he had been engaged in public preaching and 
religious activities. But from certain expressions and 
phrases he used, the writer was not satisfied in his own 
heart that his friend was really a "born [begotten] 
again" man. When he began to question him he found 
that he was only very imperfectly acquainted with the 
Scriptures and had only the vaguest conception of Christ's 
work for sinners. For a while the writer sought to present 



the Plan of Salvation in a simple and impersonal 
way, in the hope that if he were still unsaved God would 
be pleased to reveal unto him the Savior for sinners. 
One night to his joy the one who had been preaching the 
Gospel(?) for seven years confessed that he had found 
Christ only the previous night. He confessed (to use his 
own words) that he had been presenting "the Christ 
ideal," but not the Christ of the Cross. He had been trying 
to know Christ as the "Truth" before he knew Him 
as the "Way." 

The writer believes there are thousands like this 
preacher, who have been brought up in Sunday Schools, 
taught about the birth, life and teachings of Jesus Christ, 
who believe in the historicity of His Person, and who 
think that is all that is necessary for their salvation. 
When they reach manhood and go out into the world they 
encounter the attacks of atheists and infidels who declare 
that such a person as Jesus of Nazareth never lived. 
But the impressions of their early clays cannot easily be 
erased and they remain steadfast in their declaration that 
they believe in Jesus Christ. Yet when you examine their 
faith, too often you will find that though they believe 
about Jesus Christ they do not believe in Him! They 
believe with the head that such a person lived (and because 
they believe this, imagine they are saved), but they 
do not believe with the heart that this Person died to save 
them from their sins. A merely intellectual assent to the 
reality of Christ's Person and which goes no further is 
another phase of the Way "which seemeth right unto a 
man," but the end thereof "are the ways of death!" 

Lack of space prevents our doing more than just 
pointing out other ends of this Way which "seemeth 
right." Those who are trusting to an outward form of 
godliness, those who are religious because it is considered 
a mark of respectability, those who attend the House of 
God because it is fashionable to do so, and those who join 
some Church because they imagine that such a step will 
enable them to become Christians, all such are in the Way 
which ends in death— death spiritual and eternal. 

And now, my reader, where do you stand? Are you 
in the Way which "seemeth right," but which leadeth to 
death, or are you in the Narrow Way which leadeth to 
life eternal? Are you trusting in yourself or in Christ? 
are you relying upon your own works, or are you reposing 
upon the finished work of Christ? A pious life, a self-sacrificing 
spirit, attractive manners, a charitable disposition, 
regular attendance at religious services, saying 
prayers and even reading the Bible, none of these things 
—nay, all of them together— without faith in the Blood of 
Christ can obtain for you a passport to Heaven. If any 
of the above virtues could ever save a single soul, where 
was the necessity for the awful death of Jesus Christ? 
No, eternal life is neither a wage nor a reward, but the 
free Gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. However 
pure your motives, however noble your intentions, 
however well-meaning your purposes, God cannot accept 



you as a son, until you accept His Son. 
By Arthur Pink. 



R5849 : page 44 

CHRISTIAN COMMUNISM 

-'ACTS 4:32*- 5:1 6 V -FEBRUARY 20.- 

CHRIST'S SPIRIT IS SYMPATHETIC, LOVING-THIS WAS ILLUSTRATED 
IN THE EARLY CHURCH AND SINCE-LOVE IS BENEVOLENT- 
"SEEKETH NOT HER OWN" INTERESTS ONLY- 
COMMUNISM TRIED-WHY IT FAILED-WHY IT WAS 
PERMITTED-ANANIAS AND SAPPHIRA-HOW SEVERE 
WAS THEIR PUNISHMENT? 

"Love one another from the heart fervently."—" 1 Peter 1:22". 

GOD is Love; and all, in proportion as they 

have fellowship with God, must have His 

character-likeness and be loving, generous, 

kind. Selfishness is of Satan, the Adversary. 

He is the embodiment of that spirit, 

since he allowed pride and ambition to mislead 

him. The world, under the influence 

of the prince of this world, Satan, and the 

influence of the fall, is a selfish world, and 

to that extent ungodly. 

The work of the Millennial Age will be to give all 
mankind a full opportunity of recovery from the snare of 
the Devil— to Restitution, to recovery of all that was lost 
in Adam, and redeemed for Adam and his race by Jesus. 
That will be a glorious Millennium, helpful and uplifting 
to all the willing and obedient. The Church at that time 
will be with Jesus on the spirit plane, invisible to men and 
armed with all the power of God. Her work, like her 
Lord's is described. She will share with her Lord in His 
Kingdom rule. His Priesthood and His Judgeship— giving 
chastisements or rewards to mankind, and these shall be 
designed with a view to educating them, to uplifting them 
to the condition of perfection. 

This Gospel Age is the period in which God has been 
selecting this Church from amongst mankind. All of the 
select ones will be saints, regardless of denominational 
lines. God has destined that none shall be of that company 
except those who are copies of His Son. ("Romans 8:29".) 
The Church has received special testing and 
education for the glorious mission marked out for her— 
the blessing of judging the world. The Church must not 
only have a sympathy for others, but must cultivate this 
quality to the attainment of Christ's likeness in heart, and 
as much as possible must have that likeness in outward 
living and in thinking. 

The record tells us that the number of believers was 



many thousand in a little while. The spirit of love began 
to burn in their hearts— thankfulness to God, appreciation 
of His favor, a desire to serve Him, and a sympathy and 
love for the brotherhood. 

We perceive that some were poor; and, controlled by 
the spirit of love, the well-to-do felt that they would 
like all the poorer brethren to have just as good as themselves. 
First they gave privately one to another, as they 

R5850 : page 44 

realized the needs. Then the matter went further and 
they organized a little community. Many of the wealthier 
sold their possessions and turned in the money to the 
Lord's treasury, desiring that a certain amount be supplied 
to themselves and all the other members of the 
community— share and share alike. 

This manifested a very beautiful spirit, and under 
perfect conditions would have been the wise as well as 
the proper course. As it was, the community proved a 
failure. Nevertheless, the Lord apparently permitted that 

R5850 : page 45 

test and failure for a good purpose— to show us that no 

such community amongst His people is possible at the 

present time. The community principle will prosper wonderfully 

as soon as Messiah's Kingdom is established; but 

it is impracticable at the present time, as it was in the 

days of the Apostles. 

BARNABAS NOT AN APOSTLE 

This lesson introduces us to Barnabas, a godly man 
and wise, a mighty power in the Church. His name signifies 
consolation, and evidently it was an appropriate 
name. His proper name was Joses; and he must have 
been a very fine character when the Apostles gave him 
the new name Barnabas— implying that he had a beautiful 
spirit and was in his daily life a "son of consolation" to 
the brethren and all with whom he had contact. 

Barnabas had a property or estate, and sold it, and 
brought the proceeds to the Apostles' feet. He was not 
an Apostle, for of them there were only Twelve, and at 
this time only eleven, because of the loss of Judas. St. 
Paul, the twelfth Apostle, the Lord's chosen vessel, and 
"not one whit behind the very chiefest of the Apostles" 
02 Corinthians 1 1:5 V ), had not yet had his eyes opened 
to the truth of the Gospel. 

Barnabas was quite willing to take his share with the 
others from the general dole; however, amongst those 
who accepted the terms of the proposition were Ananias 
and his wife Sapphira. These had property and sold it 
and kept back a portion of the price, bringing the remainder 
to the Apostles as though it were the entire sum. 
Indeed in conspiring between themselves they had agreed 



to declare that the money they turned in to the treasury 
was all they received from the property. Our lesson tells 
of how St. Peter treated the matter. Under the guidance 
of the Holy Spirit, he said, "Ananias, why hath Satan 
filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Spirit, and to keep 
back part of the price of the land?" He pointed out to 
Ananias that the property was his own, that he was not 
compelled or urged to donate it to this community, that it 
was only his own voluntary gift, and that he had thus 
lied to God, and not merely to the community. Ananias, 
hearing these words, fell down dead— smitten of the Lord; 
and his wife suffered similarly a little later. A great fear 
fell on all the company when they heard of these things. 

WHY REPENTANCE WAS NOT PREACHED 

St. Peter doubtless remembered his own sad experience 
when he once denied the Lord. We query. Why did 
he not sympathize with Ananias and Sapphira. pointing 
out to them wherein they had erred, and urge them to 
repentance, and join with them in prayer rather than 
pronounce upon them the death penalty? 

Our thought is that these two culprits were not really 
God's children— that they had never received the begetting 
of the Holy Spirit; and that the Lord took this opportunity 
to give a great lesson to the Church— to remind 
them that they were dealing, not with flesh and blood, but 
with Jehovah God. From this viewpoint, it was worth 
while to sacrifice these two persons under Divine judgment 
with a view to teaching the Church, then and in 
future generations, how displeasing in the Lord's sight is 
hypocrisy— especially in respect to religious things. 

If these two had been spirit-begotten, then their punishment 
would be the Second Death; and we would have 
no Scriptural ground for expecting them to have any 
resurrection or future consideration from the Lord. But 
if they were merely children of this world, not fully 
appreciative of spiritual things, their future interests are 
not destroyed. They still belong to the great world of 
mankind for whom Christ died, and have not yet received 
in full the blessings of reconciliation with God through 
the Lord Jesus. Such glorious favor may be expected for 
the world in general, in the sweet by and by— during the 
Millennium, when "all the families of the earth shall be 
blessed" and be brought to a knowledge of the Truth and 
to an opportunity of accepting the same unto salvation. 

If our surmise be correct, Ananias and Sapphira were 
in a very different position from Judas, who had companied 
with our Lord for years, who had witnessed His 
miracles, had received of His Holy Spirit and through 
that power had cast out demons, healed the sick, etc. Our 
charitable thought for Ananias and Sapphira is, that if 
they had not received the Holy Spirit they but imperfectly 
appreciated what they were doing. Although they did 
know that they were practising a deception, they apparently 
did not get a proper focus upon the matter. Our 



expectation for them is that they have not sinned unto 
death; and that the life which they lost they will have 
back again in the resurrection time, with full opportunity 
to get matters straight and to determine finally their 
loyalty or disloyalty to God under the illumination which 
they will then have. 

The designed effect was realized. Great fear and 
respect for God and everything appertaining to Him in 
religion fell upon the whole multitude. It was worth 
while to punish the one couple severely, in view of the 
preparation made for their blessing in future and in view 
of the lesson which their experience brought to the remainder 
of the Church. 

THE SAME SPIRIT OF DECEPTION NOW 

We are not gifted, as was St. Peter, with authority to 
represent the Lord's interests in judging others. It would 
appear, however, from all that we are able to know, that 
there are many today living equally deceptive lives. We 
are not permitted to judge them, but they judge themselves 
by what they tell us. They profess to be consecrated 
to the Lord— Jehovah— sacrificed to the Divine 
cause. Nevertheless they keep back much through self-will, 
professing to be fully devoted followers of Jesus. 

Some of these, doubtless, belong to the same class as 
Ananias. They have become associated with Christians, 
but have never been begotten of the Holy Spirit and have 
really neither part nor lot with Christ. Others may be 
real Christians, and be keeping back part of their consecration. 
If so, the latter may be sure that they will be 
dealt with. So the Apostle declares, "If we would judge 
ourselves, we should not [need to] be judged [of the 
Lord]. But when we are judged, we are chastened of 
the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the 
world." (" 1 Corinthians 1 1:31,32'.) Such Christians, 
building upon the Rock Christ Jesus, will apparently need 
to come through the fiery ordeal pointed out in the Bible, 
and "wash their robes and make them white in the blood 
of the Lamb," in great tribulation— for failing to live up 
to their covenant of complete sacrifice.— "Revelation 7:9-17". 

It would indeed appear as though hypocrisy, which 
the Bible intimates is especially wicked in the sight of 
God, is practised to a great length amongst the nominal 
followers of Jesus. Professions of creeds not believed 
and a form of godliness without its power seem on every 
hand to tell us that many must be living hypocritically 
and subject, therefore, to the Divine judgment. The 
lesson to us is, "Take heed that no man take thy crown." 

Our Golden Text here comes in appropriately. We 
are to love one another— first our Heavenly Father, then 
our Heavenly Lord Jesus; and finally, we should love, 
and as we have opportunity serve, the brethren. Actively 
engaged in this manner, we shall be kept from hypocrisy 
and be ready for our share in the Heavenly Kingdom. 



R5850 : page 46 

PERSECUTION'S GOOD RESULTS 

-FEBRUARY 27.-' ACTS 5:12'- 6:7\- 

METHODS USED OF GOD-DIVINE APPROVAL OF THE GOSPEL- 
OPPOSITION BY THE SADDUCEES AND THE CHIEF PRIESTS- 
MULTITUDES BELIEVED IN JERUSALEM-CHURCH COMMUNISM 
BEGAN TO FAIL-SEVEN DEACONS APPOINTED. 

"Bear ye one another's burdens, and so 
fulfil the law of Christ."— 'Galatians 6:2'. 

THE manifestation of love and sympathy 
amongst the early Christians had a salutary 
effect in backing up the teachings of the 
Apostles. The principle is as true today as 
it was then. The living of the Christ life 
is necessary to a proper endorsement of the 
Gospel Message. "If any man have not the 
Spirit of Christ, he is none of His." 
('Romans 8:9'.) The worldly are apt to read 
the Gospel influence in the lives of professors 
before they give particular heed to the Message. 

Alas, that we can see so many evidences of the fulfilment 
of the Apostle Paul's words respecting our day! 
He declares that at this time many would have a form of 
godliness without its power, and be "lovers of pleasure 
more than lovers of God." ('2 Timothy 3:5'.) The difficulty 

R585 1 : page 46 

seems to be that sectarianism has lost the essence 
of the Gospel Message which Jesus and the Apostles 
taught. That serious loss has had various substitutes 
favored by the great Adversary; but they are not the 
Gospel, and do not have the proper power upon the hearts 
and lives of those who even desire to do right. The 
Gospel Message which Jesus and the Apostles taught was 
expressed in our Lord's prayer: "Thy Kingdom come; 
Thy will be done on earth, even as it is done in Heaven." 
fMatthew 6:10'.) The Apostles exhorted the people to 
prepare for the Kingdom of God's dear Son and to accept 
the invitation to become members of the Bride class. 

The parables of Jesus, His sermons, and the teachings 
of the Apostles abound with the thought that Messiah's 
Kingdom will be the great panacea for all the ills of the 
world; and that the Church, if found faithful, will share 
her Master's glory, honor and immortality. It was because 
St. Paul had this glorious hope before him, he 
declares, that he was willing to endure hardness as a good 
soldier of Jesus Christ and to count all his afflictions and 
sufferings for Christ, his sacrifice, but light afflictions. 



Because of these hopes, because of this deep-seated faith, 

he counted all earthly prospects as valueless in comparison, 

and willingly sacrificed his fame, his family position 

and his Roman citizenship, and endured stripes, imprisonments, 

buffetings and derision.— "Philippians 3:7-1 P; v 2 Corinthians 4: 17" 

"ll:23-28\ 

ERROR'S BITTER FRUITAGE 

The principle has not changed. The Gospel has not 
changed. Merely the true Message has been lost sight of. 
The theory came in that Christ's Kingdom was established 
in 800 A.D.; that the Popes were representatives, 
or Vicegerents— reigning instead of Christ; that the 
Cardinals were the Little Flock class in special glory and 
honor; and that Bishops, Archbishops and priests were 
also associated in the glory of the exalted Church. 

We are not doubting the sincerity of those who 
promulgated these theories; but surely we now see that a 
great mistake was made. The nations of Europe were 
told that they were God's earthly kingdoms, responsible 
to the Papal system as the spiritual kingdom; and that 
thus in relationship with God, they had Divine appointment 
to rule the people. Under these unscriptural teachings 
the world has been for eleven centuries. What the 
Catholics started, the Protestants have continued. 

When Great Britain rebelled against the Papacy, and 
King Henry VIII. declared his kingdom to be another 
spiritual empire, put the Bishops into the House of Lords, 
and made himself and his successors the representatives 
of Christ on earth in great power, it was a part of the 
same blunder that the Catholics had previously made. 
When, later, Luther and his followers attached themselves 
to the German princes, and favored and authorized 
them, and in turn were sanctioned by them, the German 
kingdoms were thus constituted kingdoms of God. And 
so with the other nations of Europe, great and small. 

Claiming to be God's Kingdom, these kingdoms of the 
world have therefore been hindering the people from 
hearing the Gospel Message of the Second Coming of 
Christ to establish the true Kingdom of God, to put down 
sin, to scatter the ignorance and darkness of the world, 
and to help mankind out of evil back to the image and 
likeness of God. The Bible declares these deceptions to 
be from Satan— "doctrines of demons"— M Timothy 4: P. 

Now we are seeing some of the bitter fruitage of such 
false teachings. Millions have been gathered into sects 
and parties unauthorized by the Bible, while only the few 
have been properly joined to Christ Himself as His members. 
This great mass of people, deceived into thinking 
that they are true Christians, are today at war— fighting 
like demons. The great intelligence which came to the 
world through God's Message, illuminating the minds of 
men more and more, has been turned to one side. Instead 
of blessing the world, this intelligence has been cursing 
the world with inventions for human destruction, such 



as the heathen were not intelligent enough to invent, and 
perhaps not heartless enough to use. Alas, what a picture! 

In all the churches of all denominations, prayers are 
going up for and against each other. The clergy are 
bewildered. The laity are bewildered. True faith in 
the Bible is at a discount. Little but a form of godliness 
remains. However, God has not left Himself at any time 
without witnesses in the world. Today the faithful followers 
of Jesus are realizing what is wrong. They are 
awakening, are giving the Bible a fresh study, and are 
getting blessings out of it. They are realizing that our 
difficulties have come from the creeds, which are really 
contradictory to the Bible, but which represent the 
strange notions of our deluded forefathers. Now is the 
time for the people of God who have not already put on 
the whole armor of God to do so; for the Bible seems to 
assure us that still more stringent conditions are before 
us.— "Ephesians 6:12-18". 

OPPOSITION INSPIRED BY SELFISHNESS 

Our Study for today shows how the living of the true, 
simple life of faith, trust, obedience and love had its effect- 
how that many were added to the Church, including 
"a great multitude of priests." It shows us, too, how 
angered were the Sadducees and the official class at that 
time. They were grieved that the people were taught; for 
the teachings of the followers of Jesus were so contrary 
to what they had taught and what they had hoped for. 

Not believing the Prophets, they had been using religion 
largely as a cloak— "a form of godliness." Their 
real hopes were along the line of Gentile hopes— of becoming 
more intimately associated with the Roman Empire 
and thus obtaining special favor. They feared lest 
the teaching of Messiah as the coming King of the world 
would reach the ears of the Roman rulers and bring upon 
the Jews ridicule and disfavor, and perhaps take from 
them some of the liberties which they were enjoying, and 
crush all their aspirations respecting the future. Their 

R585 1 : page 47 

opposition to the Gospel was therefore entirely selfish. 

They had the Apostles arrested and put into prison 
for preaching. But the Lord sent His angel and delivered 
His faithful servants; and they, with good 
courage, appeared again the next day in the Temple, 
preaching to the people as before. Again they were arrested, 
brought before the officials and commanded to 
preach no more in this Name. The point of the official 
resentment is noted in their words, "Ye have filled 
Jerusalem with your doctrines [teachings], and are liable 
to bring this man's blood upon us." That is to say. It 
looks as though you might really convince the people of 
this city that we have committed a great crime in putting 
to death that fanatical leader of yours called Jesus. 



But the more they sought to oppose the Message, the 
more God blessed it; the more the common people received 
the Truth; the more the Church of Christ multiplied. 

GRADUAL TRIUMPH OF THE LIGHT 

We see this same principle illustrated at the time of 
the Reformation, when God's time had come to bring back 
the Bible to the people after it had been turned aside for 
twelve hundred and sixty years. When the Bishops began 
to claim that they also were Apostles, and when, using 
this Apostolic authority, they gave the people the Nicene 
Creed in A.D. 325, an end was put to all Bible study; for 
the people were taught that that creed, and other creeds 
subsequently made, contained all that was proper to be 
believed, and that any further Bible study was quite unnecessary- 
indeed, dangerous, because by believing anything 
not in the creeds, they would be heretics and 
doomed to eternal torture. 

When, under Divine guidance, Wyclif and Tyndale 
brought the New Testament to the attention of the people 
in the English language, it marked the start of return 
to an individual faith and a new beginning of Bible study. 
It has required the centuries since to help get us out of 
the gross darkness of those twelve hundred years during 
which we were without the Bible and were poisoned by 
the various creeds. No wonder that we still feel some 
of our poison! No wonder that it is still difficult for us 
to use our common sense in Bible study! Thank God for 
the light of the new Day beginning to dawn! Thank 
God that His true saints everywhere are awakening and, 
like Cardinal Newman, are praying, 

"Lead, Kindly Light, 
Amid the encircling gloom"! 

But if God will hear our prayers and grant the guidance 
of this light to His faithful, the responsibility is 
upon us to step out from all the creeds and not support 
hypocrisy and error— as becomes those who walk in the 
path of the just, which "shineth more and more unto the 
perfect Day."— "Proverbs 4: 18". 

COMMUNISM A FAILURE 

Then came some of the difficulties of communism. 
Favoritism was claimed in the distribution of the necessities. 
Meeting this emergency, the Apostles realized that 
they could not undertake to manage a community along 
earthly lines. They concluded that they should, as the 
Master had directed, give themselves entirely to the Gospel 
work. They appointed seven Deacons to attend to the 
charities; but evidently these also by and by failed, and 
we hear no more of the early communism. 

This experience, which the Lord permitted, served its 
purpose. It manifested the proper Christian spirit, but 



nevertheless taught us the impossibility of such a practise 
while ourselves and others are still limited by the imperfections 
of the flesh. 



page 47 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
THE DAILY INVENTORY 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER AND PASTOR:- 

Greetings in the name of our Lord and Master, Jesus 
Christ! 

The matter of formally addressing you in regard to the 
"proposition" set forth in April 15th WATCH TOWER, concerning 
the cultivation of LOVE, has been in my mind for some 
time. Since your suggestion was that we note daily our 
progress in the matter, and write you occasionally of the 
same, I feel that I should not longer delay in so doing. I am 
greatly pleased and encouraged, dear Brother, with the success 
that I have been having in the cultivation of this most 
precious fruit, and I know that you also will be pleased to 
learn of my success. 

Each evening before retiring I take an inventory of the 
little battles that have taken place in my life during the course 
of the day, and note to what degree I have exercised the 
spirit of love, forgiveness and forbearance toward those who 
oppose me. I find this to be an excellent tonic for the memory, 
which is ever inclined to forget; and by this method of 
daily rendering accounts, I have been enabled to come out of 
some of the most trying circumstances "more than conqueror." 
The spirit of resentment is fast leaving my heart; and I must 
say that since accepting and acting upon the "proposition" I 
have discovered that a great deal of it was there. 

Love for my Heavenly Father and His Truth is greatly 
augmented, and greater appreciation of, and love for, the 
brethren have I now that I am constantly on the alert to 
exercise the spirit of love toward all. The ignorant and 
vicious world, and even those who hate me for the Truth's 
sake, I have learned to pity and forgive. 

And now, dear Brother, feeling that the purpose of this 
epistle has been served, in that I have pointed out the lines 
along which I have noticed the particular development in love, 
and bearing in mind that you are a very, very busy man, I 
deem it expedient to close, happy in the intelligence that I am 
your Brother, by the Grace of God. 

May your faith endure, and may the remembrance of your 
work on earth, among men, come up before God in everlasting 
praise. AMEN. W. A. JARRETT.-Kansas. 

GRATITUDE FOR PRECIOUS PRESENT TRUTH 

DEAR FRIENDS:- 
Enclosed find money order, which I hoped to have sent 



you some time ago. I wish it were more. When I consider 
how much it means to me to have an understanding of the 
precious Present Truth, and how wonderful are the opportunities 
of the present life with reference to the High Calling 
of God in Christ Jesus, I feel that nothing that I have to give 
can properly express my gratitude to the Lord. 

I take this opportunity to express, also, my gratitude to 
the little band of faithful workers who are associated with 
our dear Brother Russell in the Lord's work. May His 
richest blessings attend you, and may He grant you an abundant 
entrance into His glorious Kingdom! 

I am an Armenian who has taken refuge in this land of 
liberty from the persecutions of the Turks, and I thank our 
Heavenly Father for His mercies in this direction, as well as 
for the better understanding of His Word which I have 
gained since Pastor Russell's books were put into my hands. 
I have found some earnest Bible students here and am so 
thankful for the help I receive through association with them! 
"Blest be the tie that binds our hearts in Christian love!" 
How we long for the consummation of our hopes— when "we 
shall be like Him" and "see Him as He is"! 
Yours in the one Hope, H. H. TEORIZIAN.-Calif. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have often thought that it was probably my duty to 
write you to give you the loving satisfaction of knowing that 
another one of the consecrated sons of God has taken the 
VOW. I did this long since, informing my Heavenly Father, 
through prayer, that I took the VOW until death. 

Dear Brother, I pray for you often that our kind and 
loving Father may give you strength, grace and wisdom in 
every hour of need. I go to the Heavenly Throne of grace 
every night and morning in behalf of all the consecrated 
Israelites in every land, in harmony with one of the provisions 
of the VOW. 

"O! who's like my Savior? He's Salem's bright King; 
The sweet song of Moses He's given me to sing." 
Your brother in the Lord's service, W. A. NICHOLS. 



page 48 

International Bible Students Association Classes 
STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 49 
