Be Attentive to the Marvelous Works of God
1 For three splendid days, we gathered at the “Doers of God’s Word” District Convention. We turned our attention away from the everyday cares of life and concentrated on the marvelous works of Jehovah. The program was designed to increase our faith in God and his Word, to strengthen our relationship with him, and to intensify our zeal for the ministry. How are we benefiting from the things we were taught?​—John 13:17.
2 Families Obey God’s Word: The symposium “Be Obedient to God’s Word” helped us to examine the spiritual condition of our families. Children love to learn. Thus, godly parents were encouraged to make the family Bible study the foundation for building a spiritually strong household. Many family heads are discussing with their little ones the new brochure You Can Be God’s Friend! This will help them to develop a happy and secure relationship with Jehovah. Parents, teach your children how to be attentive to the feelings of God. Be expressive in your own love for him and his doings. (Ps. 103:2) Work together to set and attain spiritual goals and to be fully involved in serving Jehovah.
3 God’s Word Lights Our Way: We were delighted to receive the new book Isaiah’s Prophecy​—Light for All Mankind I. How far along are you in reading this first volume? The book of Isaiah foretells the dark judgments for ungodly nations as well as the bright Kingdom blessings for God’s people. (Isa. 34:2; 35:10) It also builds faith and confidence in Jehovah and in his way of doing things.​—Isa. 12:2-5.
4 When reading Isaiah’s Prophecy I, early on you can sense how Isaiah maintained his integrity to Jehovah while wickedness surrounded him. When extended an invitation to be God’s messenger, Isaiah replied: “Here I am! Send me.” (Isa. 6:8) Meditating on his willing spirit will encourage you to keep preaching the good news, having a full share in bearing “witness to all the nations.”​—Matt. 24:14.
5 Our being attentive to Jehovah’s works will magnify his greatness. So cherish the privilege of being doers of God’s word!

