Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting October 9
Song 11
 8 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
12 min: “Be Attentive to the Marvelous Works of God.” Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion. Point out a few illustrations in the new book that build appreciation for Isaiah’s prophecy.
25 min: “The New Millennium​—What Does the Future Hold for You?” Enthusiastic discussion by service overseer. After reading the announcement provided in the Society’s July 3, 2000, letter to the elders, distribute one copy of Kingdom News No. 36 to each person in attendance. Then proceed with a question-and-answer discussion of the article. Outline local arrangements for complete coverage of the territory. Consider how to help new ones and children to qualify as unbaptized publishers. Demonstrate a brief presentation. Stress the need for everyone to share fully in this campaign.
Song 53 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 16
Song 104
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Remind publishers that during weekend activity the Watchtower and Awake! magazines are to be featured along with Kingdom News No. 36.
15 min: “Tools That Educate, Motivate, and Strengthen.” (Paragraphs 1 and 2 only.) A talk. Briefly review the history of the Society’s entry into video production. (See Proclaimers book, pages 600-601.) Encourage everyone to view the video Jehovah’s Witnesses​—The Organization Behind the Name in preparation for the discussion at the Service Meeting the week of October 30. Those who have the video can share it with others who do not have it, or perhaps they can watch it together.
20 min: All of Us Can Demonstrate the Pioneer Spirit. Discussion between a book study conductor and his assistant, based on the October 15, 1997, Watchtower, pages 22-3. Consider why it would be good to have more pioneers in the congregation and how all can contribute toward reaching this goal. Also discuss ways to encourage those presently pioneering to continue and how all in the congregation can build up zeal for the ministry.
Song 131 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 23
Song 150
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: Prepare Well for Meetings. Talk and audience discussion. The benefit we derive from meetings depends a great deal on how much effort we put into preparation. Review practical suggestions offered in the March 1, 1998, Watchtower, pages 15-16, paragraphs 8-11. Invite the audience to make comments showing how they develop the necessary initiative and find the time needed to prepare well.
Song 211 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 30
Song 167
 8 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for October.
12 min: Experiences Offering Kingdom News No. 36. Ask a variety of publishers to relate encouraging results they have enjoyed so far in distributing Kingdom News No. 36. Invite regular and auxiliary pioneers to express their appreciation for the increased activity during this campaign and the opportunity they have to work with many different publishers.
25 min: Jehovah’s Witnesses​—The Organization Behind the Name. Audience discussion. Consider the questions provided in paragraph 3 of “Tools That Educate, Motivate, and Strengthen.” Offer suggestions on how the video can be used to help interested ones get better acquainted with our organization. Include one or two brief experiences.​—See the October 1, 1992, Watchtower, pages 30-1.
Song 15 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 6
Song 198
15 min: Local announcements. Review progress of Kingdom News No. 36 distribution. Report on how much territory has been worked thus far and what will be needed to complete coverage by November 17.
20 min: What Do We Believe? A brother makes a return visit on a person who asked, “What do Jehovah’s Witnesses teach that makes them different from other religions?” Discuss points covered in the box on page 6 in the October 1, 1998, Watchtower. Explain how other religions ignore or reject these basic Bible truths in favor of man-made teachings.
10 min: Singing​—An Important Part of Our Worship. A book study conductor converses with two publishers about their singing at congregation meetings. He has noticed that their singing seems to be somewhat subdued. He shares some points from the February 1, 1997, Watchtower, pages 27-8. They analyze the lyrics of one of the songs to be sung at the Watchtower Study for the current week, as suggested in the July 1, 1999, Watchtower, page 20, paragraph 12. By taking singing seriously, we put life into expressing heartfelt praise to Jehovah.
Song 223 and concluding prayer.

