“The New Millennium​—What Does the Future Hold for You?”
1 That question has been on the minds of people around the earth. Although mankind has accomplished much over the centuries, people are disillusioned because the basic problems that have plagued humans for millenniums still exist. (Job 14:1; Ps. 90:10) Where can mankind find relief?
2 During the months of October and November, we will have a special opportunity to provide our neighbors with the answer to that question. How? Through the distribution of Kingdom News No. 36. It is entitled “The New Millennium​—What Does the Future Hold for You?” During the first half of October, we will offer the Watchtower and Awake! magazines. Then from Monday, October 16, through Friday, November 17, we will engage in an intensive distribution of Kingdom News No. 36. During this campaign, we will concentrate on placing Kingdom News No. 36 on weekdays. On weekends, we will present it along with the current magazines.
3 Will You Have a Full Share? Elders, ministerial servants, and pioneers will want to take the lead in this campaign, since they are at the forefront of the work. Many publishers have adjusted their circumstances to auxiliary pioneer during one or both months of the distribution. Others plan to spend more time than usual in the ministry.
4 Congregation Book Study conductors can be instrumental in encouraging every member of their group to have a full share in the distribution of Kingdom News No. 36. There may be some publishers who have become inactive in the preaching work. Elders should visit these to see what can be done to help them. Perhaps arrangements can be made for an experienced publisher to accompany each inactive person in the field during these months. The simple presentation of Kingdom News No. 36 could be just what is needed to reactivate these publishers.
5 This will also be a good opportunity for Bible students who are well along in the Knowledge book and who qualify as unbaptized publishers to begin sharing in the ministry. Even young ones can have a fine share in this exciting work.
6 A simple presentation is all that is needed. You might say:
▪ “I have volunteered my time to help distribute this very important message to every family in [name of city or county]. This is your copy. Please read it.” It may be advantageous not to carry a witnessing case when distributing Kingdom News No. 36.
7 Well-Planned Meetings for Field Service: The elders must see to it that witnessing arrangements are both convenient and practical. The service overseer especially should ensure that plenty of house-to-house and business territory is on hand so that everyone can share fully in the work. Wherever possible, meetings for service should be organized for each weekday, for the weekends, and for the evenings. Arrangements can be made to meet in the late afternoons for the benefit of school students, shift workers, and others.
8 What to Do About Not-at-Homes: Our goal is to speak to as many householders as possible. If no one is at home when you call, take note of the address and call at a different time of day. If by the last week of the campaign you have not succeeded in contacting these householders, you may leave them a copy of Kingdom News No. 36 in a place out of sight of passersby. The local elders may instruct the congregation to leave a copy of Kingdom News No. 36 at not-at-homes on the first call when working rural areas and areas where there is more territory than can be covered during the campaign.
9 Let’s Get Busy! Congregations should endeavor to cover their territory before the campaign ends on November 17. If your territory is quite large, some publishers may work alone where this is practical and safe. This arrangement will make it easier to reach as many deserving ones as possible. Be sure to keep a good record of all the interest found.
10 The elders should anticipate how many extra magazines the congregation will need and order accordingly. There is no need to order Kingdom News No. 36, since a consignment is being sent to each congregation. Special, regular, and auxiliary pioneers will receive 250 copies each to distribute, while congregation publishers will be allotted 50 copies each. So are you ready and eager to get busy in this special activity? How privileged we are to let all our neighbors know what God has promised for the near future!

