2005 “Godly Obedience” District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses
1 As our Grand Instructor, Jehovah God arranges for us to assemble to be instructed in his ways. (Isa. 30:20, 21; 54:13) He does this through the faithful and discreet slave class, which arranges for such meetings as our annual district conventions. (Matt. 24:45-47) Our sentiments are like those of the psalmist David, who sang: “Among the congregated throngs I shall bless Jehovah.” (Ps. 26:12) David clearly understood the value of being taught by Jehovah and was determined to be among His people whenever they gathered together.
2 Will you be among “the congregated throngs” who will attend the “Godly Obedience” District Convention this year? If so, the following information will prove helpful in making your preparations to attend.
3 Plan Now to Attend Every Day: “The plans of the diligent one surely make for advantage.” (Prov. 21:5) Do not those words emphasize the value of making plans without delay to attend the convention? To ensure that you will not miss any of the spiritually refreshing program, wisely start now to make whatever arrangements are needed for you to attend all three days. If you have to ask your employer for time off, do so right away. If you need to discuss your plans with your unbelieving mate, do not leave this to the last minute. Whatever challenges you face, make them a matter of prayer to Jehovah, trusting that with his help “your plans will be firmly established.” (Prov. 16:3) Additionally, it would be good to assist your Bible students with their preparations to be present at every session.
4 Accommodations: For your convenience, rooming arrangements have already been made in each convention city. A Recommended Lodging List of available hotels will be posted on the information board after this article is considered at the Service Meeting. Please reserve rooms only at hotels on the list, and agree to pay only the rates shown. Your cooperation will make it possible for the branch office to continue to arrange for high-quality hotels at reduced rates. Bear in mind that the best quality hotels are not necessarily the closest to the convention site. Before you call to make your reservation, review the points in the box “How You Can Support the Rooming Arrangements.” When you call, follow the steps in the box “What Is the Best Way to Reserve a Hotel Room?”
5 Special Needs: The apostle Paul described certain brothers as being “a strengthening aid” to him. (Col. 4:7-11) One of the ways they helped was by providing personal services for Paul. How can you be “a strengthening aid” to others in connection with the convention? Elderly publishers, the infirm, those in full-time service, and others may require practical assistance with transportation or accommodations. Relatives have the primary responsibility to care for such ones. (1 Tim. 5:4) If they cannot do so, however, fellow believers may be able to help. (Jas. 1:27) Book study overseers should check with those in their group who have special needs to be sure that their plans are in order well in advance of the convention.
6 Special Needs Room Request forms are available only for publishers whose accommodation needs cannot be cared for by family members or by their congregation. The Congregation Service Committee should consider the publisher’s qualifications, using the guidelines on the form as well as the letter dated December 14, 2004, addressed to all bodies of elders. This provision is only for publishers in good standing, along with their well-behaved children.
7 Attending Another Convention: To ensure that there is sufficient seating, literature, rooming accommodations, and so forth, publishers are encouraged to attend the convention to which their congregation is assigned. If circumstances require that you attend a different convention, please see your congregation secretary for the mailing address of the convention you will attend, which is printed on the back of the Special Needs Room Request form. Be sure to include a self-addressed, stamped envelope with your request for the Recommended Lodging List or any additional information. If there is more than one convention being held in the city, indicate the dates of the convention that you will attend.
8 Volunteers Needed: Jesus set a perfect example in being humbly attentive to the needs of others. (Luke 9:12-17; John 13:5, 14-16) Those who volunteer to work at conventions reflect a similar spirit. To fill the needs of convention departments, local Convention Committees will soon be inviting others to work with them. There is especially a need for elders to volunteer and accept assignments. Their willing spirit provides a fine example for all in the congregation.​—1 Pet. 5:2, 3.
9 What Others See: A hotel sales manager said: “You people are our very favorite group. You are so well behaved compared with any other group. The maids all comment on how nicely they are treated and how they receive tips. In fact, everyone wants to work the weekend you are here!” Another hotel representative commented: “Jehovah’s Witnesses are the easiest group to work with.” Perhaps your exemplary conduct contributed to these statements. Imagine how happy Jehovah must feel when he sees us acting in a way that brings such praise!​—1 Pet. 2:12.
10 Through “the faithful steward,” Jehovah God has arranged for his people to assemble for spiritual instruction this coming summer. (Luke 12:42) Making preparations to attend all three days will require effort but will be well worth it. This year’s “Godly Obedience” District Convention will without fail strengthen our resolve to serve Jehovah now and on into eternity. May we be determined to follow the psalmist’s admonition: “In congregated throngs bless God.”​—Ps. 68:26.
[Box on page 3]
Program Times
Friday and Saturday
9:30 a.m. - 5:05 p.m.
      Sunday
9:30 a.m. - 4:10 p.m.
[Box on page 4]
How You Can Support the Rooming Arrangements
▪ Stay only in hotels on this year’s Recommended Lodging List. Do not call hotels that are not on the list and ask if they have a rate for our convention. Hotels that are not on the list will often say they have a rate for Jehovah’s Witnesses.
▪ To comply with fire safety laws, plan on having no more than four persons in each room, including children, unless the list indicates otherwise under the heading “Adults.”
▪ If no rooms are available when you call all the hotels on the list or if you have a problem with a hotel, inform your congregation secretary. He should contact your convention’s Rooming Department, using the information at the top of the list. Please wait for a revised list to be received for your convention rather than calling a hotel not on the list.
▪ Reserve only the rooms you will actually use.
▪ To guarantee your reservation, you must make a deposit to the hotel for each room reserved. Otherwise, the hotel can offer your room to someone else.
▪ Keep your first reservation.
▪ If your congregation has its circuit assembly the week that the convention assignment letter is to be read, the secretary may make a copy of the Recommended Lodging List for each book study overseer to show to his group. No copies of the list are to be made for individual publishers.
[Box on page 4]
What Is the Best Way to Reserve a Hotel Room?
 1. Call hotels during regular business hours, using the telephone numbers on the Recommended Lodging List.
 2. Inform the hotel that you are attending the convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
 3. Specify the dates you will check in and check out of the hotel.
 4. If no more rooms are available, call another hotel on the list.
 5. Do not accept a higher rate than what is shown on the list.
 6. Make your reservation, and ask for a confirmation number.
 7. Make your deposit by credit card, check, or money order within ten days. Never send cash. If a deposit is made by check or money order, write the confirmation number on the front.

