How the Theocratic Ministry School Benefits Us
1 Jehovah’s people have the distinct privilege of receiving theocratic education. (Isa. 54:13; John 6:45) The extent to which we benefit from it, however, depends largely on the effort we exert. Can you discern the positive effects the Theocratic Ministry School is having on your spirituality?
2 Appreciative Comments: Many school overseers have noted that the in-depth study of speech qualities has improved their congregations’ effectiveness in the field ministry. In addition, one school overseer has found that as a result of the provision for audience participation in Bible highlights, more are keeping to the schedule of Bible reading. Concerning Assignment No. 2, many brothers have commented favorably on the benefits of focusing on the material without preparing an introduction and conclusion. Those assigned this part are now concentrating more attentively on improving their reading skills.​—1 Tim. 4:13.
3 All Can Benefit: Commenting at meetings can be a delight. (Prov. 15:23) Having the oral review questions in advance enables us to prepare for and participate in the review readily. Additionally, with the January 1, 2004, issue of The Watchtower, highlights from Bible books have appeared that correspond with our assigned reading in the Theocratic Ministry School. These articles have helped many to make upbuilding comments during Bible highlights.
4 Everyone enrolled in the school has the special privilege of preparing and delivering assignments. All of us can benefit from the school overseer’s positive comments from the platform. Individual students profit further from points of counsel that he may offer in private after the meeting. The exercises featuring speech qualities at the end of each chapter of the book Benefit From Theocratic Ministry School Education provide additional help.
5 As practical and Scriptural ideas are brought to your attention during and after the school, make note of these in your copy of the Ministry School textbook. Reflect on what you have learned, and consider how this aspect of divine education is enhancing your spirituality.

