Part 4​—Conducting Progressive Bible Studies
Training Students to Prepare
1 A student who reads the lesson beforehand, marks the answers, and thinks of how to express them in his own words should make rapid spiritual progress. Therefore, once a regular study has been established, prepare a lesson together to show the student how. With most students, it will be helpful to prepare an entire chapter or lesson together.
2 Markings and Notations: Explain how to find direct answers to the printed questions. Show the student your copy of the study publication in which you have marked only the key words or phrases. As you consider the material, he may want to follow your example, marking in his copy only what is needed to help him recall the answer. (Luke 6:40) Then ask him to give the answer in his own words. This will allow you to see how well he understands the material.
3 A careful examination of unquoted scriptures is an important part of the student’s preparation for the study. (Acts 17:11) Help him to see that each cited text supports a point in the paragraph. Show him how to make brief notations in the margin of his study publication. Keep before him the fact that the Bible is the basis for what he is learning. Encourage him to make generous use of the cited scriptures in his comments during the study.
4 Survey and Review: Before the student begins his detailed preparation of the study material, it will be helpful for him to get an overview of the subject. Point out that he can survey the material by briefly examining the chapter title, subheadings, and illustrations. Explain that before concluding his session of preparation, he would be wise to take a moment to review the main points presented in the lesson, perhaps using the review box if one is provided. Such repetition will help him retain the information.
5 Training the student to prepare well for his study will help him to make meaningful comments at congregation meetings. It will also help him to develop study habits that will benefit him long after his personal Bible study is completed.

