From Our Readers
Death of a Child  “The Bible’s Viewpoint” articles “Why Did God Take My Child?” (February 8, 1991) and “The Death of a Child​—Why Does God Allow It?” (March 8, 1991) provided the comfort I needed just at the right time. On January 9, I gave birth to a baby who died after three hours. I became angry at myself and even directed my mistaken anger at God. Then I read these articles. The depth of God’s mercy poured from the pages, and I cried and cried. Thank you for the hope you provided when I was lonely and miserable.
C. K., Japan
School Teams  Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Should I Join the School Team?” (June 22, 1991) My school invited all students who were interested to join the volleyball team. I had always wanted to take part in the games. But I thought it over carefully. The games and training would conflict with my evangelizing ministry and Christian meetings. So after reading the article, I was convinced that I should not join the team.
M. C. P., Brazil
Jews and Christians  I have just completed reading the articles on the theme “Christians and Jews​—Can the Breach Be Healed?” (June 22, 1991) As a Jew, I grew up knowing that a large chasm existed between “the chosen people” and “the goyim.” I was also taught about the future arrival of a Messiah, but it was a very vague concept. One day Jehovah’s Witnesses called at my door and talked of a future of peace right here on earth. It sounded so appealing! Clearly, the Witnesses were not connected with the churches. Furthermore, they worshiped the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. I thus came to appreciate that becoming a true Christian would not betray my Jewish heritage. I therefore appreciate, more than words can say, your recent articles, and I hope that many more people will see the shining difference between Jehovah’s Witnesses and other religions.
N. S., United States
Changing What You Are  Although I have tried to overcome the bad habit of masturbation, I have been disappointed by relapses. However, through the series of articles on the subject “Should You Change What You Are?” (July 8, 1991), I was able to learn five specific steps I could take to change myself. It strengthened my determination to overcome my bad habit.
R. H., Japan
Asbestos  I am so grateful for the article “The Asbestos Story​—From Lifesaver to Death Threat.” (March 22, 1991) I work at a factory and frequently work with asbestos. However, not knowing how dangerous the material is, I have done so without any of the protective measures suggested in Awake! The article thus proved beneficial for me and my workmates, as I was able to speak about the matter at our daily safety meeting.
J. R. T., Brazil
There was a traffic accident involving asbestos, and those taking part in the rescue did not know how dangerous exposure to that material can be. I had read your article a few days before this incident. As an engineer, I was able to provide guidance so that the operation could be carried out in safety.
D. C., Brazil
Songbirds  Thank you for the fascinating article on songbirds in the May 22, 1991, issue. My husband has been feeding the birds in our backyard for years, and we both enjoy watching them. But after reading about the incredible way the birds produce their notes, we now listen to them as well. We are so grateful for your beautifully written description of yet another of Jehovah’s marvels.
J. S., United States

