Build Appreciation for Jehovah’s Matchless Qualities
1 In our ministry, we do more than teach others basic Bible truths. We help people get to know Jehovah as a person and build appreciation for his matchless qualities. When honesthearted ones learn the truth about God, it has a profound effect on them, moving them to make changes in their lives “in order to walk worthily of Jehovah to the end of fully pleasing him.”​—Col. 1:9, 10; 3:9, 10.
2 Our New Study Aid: From the outset, the Bible Teach book draws attention to Jehovah’s qualities. The very first chapter answers the questions: Does God really care about you?, What is God like?, and Is it possible to get close to God? That chapter also highlights Jehovah’s holiness (par. 10), his justice and compassion (par. 11), his love (par. 13), his power (par. 16), and his mercy, graciousness, willingness to forgive, patience, and loyalty (par. 19). Paragraph 20 sums up the matter by stating: “The more you learn about Jehovah, the more real he will become to you and the more reason you will have to love him and feel close to him.”
3 How can we use the Bible Teach book to help Bible students draw close to Jehovah? After considering a paragraph that highlights one of God’s qualities, we might ask the student, “What does this tell you about Jehovah as a person?” or “How does this show God’s interest in you personally?” By occasionally using such questions during the study, we teach our students to meditate on what they are learning and help them to grow in appreciation for Jehovah’s matchless qualities.
4 Use the Review Box: At the conclusion of each chapter, invite the student to comment in his own words on each point in the box “What the Bible Teaches.” Direct attention to the cited scriptures. To draw up what is in the student’s heart, you might at times ask, “How do you feel about what the Bible teaches on this point?” By so doing, you not only emphasize the main points of the chapter but also get valuable insight into a student’s true belief. This will help the student to begin developing a relationship with Jehovah.

