Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting July 10
Song 4
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the July 15 Watchtower and the July Awake! In one of the demonstrations, show how to handle the potential conversation stopper “We are already Christians here.”​—See Reasoning book, p. 19.
15 min: How the Congregation Is Organized and Governed. Talk and audience discussion based on chapter 4 of Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will.
20 min: “Build Appreciation for Jehovah’s Matchless Qualities.”a Include a demonstration showing how to use questions to help a Bible student reflect on the points in the review box at the end of chapter 1 of the Bible Teach book.
Song 88 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 17
Song 99
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Briefly consider the August 15, 2000, Watchtower, page 32. Highlight the benefits of maintaining a regular program of daily Bible reading, even during vacation periods or at other times when we are out of our normal routine.
15 min: Love and Humility​—Vital Qualities for the Ministry. A talk based on the August 15, 2002, Watchtower, pages 18-20, paragraphs 13-20.
20 min: “Imitate Our ‘Happy God,’ Jehovah.”b Invite the audience to comment on what helps them to maintain a cheerful disposition and a positive attitude when preaching in the local territory.
Song 189 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 24
Song 218
15 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the August 1 Watchtower and the August Awake! After each presentation, restate the opening comments that were used to arouse the householder’s interest.
10 min: “They Have Set an Example of Faithfulness.” A talk including a few published experiences of special pioneers or interviews of any local special pioneers who may be serving with the congregation.​—See the Watch Tower Publications Index under “Special Pioneers.”
20 min: Be Steadfast, Unmovable. (1 Cor. 15:58) Interview two or three publishers or pioneers who have served faithfully for many years. How did they learn the truth? What was the preaching work like when they began preaching? What challenges have they faced? What blessings have they experienced as a result of remaining steadfast for true worship?
Song 12 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 31
Song 28
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for July. Mention the literature offer for August.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Cultivate Good Habits, Reap Rich Blessings.”c Invite audience to comment on what efforts they have made to establish and maintain a good spiritual routine and the blessings they have reaped as a result.
Song 130 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 7
Song 209
10 min: Local announcements. Briefly review how the sample presentations that appear in Our Kingdom Ministry can be tailored to the needs of the local territory.​—See the January 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry, p. 8.
15 min: Meetings That Incite to Love and Fine Works. A talk based on the March 15, 2002, Watchtower, pages 24-5. Include a brief interview highlighting what effort the publisher puts forth to attend meetings regularly and how he or she has benefited from doing so.
20 min: Be Progressive and Adaptable in Our Ministry. Talk and audience discussion based on the December 1, 2005, Watchtower, pages 28-30. In a talk based on paragraphs 6-11, highlight how Paul was attentive, flexible, and resourceful in preaching and teaching. Then invite the audience to comment on the questions for paragraphs 12-14, making local application. Include a demonstration showing how publishers might adapt their approach in the ministry, taking into consideration the needs, circumstances, and cultural background of people in the local territory.
Song 83 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

