They Have Set an Example of Faithfulness
1 The year 1937 witnessed the beginning of a new avenue of full-time service​—the special pioneer activity. Capable men and women, experienced in the Christian ministry, willingly accepted assignments to serve wherever the organization directed. Now, decades later, special pioneers continue to set an example of faithfulness worthy of imitation.​—Heb. 6:12.
2 They Took the Lead: At the outset, special pioneers spearheaded the preaching work by using the portable phonograph at the householder’s doorstep. They also used recordings as the basis for Bible discussions on return visits. This was done in large cities where congregations were already established. Later, special pioneers were sent into areas where there was a greater need for Kingdom proclaimers. They followed up on all interest and conducted Bible studies. As a result of their earnest efforts, hundreds of new congregations were formed. Their tireless evangelizing contributed to the tremendous expansion of the organization that we see today. (Isa. 60:22) Special pioneers continue to play an important role in spreading the good news “in all creation that is under heaven.”​—Col. 1:23.
3 Worthy of Imitation: Some special pioneers have been serving in the full-time ministry for decades. Over the years, these loyal men and women have had their faith refined under various circumstances. (1 Pet. 1:6, 7) They have been willing to sacrifice material comforts in order to serve in places of special need. Some are now advanced in years and face poor health, or they confront other challenging circumstances. (2 Cor. 4:16, 17) Yet, they “keep on thriving during gray-headedness.” (Ps. 92:14) They put their trust in Jehovah and experience his blessing.​—Ps. 34:8; Prov. 10:22.
4 Special pioneers certainly deserve our warm commendation. If you are privileged to have special pioneers assigned to your congregation, take advantage of the opportunity to spend time with them and benefit from their experience. Show appreciation for their service as faithful Kingdom proclaimers. Draw strength from their steadfastness. All who imitate their faith can likewise enjoy Jehovah’s favor and blessing because “those acting in faithfulness are a pleasure to him.”​—Prov. 12:22.

