From Our Readers
Help From “Awake!”
Recently I received the chance to teach religion to 13 groups in a public school, a total of 52 classes. Thanks to “Awake!” I have been able to teach them many things beneficial to their development. Some subjects I have used are: Solution for a Troubled World, Sexual Abuse of Children, Fornication, Homosexuality, Use of Drugs, and Jehovah God’s Name. I felt that the students really enjoyed the information. Thank you.
O. M., Brazil
How Important Are Looks?
Your article “Young People Ask . . . How Important Are Looks?” (January 8, 1986) is not just for the younger ones. I am 42 years of age and have always had trouble reconciling the way I look, being sickened when looking into a mirror. This has been greatly exaggerated in the last 14 years while I have been stricken with severe chronic depression. Your information made me realize that I am only ordinary, no better and no worse than others. I also have other talents that far outweigh any physical limitations.
N. H., Indiana
Guillain-Barré Syndrome
Personal experiences in your magazine are always so encouraging, but never has one affected us so much as Winston Peacock’s experience, “Will I Ever Walk Again?” (January 8, 1986) At the time of receiving this copy, our dear daughter, age 23, had been paralyzed five weeks with Guillain-Barré Syndrome. We had never heard of it before and wondered if she would ever walk again. After reading Winston Peacock’s experience and the explanation of what this syndrome is all about, we felt so uplifted and encouraged. We could relate almost every move of his to Sally, and now after nine weeks, she, too, is walking with the aid of a frame, and we hope that she will soon be home to care for her 17-month-old daughter. Thank you very much.
C. and P. U., England
Dogs​—Man’s Best Friend?
I am a postman, and I thank you for the article “Dogs​—Always Man’s Best Friend?” (February 8, 1985) Reading the article, I understood that a dog is guided by instinct to follow anything that moves. Many times it has happened that dogs have frightened me and made me run, and there were problems. One bit my bag. After reading your article, I want to tell of my experience with a Doberman. As usual when I have a registered letter, I use the intercom to call the owner of the house. That day I rang and the owner answered, but along came this big Doberman and jumped right over the wall. Barking like a wild beast, he would not let me move. I remembered the article and remained still, pretending that I was calm. Finally the owner got him back over the wall. Anyway, I was frightened, but thanks to your information I survived this incident without harm. Please continue to publish interesting information that can be useful to everyone.
G. T., Italy
Crossword Puzzles Helpful
I have just recently started studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, and at first it was difficult to find my way through the different books of the Bible and getting familiar with the names. But I have been greatly helped in this by the crossword puzzles in “Awake!”
S. C., Scotland

