Gilead Graduates Subject Themselves to God’s Direction
TODAY, many resent taking direction from others. For this reason, it is unusual to find people who are willing to subject themselves to others.
But on March 2, 1986, 24 graduates from the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead in Brooklyn, New York, offered themselves willingly to go where they could best be used as missionaries. (Matthew 28:19, 20) How do they feel about being sent out, rather than choosing for themselves where they will spend what some would consider to be the prime years of their lives?
Subjection in a Skeptical World?
Anne answers: “I wanted Jehovah to decide what is the place and way for me to do my full-time service.” She and her husband, Teuvo, had already left their home in Finland and are now ready for their new home in Papua New Guinea.
Wayne feels the same way. He and his wife, Barbara, from the United States, are excited about their new assignment in Guatemala, Central America. “When we filled out the application for Gilead training,” said Wayne, “we told ourselves that Jehovah’s organization knew better than we did where to send us, and we believed it. When we arrived at the world headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses and saw Jehovah’s organization at work firsthand, we really became convinced that the organization is in the best position to decide where we could accomplish the most good.”
In a world of skepticism, how could these young people place so much confidence in an organization that they would allow it to make such a weighty decision for them? Elizabeth, who came from Australia, explains: “In most other avenues of full-time service, we have a measure of choice. But in devoting ourselves to missionary life, it is as if Jehovah is taking us in hand and personally choosing what is best for us. This makes me feel very close to Jehovah.” Her husband, Daryl, adds: “For me personally, I need to reflect continually on the fact that Jehovah is behind these decisions. I am confident as to how my career is being directed.”
Setting Aside “Fear of the Unknown”
For all the graduates, becoming missionaries has meant leaving their relatives, friends, and accustomed way of life. Did they have any apprehensions about it? Rachel, also from Australia, answers: “Yes. Fear of the unknown, fear of leaving all that is secure and familiar, and fear of my own inadequacy. But if holy spirit chooses my assignment, then holy spirit will help me fulfill it.” Her husband, Edi, feels this way about sacrificing their previous way of life: “The less I have to do with deciding where I go and what I do, the more I feel that I am giving my life in Jehovah’s service and not catering to my own selfish desires.” They have been assigned to serve in the South Pacific.
These are ordinary people with normal desires who simply have set aside their personal preferences to keep themselves free to do more in Jehovah’s service. As Gun puts it: “I trust fully that Jehovah uses his organization to direct his matters. Should I put a limit on his directions in my life? When we dedicated our lives to his service, we handed over such decisions to be made by him and not by ourselves anymore. I just hope I can keep my attitude sound in this matter whatever happens.” She has left her home in Sweden to serve in Honduras, Central America.
And what about financial security or a career in this world? “A career in the world does not necessarily bring happiness or contentment or give purpose,” responded Chris, of the United States. “But a career of full-time service to Jehovah brings that and much more.” Chris and his wife, Mary, are anxiously looking forward to learning their new language, Chinese, in Taiwan.
“A Good Friend Whom You Love and Cherish”
When asked if she would recommend that others allow themselves to be placed by the organization anywhere on earth to accomplish the preaching work, Monét answered: “Only if they have a strong confidence that it is direction from Jehovah. Otherwise, when problems occur they won’t have the strength to overcome the problems or at least not have joy in enduring them.” Monét, from the United States, got married shortly after graduation, and she will be going to Taiwan with her husband who has been serving there in missionary work.
But could anyone making these sacrifices find joy? Elizabeth summed it up this way: “When you have a good friend whom you love and cherish, it’s easy to give up your own personal preferences for his sake. That is how I feel about cooperating with God’s organization. It’s just giving up what we want for Jehovah, our best Friend.”
[Box on page 25]
CLASS PROFILE:
Number of countries represented:       6
Number of countries assigned to:      10
Number of single men:                  4
Number of single women:                2
Number of married couples:             9
Total number of students:             24
Average age:                        31.1
Average years baptized:             13.7
Average years in full-time ministry: 8.8
[Map/​Pictures on page 26]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
[Pictures]
Deborah and Yale Kooperstein, United States
Evelyn and David Fritz, Barbara and Wayne Sullivan, Guatemala
Timo Kurkaa/​Tommy Petersson, Colombia
Cam and Donnie Doerschler, Dominican Republic
Peter Davies/​Barry Hill, Ecuador
Gun Stenz, Honduras
[Map/​Pictures on page 27]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
[Pictures]
Pauline and Geoffrey Hendry, Hong Kong
Anne and Teuvo Hyörtti, Papua New Guinea
Mary and Christopher LaPrath, Monét Carleton, Taiwan
Elizabeth and Daryl Bryon, Papua New Guinea
Rachel and Edi Possamai, South Pacific

