Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JUNE 1, 1917 


No. 11 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


"THE HAOTWRITOTO OS THE WALL" 

We append an editorial from the New York American of 
May 18, which we believe sets forth without exaggeration 
present conditions throughout the world. After certain parts 
we have inserted some paragraphs from Vol. IV, "The Battle 
or Abmageddow," of the series of "Studies ra the Scriptubes
. " 

The "Battle of Armageddon" was written twenty years 
ago, and so faithfully does it picture present events leading 
up to their climax, "The Battle of Armageddon," and the introduction
 of earth's new Government, the kingdom of God's 
dear Son, that we could wish a copy of it in every home 
throughout the whole earth. Truly there lived among us in 
these last days a prophet of the Lord; and although now he 
has passed from human sight, his works remain an enduring
 witness to his wisdom and his faithfulness! Following 
is the editorial referred to with the insertions from "The 
Battle of Armageddon": 

"BATTLE Or THE GREAT DAY OP GOD AUaOHTT" 

May 18, 1917, The A T . Y. American said: 

"The official mind seems to take it for granted that when 
the governments have made peace and have arranged the 
division of whatever spoils there may be, the peoples are 
going quietly back to work for their former masters, to live 
tinder the same institutions, to be, in short, the same nations, 
guided and controlled by the same financial, aristocratic and 
diplomatic castes that have ruled them for many centuries." 

Twenty years ago Pastor Russell said : 

"It it becoming more and more manifest to the masses 


of men that in the present order of things they are between 
a nether and upper millstone, whose rapid revolutions must 
eventually, and at no distant date, grind them down to a miserable
 and ignoble serfdom, unless interfered with in some 
way. Such indeed is the actual condition of things: human 
necessity is the feed-pipe which presses the masses between 
the millstones; the lower millstone is the fixed law of supply 
and demand which is crowding the rapidly increasing and 
growingly intelligent population of the world closer and 
closer to the pressure of the upper millstone of organized 
selfishness, driven by the giant power of mechanical slaves, 
assisted by the cogs and levers and pullevs of financial combinations
, trusts and monopolies." — Vol. IV, p. 372, par. 2. 
May 18, 1917, The New York American said: 
"These seem to be also the views and conceptions of the 
public journals and of most private citizens, who naturally 
have no other sources of information and of opinion than the 
public journals. 

"We can excuse the private citizen, hut it is amazing that 
men who are hailed as statesmen cannot see what is going 
on before their eyes; cannot see that the Europe of 1913 has 
vanished as completely as the Europe of the dark ages ; cannot 
see that the proletariats have at last in their hands the 
weapons and in their minds the thousrht and in their hearts the 
resolve to do away with all the old distinctions and social 
inequalities; that the institutions of government and laws 
which still seem to be solid and enduring edifices are in 
reality only hollow shells, mined and ready to be blown 
to pieces when relief from the pressure of outside war gives 


[60»X] 


(163-164) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N, Y. 


the peoples time and opportunity to overthrow and to rebuild 
the fabrics of society." 

Twenty years ago Pastor Russell said: 
"It will be impossible to reestablish the present order, (1) 
because it has evidently outlived its usefulness, and is inequitable
 under present conditions; (2)' because of the general
 diffusion of secular knowledge; (3) because the discovery
 that priestcraft has long blinded and fettered the 
masses with error and fear will lead to a general disrespect 
for all religious claims and teachings as of a piece with the 
discovered frauds; (4) because religious people in general, 
not discerning that God's time has come for a change of dispensation
, will ignore reason, logic, justice and Scripture in 
defending the present order of things." — Vol. IV, p. 551. 
May 18, 1917, The N. Y. American said: 
"This talk about autocracy still to be overthrown and 
democracy still to be saved and established is proof enough 
of the mental incapacity of so many men, esteemed wise, to 
realize what has happened in Europe. For the war has 
already achieved those two tremendous results. They are accomplished
 facts. 

"The basis of any government and of any institution is 
the state of mind of the masses and the inability of the 
masses or the ability of the masses to impose their desires 
upon government. 

"Now, any thinking mind must perceive that the masses 
in every "country in Europe have the ability to set up at any 
time any form of government or any institutions and laws 
they desire, because the masses of Europe, for the first time 
in history, are citizen soldiers, equipped with all the weapons 
and munitions of war and as able to subjugate their masters, 
to coerce their officers and to overthrow their governments 
as were the Russian citizen soldiers. 

Twenty years ago Pastor Russell said: 
"Where, then, we inquire, is there such an army, under 
present instruction and training? — an army before which 
the earth [society 1 shall quake and the heavens [ecclesiasticism
] shall tremble (Joel 2:10); which shall boldly array 
itself against the conservative forces of Christendom, both 
civil and ecclesiastical, and hope even to cope with its present 
strength? Where is the army that in the near future will 
dare deny Christendom's time-honored doctrines, its statecraft
 and priestcraft? that will sullenly ignore all its anathemas
, spurn its orders, and hurl back its thunderbolts of 
authority and organized power? that will face the roar of its 
Vesuvian artillery, defy its missiles of shot and shell, plow 
through its fleets and naval armaments, And, snatching the 
diadems from crowned heads, topple the kingdoms into the 
midst of the Bea? that will set the heavens on fire, and melt 
the earth with fervent heat, thus making one vast universal 
wreck of the old order of things as predicted by the prophets? 
"That such an army is cexming into existence and preparing
 for the desperate conflict we are none the less forcibly 
assured by the signs of the times than by 'the sure word of 
prophecy. 5 And it is the recognition of this fact (without 
any reference or knowledge of the word of prophecy) that 
is now filling the heart of Christendom with fearful foreboding
, and impelling statesmen everywhere to take extraordinary
 measures for protection and defense. 

"But in these very measures for self-defense devised by 
'the powers that be/ there is probably a snare which they do 
not realize. The armies upon which they depend for defense
, be it remembered, ahe the armies of the common 
people; these millions of disciplined warriors have wives and 
sons and daughters and brothers and sisters an<J cousins and 
friends in the ranks of the common people, with whose interests
 their own are linked by nature's strong ties ; and their 
service of thrones and kingdoms is only secured by imperative
 orders, and made endurable by a remuneration which 
they are fast coming to consider as no satisfactory compensation
 for the hardships and privations which they and their 
families must undergo, not to mention perils of life and limb 
and health and fortune. Year by year these armed hosts are 
less and less infatuated with the %lory' of war, more keenly 
alive to its sufferings and privations, and less and less devoted
 to the sovereign powers that command their services, 
while the armies of toilers, of the common people at home, 
are becoming more and more irritated and dissatisfied with 
their lot, and more and more apprehensive of the future. 

"All of these things are indications of at least a possibility 
that in the crisis approaching the mighty armed and disciplined
 hosts of Christendom majr turn their powers against 
the authorities that called them into being, instead of to uphold
 and preserve them. That such a possibility has not 
been entirely unthought of by the rulers is witnessed by the 
fact that in Russia, when the famine prevailed and led to 


riots among the common people, the facts concerning it were 
diligently kept from their friends and brothers in the Russian 
army, and the soldiers detailed for the suppression of the 
riots were from remote districts." — Vol. IV, pp. 545, 546. 
May 18, 1917, The N. Y. American said: 
"In 1848, when Europe rose and struck for freedom, the 
rebels could neither mobilize nor communicate quickly with 
one another, because there were neither railways nor electric 
telegraphs. So they were beaten in detail. 

"In 1848 one monarch could and did lend another thousands
 of mercenary standing troops to beat that other's subjects
 into submission. 

"In 1917 there are no mercenaries, no standing troops, no 
Pretorian Guards. They were all shot to pieces long ago on 
the battlefields — nourishing the hugest satire the world has 
ever seen, the tree of universal human liberty with the blood 
of tyrant's hirelings. 

CONDITIONS OP THIS BATTLE UNPRECEDENTED 
"The millions of men now in the camps and trenches of 
Europe are not mercenaries, not hirelings, petted and trained 
to shoot down rebellious subjects — they, are the proletariats 
themselves. And whenever they decide to quit slaying one 
inother at their master's orders* and decide to go home and 
take over the control of their own countries, to constitute 
themselves the lawmakers, to abolish the institutions of property
 in land and of private exploitation of public functions — 
that day they will accomplish these things because they have 
in their hands the weapons with which to make good their 
purposes and resolves. Every day the signs of this coming 
revolution multiply faster and faster. 

r 'The Russian Social Democracy has determined that a 
congress of Social Democrats shall be held in Sweden, there 
to formulate, xor a petition to the sovereigns and cabinets 
to end the war, but an ultimatum to the sovereigns and cabinets
 to end the war or to take the consequences of domestic 
revolutions with the armed aid of the Russian Democracy. 

"We suppose that no man familiar with history can fatf 
to perceive the exact parallel between the course the redcapped
 Russian revolutionists are pursuing and the course 
which the red-capped French revolutionists pursued a hundred
 and twenty years ago; nor can fail to remember that 
when the French revolutionists started out to aid revolution 
and republicanism in other countries of Europe, their tumultuous
 sans-culotte armies were irresistible, and drove before 
them in battle with the same fierce ardor to the same headlong
 rout the trained troops alike of Prussia and Austria, of 
Holland and of England, of Italy and of Spain. 
Twenty years ago Pastor Russell said: 
"In all those leading causes which culminated in the terrors
 of the French Revolution we see a strong resemblance 
to similar conditions today which are rapidly and surely leading
 to the foretold similar results on a world-wide scale. 
Mark the growing animosity between the privileged classes 
(royalty and aristocracy) and the working classes, the discussions
 of the rights and wrongs of the people, and the decline
 of respect for both civil and ecclesiastical authority. 
Note also the revolutionary current of popular thought and 
expression — the increasing dissatisfaction of the masses of the 
people with the ruling powers and the institutions of government
. And if the American Declaration of Independence, with 
its proclamation of human rights and of the foundation of 
government in contract and the consent of the people, inspired 
the masses of the French with a desire for liberty and independence
, it is not surprising that the successful experiment 
of this government of the people and by the people, for a 
century past, and the measure of liberty and prosperity here 
enjoyed, are having their effect upon the peoples of the old 
world. The ever-continuous tide of emigration from other 
countries to this country' is another evidence of the impression 
which this experiment has made upon the peoples of other 
nations. 

"And yet, the liberty and prosperity here enjoyed are far 
from satisfactory to the people here. They crave a still 
better condition and are seeking measures to attain it. Kowhere
 throughout Christendom does this determination assert 
itself more positively and boldly than here. Every man is on 
the qui vwe to assert his real or fancied rights. The trend of 
thought here, as elsewhere, is in the current of revolution, and 
is daily becoming more so. 

"The French Revolution was a struggle of a measure of 
light against gross darkness; of the awakening spirit of liberty
 against long established oppression; and of a measure 
of truth against old errors and superstitions, long encouraged 
and fostered by civil and ecclesiastical powers for their own 
aggrandizement and the people's oppression. And yet, it exhibited
 the danger of liberty unguided by righteousness and 


[6092] 


June I, 1917 


THE WA TCH TOWER 


(164-165) 


the spirit of a sound mind. (2 Timothy 1:7) A little learning
 is indeed a dangerous thing." — Vol. IV, pp. 533, 534. 

May 18, 1U17, The N. Y. American said: 

"We should not commit the stupid blunder of looking upon 
these Russian revolutionists as a helpless, anarchic mob. 
They ake just that at present; and all their longings are for 
peace. But once let them resolve, in some tierce enthusiasm 
of new-found liberty, to carry the red flag to other countries, 
they would become an irresistible sturm, a rushing tempest 
of war and victory. 

"Nothing is easier than to underrate the weighty importance
 of this Stockholm conference, nothing more statesmanlike
 than to give it serious consideration. 

-'OUT OF THINE OWN MOUTH WILL I JUDGE THEE" 

"We hear here at home talk of war being carried on for 
another year, for two years more, for three years more. 

**We do not believe "it. 

"We do not believe that war can be carried on by any 
government on earth through another year. 

"If there were not famine to reckon with, the universal 
weariness of slaughter in Europe would end war, either by 
persuasion of by armed revolt. 

"We believe that unless the European Governments soon 
negotiate peace for Europe's suffering peoples, then Europe's 
suffering peoples will before long rise in mass and overthrow 
their governments in a common outburst of revolution and 
ruin. 

"We do not hazard this as prophecy. We simply state it 
as fact. 

"The truth is that the very situation we predicted, as you 
will remember, more than two years ago, and many times 
since, has now arisen — and Armed Socialism is marching 
steadily and rapidly to overthrow the institutions and governments
 of all Europe and to raise the red flag of internationalism
 over every capital of the Old World. 

"Because this is "so apparent, because this seems so inevitable
 and so near, we do not believe that the war in Europe 
will be prolonged over another year. 

"We believe that unless the governments of Europe soon 
make peace, the peoples of Europe will make peace by overthrowing
 all thrones, nobilities and privileged castes and 
classes; and in that case peace will come to us automatically. 

"We repeat that all calculations of prolonged warfare in 
Europe, based upon continued obedience of the masses to their 
present governments, are idle speculations, foolish calculations
 that will be blown to pieces by the storm and tempests 
of social revolutions unless the governments of Europe make 
peace before their peoples rise against war and against their 
governments. 

"The signs of these troublous and momentous times could 
not be more plain to thinking men if they were written by 
some mighty angel's moving hand, in letters of fire, across 
the sky that domes the earth." 

Twenty years ago Pastor Russell said: 

'Truly this is the predicted time of distress of nations with 


perplexity! The voice of the discontented masses is aptly 
symbolized by the roaring of the sea, and the hearts of 
thinking men are failing for fear of the dread calamity 
which all can see rapidly approaching; for the powers of 
heaven {the present ruling powers) are being terribly shaken. 
Indeed some, instructed by these signs, and calling to mind 
that Scripture, 'Behold, he cometh with clouds/ are already 
beginning to suggest the presence of the Son of Man [come 
as a thief, as foretold] although they greatly misapprehend 
the subject and God's remedy. 

"But amidst all the shaking of the earth (organized society
) and of the heavens {the ecclesiastical powers) those 
who discern in it the outworking of the divine plan of the 
ages rejoice in the assurance that this terrible shaking will 
be the last that the earth will ever have or need; for as the 
Apostle Paul assures us, it signifieth the removing of those 
tilings that are shaken — that those things which cannot be 
shaken — the kingdom of God, the kingdom of light and peace 
■ — may remain. For our God is a consuming fire. In his wrath 
he will consume every system of evil and oppression, and he 
will firmly establish truth and righteousness in the earth.'*— 
Vol. IV, pp. 149, 150. 

HUMAN RACE TO BE KESTOEED TO PEEFEOTION 

As a sample of the Scriptural .Message oi ^weetne&s and 
comfort which Pastor Russell taught the people, we quote 
from Volume I of his Studies in the Scriptures, pages 19) 
and 192, written thirty-one years ago: 

"The Apostle Peter, our Lord, and all the prophets since 
the world began, declare that the human race is to be restored 
to glorious perfection, and is again to have dominion over 
earth, as its representative, Adam, had. 

"It is this portion that God has elected to give to the 
human race. And what a glorious portion! Close your eve« 
for a moment to the scenes of misery and woe, degradation 
and sorrow that yet prevail on account of sin, and picture before
 your mental vision the glory of the perfect earth. Not a 
stain of sin mars the harmony and peace of a perfect society ; 
not a bitter thought, not an unkind look or word; love, 
welling up from every heart, meets a kindred response in 
every other heart, and benevolence marks every act. There 
sickness shall be no more; not an ache nor pain, nor any evidence
 of decay — not even the fear of such things. Think of all 
the pictures of comparative health and beauty of human form 
and feature that you have ever seen, and know that perfect 
humanity will be of still surpassing loveliness. The inward 
purity of mental and moral perfection will stamp and glorify 
every radiant countenance. Such will earth's society be; and 
weeping bereaved ones will have their tears all wiped away, 
when thus they realize the resurrection work complete. — 
Revelation 21:4." 

Arty thoughtful man can interpret prophecy after it has 
been fulfilled. Pastor Russell interpreted these prophecies 
twenty years ago, and the clergy scoffed and persecuted him 
because he told the people the truth. Truly, as was said of 
the Master, "They hated him without a cause!" Truly, 'The 
darkness hateth the light!" 


MORE ABOUT SELECTIVE DRAFT 


At the time of going to press with the last issue of The 
Watch Tower the Selective Draft Act was before the conferees
 of the House and the Senate. Some changes were made 
in the Bill, and the Act as finally passed by Congress on 
May 16th and approved by the President and relating to exemption
 is as follows: t 

"Sec. 4. That the Vice President of the United States, the 
officers, legislative, executive and judicial, of the United 
States and of the several States, Territories and the District 
of Columbia, regular or duly ordained ministers of religion, 
students, who at the time of the approval of this act are preparing
 for the ministry in recognized theological or divinity 
schools, and all persons in the military and naval service of 
the United States shall be exempt from the selective draft 
herein prescribed; and nothing in this act contained shall be 
construed to require or compel any person to serve in any 
of the forces herein provided for who is found to be a member 
of any well-recognized religious sect or organization at present 
organized and existing and whose existing creed or principles 
forbid its members to participate in war in any form and 
whose religious convictions are against war or participation 
therein in accordance with the creed or principles of said religious
 organizations, but no person so exempted shall be exempted
 from service in any capacity that the President shall 
declare to be noncombatant; and the President is hereby authorized
 to exclude or discharge from said selective draft and 
from the draft under the second paragraph of section one 
hereof, or to draft for partial military service only from those 


liable to draft as in this act provided, persons of the following 
classes: County and municipal officers; custom-house clerks; 
persons employed by the United States in the transmission of 
the mails; artificers and workmen employed in the armories, 
arsenals and navy yards of the United States ; and such other 
persons employed in the service of the United States as the 
President may designate ; pilots ; mariners actually employed 
in the sea service of any citizen or merchant within the United 
States; persons engaged in industries, including agriculture, 
found to be necessary to the maintenance of the Military Establishment
 or the effective operation of the military forces 
or the maintenance of national interest during the emergency; 
those in a status with respect to persons dependent upon 
them for support which renders their exclusion or discharge 
advisable; and those found to be physically or morally deficient
. No exemption or exclusion shall continue when a 
cause therefor no longer exists; Provided, That notwithstanding
 the exemptions enumerated herein, each State, Territory, 
and the District of Columbia shall be required to supply its 
quota in the proportion that its population bears to the total 
population of the United States. 

"The President is hereby authorized, in his discretion, to 
create and establish throughout the several States and subdivisions
 thereof and in the territories and the District of 
Columbia local boards, and where, in his discretion, practicable
 and desirable, there shall be created and established 
one such local board in each county or similar subdivision
 in each State, and one for approximately each thirty 


VII— 18 


[6093] 


(165-166) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


thousand of population in each city of thirty thousand population
 or over* according to the last census taken or estimates 
furnished hy the Bureau of Census of the Department of 
Commerce. Such boards shall he appointed by the President, 
and shall consist of three or more members, none of whom 
shall be connected with the Military Establishment, to be 
chosen from among the local authorities of such subdivisions 
or from other citizens residing in the subdivision or area in 
which the respective boards will have jurisdiction under the 
rules and regulations prescribed by the President. Such 
boards shall have power within their respective jurisdictions 
to hear and determine, subject to review as hereinafter provided
, all questions of exemption under this act, and all questions
 of or claims for including or discharging individuals 
or classes of individuals from the selective draft, which shall 
be made under rules and regulations prescribed by the President
, except, any and every question or claim for including 
or excluding or discharging persons or classes of persons 
from the selective draft under the provisions of this act authorizing
 the President to exclude or discharge from the 
selective draft 'Persons engaged in industries, including agriculture
, found to be necessary to the maintenance of the Military
 Establishment, or the effective operation of the military 
forces, or the maintenance of national interest during the 
emergency.' 

"The President is hereby authorized to establish additional 
boards, one in each Federal judicial district of the United 
States, consisting of snrh number of citizens, not connected 
with the military establishment, as the President may determine
, who shall be appointed by the President. The President
 is hereby authorized, in his discretion, to establish more 
than one such board in any Federal judicial district of the 
United States, or to establish one such board having jurisdiction
 of an area extending into more than one Federal judicial 
district, 

"Such district boards Bhall review on appeal and affirm, 
modify, or reverse any decision of any local board having 
jurisdiction" under the rules and regulations prescribed by the 
President, Such district boards shall have exclusive original 
jurisdiction within their respective areas to hear and determine
 all questions or claims for including or excluding or discharging
 persons or classes of persons from the selective draft, 
under the provisions of this act, not included within the 
original jurisdiction of such local boards. 

"The decisions of such district boards shall be final except
 that, in accordance with such rules and regulations as the 
President may prescribe, he may affirm, modify or reverse any 
such decision. 

"Any vacancy in any such local or district board shall be 
filled by the president, and -any member of any such local board 
or district board may be removed and another appointed in his 
place by the President, whenever he considers that the interest
 of the Nation demands it. 

"The President shall make rules and regulations governing 
the organization and procedure of such local boards and district
 boards, and providing for and governing appeals from 
such local boards to such district boards, arM reviews of the 
decisions of any local board by the district board having jurisdiction
, and determining and prescribing the several areas 
in which the respective local boards and district boards shall 
have jurisdiction, and all other rules and regulations necessary 
to carry out the terms and provisions of this section, and shall 
provide for the issuance of certificates of exemption, or partial 


or limited exemptions, and for a system to exclude and discharge
 individuals from selective draft." 

The Act as originally passed granted absolute exemption 
to certain persona, but as finally passed and approved* by the 
President, no person will be exempt from service in any 
capacity that the President may declare noncombatant. 
REGISTRATION FIRST-^ EXEMPTION LATER 

On June 5 every male person and every alien who has 
declared his intention to become a citizen, who is 21 years 
old and who has not yet reached his 31st birthday, will be 
required to register at the voting precinct wherein he resides
. At the same time 12 questions will be propounded to 
him, which he must answer and which are as follows: 

"1 Name in full Given name Family name 

2 Ilome address No. Street City State 

3 Date of birth Month Day Year 

4 Are you (1) a natural-born citizen, (2) a naturalized 
citizen, (3) an alien, (4) or have you declared your 
intention (specify which) ? 

5 Where were you born? Town State Nation 

5 If not a citizen, of what country are you a citizen or 
subject ? 

7 What is your present trade, occupation, or office! 

8 By whom employed? 
Where employed? 

9 Have you a father, mother, wife, child under 12, or a 
sister or brother under 12, solely dependent on you for 
support (specify which) ? 

10 Married or single (which) ? Race (specify which) T 

11 What military service have you had? Rank 
Branch Years Nation or State 

12 Do you claim exemption from draft (specify grounds) ? 
I affirm that I have verified above answers and that they 

are true. " 

These questions must be answered. Any one refusing to 
answer them will be subject to fine and imprisonment. In 
answer to Question 7, Pilgrim Brethren and regularly elected 
Elders of Classes can answer, "Ordained Minister of Religion." 
If you claim exemption because of your religious conviction, 
then you should answer Question 12 merely by saying, "Because
 I am a member of the International Bible Students 
Association." The Government has been advised from this 
office of the reasons why members of the International Bible
 Students Association come within the terms of the law 
and should be granted exemption. 

After registration the Government will draw by lot the 
names of 500,000 of those who are registered j and all of that 
number who have stated at the time of registration, in answer 
to Question 12, that they claim exemption, will then be given 
an opportunity to be heard as to the reason or ground for 
exemption. 

The rules and regulations governing this part of the 
Act are now in course of construction under the direction of 
the President, and therefore cannot be given at this time, but 
we are advised that the Government will make wide publication
 thereof as soon as formulated. If you expect to claim 
exemption you should procure a copy of these rules as soon as 
published, read and carefully follow them. They will doubtless
 provide for the filing, before the Board constituted for 
that purpose, of a petition for exemption, which will be 
heard in due time by the Board. 

We stand ready to render any and all assistance we can 
to the brethren in this behalf. 


THE PASTORAL WORK 


There seems to be a misunderstanding in the minds of 
some with reference to the Pastoral Work. It has been suggested
 that the Soctett has changed the method of work since 
Brother Russell finished his course. Such is not the case, 
however! We here desire to consider some salient points 
with the hope of making clear the whole proposition and enabling
 all to have a better understanding of this excellent 
feature of the harvest work. 

We call attention to an article in the November 1 Watch 
Toweb, 1(116, page 331, under the caption of "World-Wide 
Pastoral Work." It will be observed there that Brother Russell
 stated that about 500 classes had voluntarily elected him 
as Pastor. Therein he states, "Only of late has the Lord 
deeply impressed upon our attention a considerable work in 
which the sisters might engage with profit both to themselves 
and to the cause." He further stated that, as Pastor, he 
was calling attention to this new field of service; hut that 
before calling the attention of the outside classes to it, he had 
first made a trial in N. Y. City, adding, "the resulting success 
was so pronounced that we felt justified in calling it to the 


attention of all the classes which have notified us of our 
election as their Pastor, sending to each class copies of the 
following letters." The letters were published in said article. 

It is readily to be seen that this work, begun with the 
sisters, was directly under the supervision of Brother Russell 
as Pastor. After Brother Russell had finished his course here, 
the church had no Pastor. It was deemed wise not to elect 
another, as we have heretofore stated in The Watch Toweb. 
Since this work, begun by him, was clearly a part of the harvest
 work, it was the privilege and the duty of the Society to 
continue it. When Brother Russell was here, the reports 
were made direct to him. After his decease it seemed proper 
that this work should be under the Society's direction. 

In the January 1,1917, issue of The Watch Toweb it was 
stated that Brother Sturgeon would have the oversight of the 
Pastoral Department at the Brooklyn office. In the adjustment
 of the office work it was afterwards deemed best that 
everything should be under the direct supervision of the 
Society, so that any one might be assigned to that work as 
occasion required. While it was proper for Brother Russell 


[6^4] 


Junk 1, m7 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(166-167) 


to have the work under his direct supervision as the Pastor 
of the varioua Congregations, since his demise it seems that 
the only proper course would he to have this and all other 
branches of the work under the direct control, oversight and 
supervision of the Watch Toweb Bible and Tract Society, 
and not under the oversight of any individual.' The friends 
will no doubt recognize the wisdom of this course. Acting 
upon this thought, the Board of Directors rescinded its action 
taken in December, of placing the direct oversight of the 
Pastor Department under any one. Brother Sturgeon, therefore
, is no longer in charge of that work. This does not 
mean, nor should it be interpreted to mean, that the Society is 
in anywise dissatisfied with the services of our dear Brother, 
but that its action has to do, solely and completely, with the 
matter of the best policy. Hereafter, therefore, all communications
 relating to the Pastoral Work should be addressed, 
"Watch Toweb Bible and Tract Society, Pastoral Dept" 

In the March 1, 1917, issue of The Watch Toweb we 
said: "We are convinced that it is now no longer wise to 
limit this work to the sisters, but rather that the responsibility
 should rest upon all the Congregation.'* We therein suggested
 that henceforth the Lieutenant and other officers to 
conduct the Pastoral Work should he elected by the vote of 
the entire class, adding, "The Pastoral work will then be 
carried on practically as before, with the exceptions herein 
stated." 

SOME QUESTIONS ANSWERED 

Some of the questions that have arisen in the minds of a 
number since then are, Should brothers be elected to the 
office of Lieutenant, Secretary, etc.? and, Should they engage
 in the Pastoral Work? 

In answering these questions we quote Brother Russell's 
language in the November 1 Watch Tower, page 334, as follows
: "We have not invited the brethren to engage in this 
work, because we believe that there are other things which 
they can do that sisters cannot do," The Society Btill adheres
 to this policy; viz., that all officers of the Pastoral 
Work, such as Lieutenant, Secretary, etc., should be sisters, 
and that these sisters should be elected by the entire congregation
 and not by the sisters alone. The only part that 
the brothers have in this work is that of giving Chart Talks 
after the sisters have made the calls and arranged for the 
meetings* The Brother to give the Chart Talks should be 
assigned by the congregation in its usual manner of assigning 
speakers. Frequently the congregation delegates to its Board 
of Elders, or to a committee, the duty of assigning the varioua 
speakers; and where the congregation has done this it would 
be proper for the elders or the committee designated by the 
congregation to- make such assignment of some suitable brother 
to give the Chart Talks. Such assignment should be made at 
the request of the Lieutenant, she having previously arranged 
for the Chart Talks. Some of the classes have informed us 
that a brother has been elected as Lieutenant, Thia was not 
the thought of Brother Russell, and the Society has made no 
change. 

At one of the last conventions that Brother Russell attended
, this question was asked him: "Should the sisters 
start the Pastoral Work without consulting the elders and 
should they go ahead with it even though one of the elders 
is not in favor of it?" His reply was: "The elders have 
nothing to do with the Pastoral Work. The elders are elders, 
and should therefore attend to the work of the elders. The 
Pastoral Work is for the Pastor, and the Pastor should therefore
 attend to it. If any of the elders hinder or find fault 
with this work, our advice to the class would be that at the 
next election such elder he dropped from eldership. Each 
one should learn to attend to his own business, and not interfere
 with others ; and in this way the work will prosper." 

In relation to the Pastoral Work, the Society now takes 
the place of Pastor Russell, and of course some minor adjustments
 must be made to fit the conditions. The Pastoral 
Work is distinctly a work for the sisters; but the whole 
ecclesia, under the Society's direction, now has the responsibility
 of electing the officers. 

Question: Suppose there is a small class in a town, in 
which all the members of the class ai© brothers and not one 
a sister, what then should be done about the Pastoral Work? 

Answer: If it cannot be conveniently arranged for some 
sisters from another class to come and do the work, then 
rather than neglect it, our thought is that the brothers should 
do the work; but this is the exception to the rule. No rule 
can be made that will apply absolutely to every case. 

ASSIGNMENT OF TESKETOBY 

Where the Pastoral Work is in progress and there are no 
colporteurs in the town, Bhould the Pastoral Work be suspended
 until an assignment from the Society can be had for 
the Pastoral WorkT 

Certainly not! There should be no delay in or suspension 
of the work, but it should progress. In the meantime the 
Lieutenant should notify the Society of the situation; and if 
there are no colporteurs at work in that town, the Society 
will assign all the territory of that place to the Pastoral 
Workers* After receiving the assignment of territory, the 
Lieutenant will district the town or city for the work in the 
same manner pointed out in the November 1 issue of The 
Watch Toweb. 

Question: Should the work be going on in all the district
 at the same time? 

Answer: No arbitrary rule can be followed in this regard
. Where it be found' to be to the best advantage to have 
the work progressing in several districts at the same time, that 
should be done; but if it be found best to pursue some 
other method, then that method should be adopted. In some 
of the larger cities the friends have found it very advantageous
 to work one district at a time. They do it somewhat 
in the following manner: 

The various District Workers go into one district, select 
a public hall centrally located, and engage it for a certain date. 
Then the District Workers canvass or call upon everybody 
in that district in the usual manner, loaning the books, etc., 
and inviting them to a Series of Chart Talks at the hall previously
 hired. One of the most competent brothers is selected 
to give the Chart Talks. This method has met with splendid 
success in somo places, and is worthy of serious consideration
 by others, we believe. After a district is thus finished, 
the entire force moves to another district and a similar 
course is pursued there. It will not be necessary to wait until 
the Series of Chart Talks have been completed in one district 
before the work begins in another. It should be kept in 
mind, however, that no fast or fixed rule can be laid down to 
be followed in every instance. The Lieutenant and her assistants
 must exercise some judgment in the matter and pursue
 the course that seems to be the best. In smaller cities 
and towns it would seem best to follow the method of having 
the Chart Talk in homes where a suitable room or rooms 
can be had for that purpose. Conditions differ in different 
places, and each place should govern itself accordingly. 

Because there is some slight deviation in working out the 
details of this matter let no one think that Brother Russell^ 
method has been changed. We wish here to state emphatically 
that the Society has made no change in the method adopted 
by Brother Russell for the Pastoral Work, and it has no 
intention of doing so, unless the Lord should direct some 
change. The change in the manner of election of officers 
has nothing to do with the method of the work. 

From time to time questions of minor details will arise 
which have not been covered in anything that has been written. 
Under such circumstances the Lieutenant should use her best 
judgment, in the meantime communicating with the Society 
for suggestions or advice. 

THE LOED HAS BLESSED THE BOOK LOANING 

In a recent issue of The Watch Toweb it was stated that 
"the book- loaning feature of the Pastoral Work, instituted 
by Brother Russell, was originally intended by him to be 
merely incidental and not to be a prominent part of the* 
work; the chief part of the work being to call on those who 
already have the books and encourage them to read, etc." 

Question: Is it the thought, then, that the Book-loaning 
feature should not be pushed? 

Answer: The matter was experimental, of course, to begin
 with. As the Pastoral Work has progressed, reports indicate
 that the Lord has especially blessed the loaning of the 
books ; it gives the sisters an opportunity to reach a class of 
people who have not heretofore considered the truth. It is 
in the nature of a Circulating Library, and many have been 
influenced thereby to read "The Divine Plan of the Ages" 
who subsequently became deeply interested in the truth. 

The loaning of books at once appeals to some as an entirely
 unselfish manner of presenting the message. The Lord's 
blessing upon this part of the work has been so marked that 
we believe we should take it as an indication that he is pleased 
to have the message put out in this manner. The amount of 
books loaned will depend largely upon the quantity desired 
to be supplied by the local Ecclesia. This is another reason 
why the entire class should have the responsibility of the 
Pastoral Work; for it is the class that supplies the books 
for loaning, the work being done particularly by the sisters, 
as heretofore suggested. We desire to encourage the bookloaning
 feature. 


[6095] 


VERBI DEI MINISTER 


'Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now, saith the Lord of Hosts, 
if I will not open the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room 

enough to receive it." — Malachi 3:10, 


The V. D. M. Questions, under the Lord's guidance and 
blessing, have proven to be of such value to the church that 
they have been in the past, and continue to be in the present, 
recognized as one of the features of the harvest work which 
has a close relationship to all the other features of that 
work. They have emphasized in a particular way the third 
article of The Vow, which reads: <f I vow to still more carefully
, if possible, scrutinize my thoughts and words and doings
, to be intent that I may be better enabled to serve thee and 
thy dear flock"; and they have been used by the Lord, we 
believe, to greatly assist his people in fulfilling this part of 
their vow. 

From the great number of letters we have received from 
the friends, we have come to see that the thought has been 
gradually developing in their minds that they no longer consider
 themselves as fully qualified for the particular service 
of the present hour unless they be able to give, in a satisfactory
 manner, "a reason for the hope that is in them." This 
seems to be one of the reasons for the Lord of the vineyard's 
giving these questions at this evening time, when the harvest
 work is protracted beyond the harvest day, leading up 
and merging into "the night when no man can work." They 
seem to be his examination papers given to his people at 
the close of the day to prove which ones are fully qualified 
for the service reserved by him for thi3 momentous hour 
of the Gospel age. 

Hundreds of Ecclesias, beginning with the New York City 
Congregation, have reached the conclusion that no brother is 
properly qualified to serve them, either as elder or as deafcon, 
unless he be able to give a satisfactory answer to the V. D. M. 
Questions. Many colporteurs and pastoral workers have 
likewise reached the same conclusion with respect to qualification
 for their respective services. This is the standard 
required of all the workers at the Tabernacle and in the 
Bethel home. Brother Russell handed his paper in to the 
Committee the same as any one else; so also have Brother 
Rutherford, the members of the V. D. M. Examining Board, 
and the other brethren at Bethel and the Tabernacle. 

Surely no Bible Student would consider the V. D. M, Questions
 to be too high a standard! And yet, we doubt that 
few of the ministers occupying the pulpits of the land today 
could pass this examination (simple though it seems) on the 
fundamental teachings of the Bible. One dear sister whose 
answers to the Questions were recently approved has just 
written to us expressing her thankfulness to the Lord for 
having passed, and saying that she now feels qualified to teach 
the truth to her children in her own home! Evidently the 
passing of these examinations has something to do with the 
sealing of the saints in their foreheads and with their approval
 by the Unseen Judge as worthy a share in the Smiting
 of the River Jordan — that special feature of the harvest
 work reserved by tlje Lord to be the closing one, just preceding
 the final trial time of the little flock, which will 
culminate in their glorification. And yet we realize that in 
this, as in all other works during the Gospel age, the Lord 
accepts the spirit of those who cannot engage therein. 
THE SCOPS OF THE V. ». M. QUESTIONS 

The required amount for passing this examination is 85% ; 
and we are reserving for a subsequent article an explanation of 
the principles followed and the methods adopted by the Examining
 Board for determining as far as possible the standing
 of each student who submits his V. D. M. Question papers 
for inspection. However, we have thought it best not to give 
individual percentages, except to say that one has received 
the required 85% or over. This simply recognizes all who have 
passed as being in one class, without making any further 
and unnecessary distinctions. No one can possibly make 100% 
who does not possess an accurate knowledge of every main feature
 of the divine plan and of the necessary requirements 
of every candidate for the positions of Priests and Kings, to 
reign with Christ a thousand years for the purpose of blessing
 all the families of the earth. 

The, doctrinal part of the examination commences with 
"the first creative act of God," centers in the ransom, and 
culminates in the completed work of Christ at the end of the 
Millennium, merging into the ages beyond— a comprehensive 
sweep of all revealed doctrine. The experimental part commences
 with the initial point of conversion, or turning from 
sin, centers in consecration and spirit-begetting, and culminates
 in spirit-birth into the divine nature, to be forever with 
and like the Lord — a comprehensive survey of the whole process
 of character building. It includes the symbolization 


of one's consecration, the taking of The Vow, the careful 
reading of the Six Volumes of Studies in the Scriptures, 
the "enlightenment and benefit therefrom," and climaxes with 
the belief that one has "a substantial and permanent knowledge
 of the Bible which will render him more efficient as a 
servant of the lord throughout the remainder of his life'* — 
a period of time which is now quite short, we believe, as far 
as the little flock on this side of the - veil is concerned. 
This seems to be the Lord's way of approving "the laborers" 
for the special service, as an additional favor, now before 
the church — these laborers having been called together in all 
parts of the harvest field last summer by means of the many 
conventions held — more in number than ever held at any 
previous time in the history of the church. 

Each question, and each part of each question, should be 
concisely answered in one's own words ; and after each anBwer
, citations to the Bible and the Scripture Studies, as 
authorities, should be given. This will not only make each 
answer complete in itself, but will also make the examination
 more valuable to the one being examined. The thought 
is to get the largest possible amount of blessing out of these 
V. D. M. Questions. The foot-note on the Question blanks 
has seemed to some to leave the matter of citations optional, 
and these have inferred that their papers would be the more 
acceptable if the citations were omitted. However, this is 
not the case. Each answer should be given in one's own words, 
and citations to the Bible and #e Scripture Studies should 
be given as authority for the answer. 

EXAMIXIKa BOARD KEPT BUST 
More than four thousand of these papers have been received
, examined, answered and filed. But we believe that 
fully as many more will be received within the next few 
months, when the friends get the right focus on this matter, 
appreciate what it means, and understand its relationship to 
the service of the church yet on this side of the veil. As 
stated in a previous article, the Society is desirous of serving
 the best interests of the friends in every way it can, and 
has therefore continued the V. D. M. Department, established 
by; our dear Brother Russell, in order that it may serve the 
friends in this connection. 

Every mail brings many inquirieSj requests for blanks, and 
answers; and still the stream flows on, and will no doubt 
increase in volume until the work is done. Unavoidably, there 
have been some few losses, delays and mistakes; but this has 
afforded a good opportunity for the exercise of forbearance, 
patience and, in the case of failures, brotherly love, with the 
result that it has all worked together for good. However, 
it is surprising to know how comparatively few mistakes have 
been made. In this connection, we would like to request that 
every one who mailed his answer to us previous to the last 
Memorial supper, and who has thus far not received an answer
, will kindly drop us a postal card at once, giving full 
name and address, saying, "Please make report on my V. D. 
M. papers, sent in about ." This will enable the Examining
 Board to look up their files; and, in case the paper 
be missing, we will send another set of Questions, which will 
afford another opportunity for answering them. In case the 
answers should be on hand, we shall thus have opportunity 
for making a report without further delay. 

V. D. M. DEPABTMENT PERMANENT 
No doubt there are many friends who have delayed sending
 in their answers for one reason or another until they 
have concluded that it is now too late; or else they may have 
concluded to wait until the promised standard answers shall 
appear in The Watch Tower, thus hoping to get their share 
of the blessings at that time. For several reasons which have 
since come to our attention we think it best not to insert these 
standard answers in The Watch Tower, In the first place, 
should this be done, it would cut off- any further opportunity 
for passing the examination — a step we do not wish to take 
until it becomes necessary. It would also close this door of 
opportunity for a great blessing to many who have not previously
 given this subject the serious consideration which we 
believe it merits. 

Additionally, it would deprive the colporteurs and the 
pastoral workers of one of their best arguments to induce 
the people to read the Scripture Studies. When they tell the 
prospective reader that the Society which has inaugurated 
this Circulating Library has appointed an Examining Board 
for the purpose of examining the papers of all readers and 
passing upon them, somewhat after the manner of Universities
, it will be quite an incentive to them not only to read the 


(167-168) 


[6096] 


JuNJt 1, 1917 


T H E WA T C II TOW E R 


(163 175) 


book, but also to make n study of it for the purpose oi passing
 the examination, if possible, when they have finished 
reading, and of receiving the honorary degree referred to in 
* j ach issue of The Watch Tower, second page, second paragraph
, which has appeared there since February 1, 1906, In 
other words, it now seems clear to us that this V. D. M. Department
 should remain a permanent feature of the work 
until the harvest shall end and the labors of the little flock 
"hall cease. 

PURPOSE SERVED BT THE V. D. M. QUESTIONS 

Filially, we belie\e that the V. 1). M. Questions enable each 
nno to get a better focus upon himself, his standing before 
the Lord, his accurate knowledge of the truth, his attainments
 in character development, his relationship to the 
brethren, the church, the Society and the harvest work. On 
the other hand, we believe these Questions enable the brethren
, the church and the Society to get a better focus upon 
each one in these various connections and relationships — all 


of which would be beneficial and helpful in the way of an intelligent
 cooperation in the Lord's work. Anything like pride 
or division should be „ carefully guarded against and avoided. 
This is the main reason for not giving individual percentages. 
We would also deprecate the use of the letters V. D. M. after 
one's name in the way of distinctive title. To use this in 
advertising a public speaker in order to gain a better hearing 
for the truth would be a wise use of the letters, in our 
judgment. And now, dear Brethren, 

"What more can he say than to you he hath said? 
You who unto Jesus for refuge have fled!" 
Surely we are on the eve of a great forward mo\ement, 
in which all of the Lord's approved ones desire to have a 
share! It is evidently the most appropriate time to give heed 
to the words of our text: "Bring ye all the tithes into the 
storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and provi: 
me now herewith, saith the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open 
the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that 
there shall not be room enough to receive it." — Malachi 8:10. 


THE UNTRIED YEAR 

"If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence. " 

'■Lord, go before and point the road, "That which 1 see not, teach thou me; 

I know not whither it may lead, And that thy wisdom still withholds, 

^or what the work thou hast decreed— Until thy patient love unfolds, 

Enough that thou wilt bear the load! In child-like trust I leave to thee 


"It is thy hand that stirs the nest, 
That sets these changeful tunes for me; 
But, Lord, there is no change with thee, 

And thou art my unfailing rest. 

"Oh, help me through the toil and heat, 
To follow closely by thy side, 
Ere yet the gracious dew has dried 

From off the treadings of thy feet. 


"Let thy sweet presence light my way, 
And hallow every cross I bear; 
Transmuting duty, conflict, care, 

Into love's service, day by day. 

"Whatever future lot be mine, 
My Savior, bless its good or ill; 
And let thy hand be with me still, 

And turn the water into wine." 


JESUS CRUCIFIED 


(This article, excepting the paragraphs below, was a reprint of 

issue of March 15, 1908, 
"A LOOK AT THE CRUCIFIED ONE" 

Comparing the details as given in the different Gospels, 
riome are inclined to think a difference exists between St. 
John's statement in 19:14 and St. Mark's in 15:25. We think 
both are correct- St. John evidently followed the Roman custom
 of reckoning from midnight to midnight. He does not 
mention the hour of the crucifixion, but the hour when Jesus 
was first presented before Pilate which, according to St. 
Matthew (27:1,2) was early in the morning, probably shortly 
after sunrise. St. John omits manv details; and, were it not 
for the other Gospels, we might infer that the crucifixion followed
 immediately. Note a similar abbreviation in Luke 24: 
50-53 as compared with St. John 21 and ActB 1:1-10. 

The examination of Christ before Pilate, thence to Herod, 
thence back to Pilate, and the trip to Calvary, would surely 


article entitled "Why Our Lord Was Crucified," published in 
which please see.] 

occupy three hours. St. Mark states particularly that Christ 
was crucified at the third hour. If this were Roman reckoning
, it would be three, o'clock in the morning, but the Jews 
frequently reckoned a twelve-hour day — sunrise to sunset. 
See Matthew 20:1-6; John 11:9. The third hour would, therefore
, be about nine o'clock in the morning. Critical students 
agree that the expression, "from the sixth hour until the 
ninth hour" (Matthew 27:45; Mark 15:33; Luke 23:44), indicates
 from noon until three in the afternoon. According to 
the Jewish Baw, the body must be removed "before sunset. This 
would, therefore, give ample time for the removal of Christ's 
body from the cross to the tomb before the closing of the 
twelfth hour, which according to the Law, would he the last 
hour of the day. 


THE RISEN LORD 


[This article was a reprint of that entitled "He That Liveth and Was Dead/' published in issue of May 15, 1908, which 

please see.] 


SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


FORMER PILGRIM BEARD FROM 

DiCAB Brethren: — 

Although dear Brother Russell will he greatly missed by 
us all, he is greatly the gainer, having gone beyond the veil to 
be forever with the Lord. You may be assured that whatever 
influence I can exert in the interest of the Society and the 
work it is doing, I will be very glad to exert. My humble 
prayer is that all the dear brethren at the Headquarters and 
everywhere may work together most harmoniously and successfully
. 

With much Christian love and very best wishes in which 
Sister Draper joins me, I am. 

Your brother in the Lord. Frank Drapes. — Mich. 

GOD WTXL GIVE NEEDED GRACE 
Dear Brethren: — 

We were blessed with the account of what took place at 
Brother Russell's funeral; also by one of the most beautiful
, loving tributes possible for one man to pay to the 


memory of another, given the Detroit class by our dear 
Brother Wisdom. And the best of it is, 1 know all was 
true. I can say with dear Brother Wisdom, that I have lost 
my best earthly friend amongst men. I ltnow that is also 
true of all the dear Bethel family. 

Our prayer, dear Brethren, is that the dear Lord will 
give you the needed grace and strength to carry on the work 
that remains. Much love and best wishes. 

Your brother in Christ, Forrester H. Taylor. — Mich. 
ENDEAVOR TO FINISH OUR COURSE WITH JOT 
Beloved Brethren: — 

We are praying that the Lord's blessing may rest upon 
you, giving you more of that wisdom which comes from 
Above, that as a family we may still enjoy sweet communion 
with each other until our probation closes. 

We mourn with you the taking away from our midst of 
our dear Pastor, through whom we have been richly fed for 
these many .years. Although feeling . his loss, our hearts re- 


[6097] 


(163-179) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


liROOKtYW, N. Y 


joice to see that he was faithful unto death, instantaneously 
therefore entering into his great reward as promised. (Rev. 
14:13) Let us continue to do the Lord's will so that we also 
may finish our course with joy. 

Yours in him, Cambebwell Class. — Jamaica, 

MEMORIAL TOWER PROVED GREAT BLESSING 
Deakly Beloved Brethkkn: — 

We wish to extend to you our love and best wishes, and 
to assure you that you may rely upon our cooperation in 


the Lord's work in this city, and in any other way in which 
we are privileged to serve. 

We have received a great blessing, from the reading of 
the Memorial Tower; and our earnest desire is to emulate 
our dearly beloved Pastor, as he so faithfully followed in 
the footsteps of our dear Master. We resolve to remember 
you daily at the throne of heavenly grace. 

Your Brethren in the dear Redeemer, 

Lowell Associated Bible Students. — Mass. 


A WORD OF WARNING! 


Sheep that browse in every pasture, measurably regardless sheep of this character prompts us to Bound a note of warn 
of the "green pastures and still waters" of truth of the Lord's ing at this time. Truly, "The hoi 


provision, are in constant danger of enemies lurking about. 
The increasing number of inquiries coming from frightened 


hour of temptation" is upon 
us, and the "strong delusions" abroad will be sure to Bift out 
all except those which Btray not from the fold of the Lord. 

