Now Is the Time
1 When the apostle Paul wrote his second letter to the Corinthians, he reminded them that they had resolved to do a fine relief work in behalf of their fellow believers in Jerusalem. However, a year had passed, and they had still not completed the work that was started. So he urged them: “Go on and finish it: be as eager to complete the scheme as you were to adopt it.”​—2 Cor. 8:11, The New English Bible.
2 At one time or another, all of us have set goals for ourselves. We may have decided to increase our share in the field ministry, to get to know our brothers better, to qualify for a privilege of service, or to overcome some weakness. Although we started out with good intentions, we may not have followed through to achieve our goal. Before we realized it, weeks, months, or even years may have gone by without our making any headway. Could it be that we need to apply to ourselves the counsel to “go on and finish” what we started?
3 Achieving Our Goals: It is one thing to make a personal resolve but quite another to carry out that resolve. Procrastination can thwart any progress. We need to make up our mind and then be determined to push ahead without delay. Personal organization is essential. It is important to set aside the time needed to get the job done and to make sure the time is used for that purpose. It is a good idea to establish a deadline and then exercise self-discipline to make sure it is met.
4 When we are hard-pressed to meet our goals, it is easy to reason: ‘I’ll get to it later.’ But we do not know what will happen in the future. Proverbs 27:1 states: “Do not make your boast about the next day, for you do not know what a day will give birth to.” The disciple James warned against being overconfident about the future because “you do not know what your life will be tomorrow. . . . If one knows how to do what is right and yet does not do it, it is a sin for him.”​—Jas. 4:13-17.
5 With so many distractions as well as demands made by others, our goals can easily become obscured. A conscious effort is needed to keep them fresh in mind. Keeping the matter in our prayers is helpful. Asking others close to us to remind and encourage us may make a difference. Putting a notation on our calendar will serve as a reminder to check our progress. A person must make up his mind to “do just as he has resolved in his heart.”​—2 Cor. 9:7.
6 The month of October provides a fine opportunity to concentrate on our goals. We will be offering copies of The Watchtower and Awake! Subscriptions to these two magazines may be offered where there is genuine interest, usually on return visits. Could we set some reasonable goals to be achieved? How about trying to increase our magazine placements? Deciding to make more return visits and to start a new Bible study could be reasonable goals for many.
7 It is not wise to put off what is important, since this “world is passing away.” (1 John 2:17) Special privileges and blessings in Jehovah’s service are available to us now. It is up to us to take advantage of them.

