Seek First God’s Kingdom​—By Always Offering Sacrifices of Praise
1 Those who seek first the Kingdom are always mindful of speaking about Jehovah and talking about his Kingdom. (Ps. 145:11-13) Every day there are opportunities to bless his name and speak about the good news. (Ps. 96:2) Praising Jehovah was a delight to the psalmist who declared: “In God we will offer praise all day long.” (Ps. 44:8) If we feel the same way, we will be eager to share regularly in the Kingdom ministry.
2 Jehovah has not established specific requirements as to how much time we should spend in the ministry, but he encourages us to be praising him “always.” (Heb. 13:15) If our personal circumstances permit, we should make it our goal to spend some time praising Jehovah every week. Those who are already doing that might be able to arrange their affairs to serve as an auxiliary pioneer occasionally or even on a continuous basis. Some who have been enjoying the auxiliary pioneer service may be able to enroll as regular pioneers.
3 Whatever our personal circumstances, is it possible for us to increase our sacrifice of praise? Zeal is stimulated by appreciation. Personal study of God’s Word cultivates appreciation. Congregation meetings motivate us to express that appreciation in practical ways. Close association with other zealous praisers can ‘incite us to fine works.’ (Heb. 10:24) By taking full advantage of provisions made by the congregation, we may be able to increase our sacrifice of praise.
4 The prophetess Anna set a fine example in Jehovah’s service. Although 84 years old, she “was never missing from the temple, rendering sacred service night and day.” (Luke 2:37) Her whole-souled involvement in congregation activities brought her great personal satisfaction. The Bible account of her faithful service provides encouragement for us today.
5 Paul recommended that those “who are strong ought to bear the weaknesses of those not strong.” (Rom. 15:1) Likely there are some in your congregation who would benefit from your kind assistance and encouragement. An invitation to accompany you in the field ministry may be just what is needed. A publisher may need transportation or someone to work with. Discouragement may be a problem with someone else, and you may be the one who can provide the upbuilding support needed to revive the person’s zeal for Kingdom service. (1 Thess. 5:14) Your willingness to “share with the holy ones according to their needs” demonstrates your heartfelt desire to increase praise to Jehovah’s name.​—Rom. 12:13.
6 We cannot begin to enumerate all the things that Jehovah has already done and will yet do for us. There is no way we can repay him for these blessings. What overpowering reasons there are for ‘everything that breathes to praise Jehovah’!​—Ps. 150:6.

