R3693 : page 1 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVII. JANUARY 1, 1906 No. 1 



CONTENTS 

Thoughts for the New Year 3 

How Shall We Pay Our Vows? 4 

"Lo, I Am With You" 5 

"God Bless You"-1906 6 

Views from the Watch Tower 6 

The Crisis Nearing 6 

Church Union in Great Britain 6 

Results of Russian Struggle 7 

Russia's Three-Sided Melee 7 

Berean Bible Study— "Prayer" 8 

Reports from Foreign Branches 8 

Our Pathway (Poem) 10 

The Glorious Proclamation 10 

Gifts to Our King 14 

page 2 

THIS JOURNAL AND ITS MISSION. 



THIS journal is set for the defence of the only true foundation of 

the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 

through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 

aransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (I Pet. 1:19; 

I Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 

and precious stones (I Cor. 3:11-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 

of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 

of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 

that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 

God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, 

as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 
is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 

workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 
Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 
the chief corner stone of his Temple, through which, when finished, 
God's blessing shall come "to all people," and they find access to 
him.-I Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing, of consecrated believers 
in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 
"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 
the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 
and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 
place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 
"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a ransom 
for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; Jno. 1:9; I Tim. 2:5,6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 
as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 
hisjoint-heir.-I John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 
the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 
witness to the world; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the 
next age. -Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 
to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 
of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, 
at the hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church— when all the 
wilfully wicked will be destroyed.— Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, Editor. 



LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



page 2 

YOUNG'S AND STRONG'S CONCORDANCES. 



There is a little "war" of prices at present, and so long as it 
lasts we can sell these valuable works at specially low prices, 
viz.: Young's, in cloth binding, at $4.00, plus postage, 55c. 
Strong's at $3.00, plus 65c postage. The latter is a wonderful 
bargain. We scarcely expect the prices to go lower. 

R3694 : page 2 

THE PITTSBURGH DISPATCH. 



Most of the subscriptions to the Pittsburgh Dispatch expired 
with November. Please note the date tag and let us know if 
you wish us to renew for you. We have a special clubbing arrangement 
by which we can supply this cosmopolitan newspaper 
for $3.00 per year, or just half price. This supersedes previous 
notices. The Dispatch proposes more space for Brother 
Russell's discourses every Monday hereafter. 

page 2 

WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 



These are substantially made of stiff cloth boards, and can 
hold two years' issues of the WATCH TOWER. They prevent 
soiling and loss. Price, postpaid, 50c. 



German booklet on the Law and the Sabbath, 72 pages, 
postpaid 5 cents each. 



R3695 : page 3 



THOUGHTS FOR THE NEW YEAR. 

THE dawn of another new year is properly a time 
for solemn reflections, both retrospective and 
prospective. In the retrospect how abundant 
is the cause for thanksgiving! We who have been blessed 
with the richest favors of divine grace in that knowledge 
of divine truth which reveals to us the high privilege 
of becoming sons and heirs of God, and joint-heirs with 
Jesus Christ to an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled 
and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for the 
called and chosen and faithful according to his purpose, 
have a never-failing cause for deepest gratitude. Great 
indeed was the favor which revealed to us the hope of 
everlasting life as justified, human sons of God— of full 
restitution to the divine favor and likeness, as was at 
first possessed by our father Adam. And great was our 
joy when first, by faith, we appropriated this precious 
promise and realized that legally, through merit of the 
precious blood of Christ shed for our redemption, we had 
passed from death unto life, and that in God's appointed 
time the everlasting treasure with all its attendant 
glory and blessing would be ours. But beyond even this 
are the "exceeding great and precious promises" to those 
of this justified class who have been called, according 
to God's purpose, to become the bride and joint-heir of 
his dear Son. 

Then, in addition to all these blessings of hope and 
promise, was the blessed realization during all the year, 
and with some of us for many years past, that though 
we walk through the valley of the shadow of death, as 
the Psalmist aptly represents the present life, our blessed 
Shepherd's rod and staff have been our comfort and our 
safeguard. How often has the friendly crook of the 
Shepherd's staff stayed us from wandering off into bypaths 
and kept us in the narrow way; how his chastening 
rod has from time to time aroused us from dreamy 
lethargy and urged us on our way. And at such times 
we have recalled the comforting words: "My son, despise 
not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint 
when thou art rebuked of him; for whom the Lord loveth 
he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. 
If ye endure chastening, God dealeth with you 
as with sons; for what son is he whom the father chasteneth 
not? But if ye be without chastisement, whereof 
all are partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons."— 
Heb. 12:5-8. 

"THOU SPREADEST MY TABLE IN THE MIDST OF 
ENEMIES." 

Spiritually, we have feasted on the bounties of 
divine favor; while in things temporal, under whatsoever 
circumstances we have been placed, having the assurance 
that all things work together for good to them that 
love God, we have realized that godliness with contentment 



is great gain, having promise of the life that now 
is [so long as God wills to have us remain here], and also 
of that which is to come. Wherefore, we can and do 
most heartily "offer unto God thanksgiving." And shall 
we not render unto him, not only the praise of our lips, 
but also the incense of truly consecrated lives, throughout 
the year upon which we are just entering? Dearly 
beloved, consecrate yourselves anew to the Lord today 
—not in the sense of invalidating the consecration 
made once for all, possibly many years ago, but rather 
in the sense of re-affirming and emphasizing that covenant. 
Tell the dear Lord that you consider yourselves 
entirely his, and that it is still your purpose to keep your 
all upon the altar of sacrifice during this new year and 
until it is wholly consumed in his service. Then let us 
proceed with studious care from day to day to pay these, 
our vows of full consecration, unto the Most High. 

As we look back and with sorrow view the imperfections 
of even our best efforts, and then forward and 
see the lion-like difficulties that seem to obstruct our onward 
course, we will need greatly to reinforce our waning 
courage with the special promises of divine grace to help 
in every time of need. We have the blessed assurance 
that "the Lord will give strength unto his people." 
"Call upon me in the day of trouble," he says, "and I 
will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me." As soldiers 
under our great Captain, we have enlisted in no uncertain 
struggle, except our own faint-heartedness or 
unfaithfulness should make it so. We are fully supplied 
with the whole armor of God, and will be amply protected 
against all the fiery darts of the adversary if we 
accept it and carefully buckle it on; we are forewarned 
of all the snares and dangers that beset our onward way, 
so that we may avoid and overcome them; we are fully 

R3695 : page 4 

informed as to the policy and course of the Captain under 

whose banner we have enlisted, and of the part we are to 

take under his leading. We have his constant presence 

with us, even to the end of our course. His inspiring 

voice may always be heard above the clash and din of 

battle— Fear not, it is your Father's good pleasure to 

give you the kingdom! Be of good cheer; I have overcome! 

Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be 

afraid! Greater is he that is for you than all they that 

be against you. If we are weak and incline to faint-heartedness 

we have only to remember the blessed 

promise, "The Lord will give strength unto his people;" 

and by our faithfulness in the service we shall glorify 

God and he will deliver us gloriously from all our foes, 

both seen and unseen. 

HOW SHALL WE PAY OUR VOWS? 

This is an important question with all the truly 



consecrated, and one surely of paramount importance. 
Let us consider, then, that when we consecrated ourselves 
fully to the Lord, we thereby signified that we would hold 
nothing back for self. That consecration included all 
our possessions, our time, our physical energies and our 
mental attainments. And it implied the sacrifice of all 
our former earthly ambitions, hopes and aims, so that 
we should no longer pursue them to any extent. This, 
and nothing less, is what our vow of full consecration 
signifies. But it signifies, further, that these possessions 
or personal qualifications, which the Lord terms talents, 
are not only to be released from the service of the worldly 
ambitions, etc., but that they are to be so released, not 
for aimless inactivity, but for the purpose of being 
utilized in an opposite direction— in the service of God, 
of his plan and of his children. 

In the parable of the talents (Matt. 25:14-30) the 
Lord illustrated very clearly how we are expected to 
pay our vows of consecration to the Most High. He 
says: "It is like a man who, intending to travel, called 
his own servants and delivered unto them his goods. 
And to one he gave five talents, to another two, and to 

R3696 : page 4 

another one; to each according to his respective capacity; 
and straightway took his journey." 

TO EACH ACCORDING TO ABILITY 

This master had important and valuable interests 
to leave in charge of his servants; and as these servants 
had all engaged to serve him, he had a right to expect 
of them a sincere and faithful interest in the work. 
Yet he did not expect more of them than they were 
severally able to accomplish. He rightly expected larger 
returns from the one who had five talents than from those 
who had one or two talents. And in the reckoning, it 
will be observed that the servant who had doubled his 
two talents was just as highly commended as the one 
who had doubled his five. The reply to each was the 
same— "Well done, good and faithful servant: thou 
hast been faithful over a few things; I will make thee 
ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy 
Lord." And had the servant with the one talent been 
similarly faithful he would have received the very same 
commendation. Notice also that the parable does not 
represent the obligations of the world of mankind in the 
use of their talents, but merely of "his own servants"— 
the consecrated believers only. And notice also that no 
servant was left without some talent of usefulness and 
responsibility. Each servant had at least one talent; and 
for the right use of that one talent he was just as accountable 
to his master as were those who had more. 

But the professed servant with the one talent was 
unfaithful to his master, and yet he evidently wanted 



to be considered a servant still, and probably thought 
he was worthy of commendation and reward for not 
perverting his Lord's money to other uses. He had taken 
good care of the talent; he had not turned it in opposition 
to the Lord, but he had simply buried it— failed to 
use it. At the reckoning time, he who had received the 
one talent said, "Lord, I knew thee, that thou art an 
exacting man, reaping where thou hast not sown, and 
gathering where thou hast not scattered. And I was 
afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth; lo, 
there thou hast thine own." 

"His Lord answered and said unto him, Thou 
wicked and slothful servant, thou knewest that I reap 
where I sowed not, and gather where I have not scattered; 
thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to the 
exchangers; and then at my coming I should have received 
mine own with interest." It will be observed that 
this servant was not what men would generally call 
wicked. He was simply an idler, willing, if he could, to 
draw a servant's approval and compensation, but lacking 
any real, active interest in his master's business. He 
had no ill will toward his master; he was probably very 
glad that the other servants kept the business from 
going to wreck and ruin; he did nothing to hinder them 
from using their talents, but he did not feel the responsibility 
he had assumed in becoming a "servant," nor take a 
proper interest in his master's affairs. Yet, as a faithless, 
slothful servant, he was really a covenant-breaker, and 
therefore "wicked" and certainly unfit to be trusted 
with still greater responsibilities on the master's return. 

But let us remember that this was not a real case: 
it was simply a parable used to illustrate real cases. 
And if the illustration fits your individual case, let it 
not lose its effect upon you. The very object of the parable 
is to arouse such to a sense of their short-comings, 
and to recover them from the lethargy into which they 
have relaxed, by reminding them of their responsibilities. 
Activity in the Lord's service to the full extent of our 
ability or talents is what the Lord has a right to expect 
of all who profess to be his servants; and it is what he 
does expect. Therefore, if you have but one talent, do 
not bury it, but cultivate and use it; do what you can, 
and all you can, in the great work to which we have 
already consecrated our lives. 

MUCH GIVEN, MUCH REQUIRED 

And those who have several talents, let them see to 
it that they too are faithful to the extent of their abilities, 
not being content to do merely what the one-talented 
man can do or ought to do. Such a one would not be a 
good and faithful servant, and could not expect the 
Master's approving "Well done!" His approval will be 
given to those only who are faithful to the extent of their 
opportunity. 

Those who find the truth and make the consecration 



before they are encumbered with the cares of this 
life, who have no families dependent upon them and who 
have a reasonable degree of health, have at least two 
talents— time and health— which can and ought to be 
utilized in the service to the best possible advantage. 
Then there are those who have a money talent, or a 

R3696 : page 5 

business talent, and such should consider how these are 
being used. Are they largely swallowed up in luxuries, 
or a superabundance of the good things of this life, for 
either self or family? Or are they being laid up as treasures 
upon earth— in banks, store-houses and investment 
securities, to enrich and to cultivate the spirit of pride in 
friends or children, and for them to quarrel over after 
you are dead? 

Our talents for use in the Lord's service consist of 
all those things and opportunities which are over and 
above what we need for the necessary and reasonable 
maintenance of ourselves or our families, if we have 
families, and the reasonable provision against distress 
in case of a sudden calamity or approaching old age, 
etc. Aside from these, all we have should be in active 
service, be they many talents or few. If we have five 
talents and are using only one or two, how can we expect 
the Master's "Well done, good and faithful servant"? 
Did we not covenant to give and to use all for him?— all 
our money, all our time, all our influence, all our mental 
activity, all our physical ability? How faithful have we 
been during the past year? How do we stand at the bar 
of our own judgment? And how faithful will we be 
during the coming year? After providing things decent 
and honest for ourselves and those dependent upon us, 
let us judiciously appropriate our talents to what we 
profess to consider the chief business of life. Here are 
the testing points of true loyalty and devotion. Let us 
ponder them well, and not lightly set them aside. 

FORMER OPPORTUNITIES LOST 

But observe further what the Lord has to say about 
this "wicked and slothful servant." He says: "Take 
the talent from him and give it unto him which hath 
ten talents; for unto every one that hath [made use of 
his talents] shall be given, and he shall have abundance; 
but from him that hath not [made use of his talent] 
shall be taken away even that which he hath. And 
cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: 
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." The outer 
darkness here referred to is in contrast with the inner 
light of the holy place of favor and communion and 
instruction from God, symbolized in the Tabernacle. 
The testing comes on the return of the Master. Then 
the faithful servants shall enter into fuller joys and 
privileges and blessings, while the unfaithful will go 



into the outer darkness of error and ignorance concerning 
God's plans and ways, which envelops the world 
in general, and their neglected opportunities for more 
abundant service will go as a reward to those who are 
already earnest and active, and whose earnest and faithful 
labors will in due time be abundantly rewarded. 

As we thus view our Lord's teaching, we see that 
our only security as sons of God and joint-heirs with 
Christ is in activity in the service of the truth. Well, 
says one, I see very few doing that. Very true: only a 
few will do it. But that precious few are the Lord's 
jewels. Are you one of them? Ah, that is the point to be 
considered. No matter how few they are, or whether 
you ever saw or knew of any such, that does not alter 
the conditions of our calling. "This is the way: walk 
ye in it." One, at least, has trodden it before. Look 
for his foot-prints and follow him, and "He will give 
strength unto his people," even though they walk alone, 
as he did, without the cheering companionship of 
fellow-travelers. 

"LO, I AM WITH YOU" 

But think not that you are traveling alone in this 
narrow way. The Lord has now a consecrated people, 
a faithful band of servants who, with every talent consecrated, 
are steadily pursuing their course in the narrow 
way. We know some of them by name and by 
character and by their steady and progressive activity 
in the blessed work. Not many of them have five talents, 
but a good many have two or three, and some only one. 
Quietly and unobtrusively they go about from day to 
day preaching the wonderful words of life, and God is 
with them and is leading them on. Their hearts are full 
of joy and hope and they are kept securely amidst all 
the perils of this evil day. None are so clear in their 
apprehension and appreciation of truth as those who 
are fully enlisted in its service. Let all who would run 
the race successfully look well to their zeal and activity 
in the Lord's work. If we bury our one or our many 
talents under a weight of worldly cares and encumbrances 
which might be avoided or set aside; if we bury 
them under worldly ambitions for either self or family— 
whether this be by wasting consecrated time upon 
science, philosophy, music or art; or upon business, 
politics or pleasures; or in pampering pride and appetite 
—then as unfaithful servants we will sooner or later go 
into outer darkness, by being caught in some of the 
snares of this "evil day," and will be led farther and 
farther into error and away from truth. 

Mark well that it is not a case of such unfaithful 
servants being liable to get into outer darkness, into 
error: it is a case of must. The Master's orders are 
peremptory and decisive: "Cast the unprofitable servant 
into outer darkness." The light now shining is 
not for the unfaithful, but for the faithful servants; and 



no matter how clearly the unfaithful may have seen and 
understood the deep things of God, and no matter how 
he may have enjoyed them, if he has not loved them 

R3697 : page 5 

so as to serve them and sacrifice his conveniences for 
them, he is unworthy of them and must go out into the 
outer darkness of the world in general. With these as 
with the world the disappointment of theories and plans 
in the great time of trouble will ere long bring the weeping 
and gnashing of teeth foretold. 

FAITHFULNESS IMPLIES ACTIVITY 

It is indeed a notable fact that in no single case 
have we seen one drift away from the truth into the 
snares of these perilous times who was very active and 
fully enlisted in the Lord's work, whose one aim and 
endeavor was to herald the truth and to bless others 
with it. To such the Lord says, "My grace is sufficient 
for thee"— "Ye shall never fall, for so an abundant 
entrance shall be ministered unto you into the everlasting 
kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ." 

Let us, then, dearly beloved, have for our watchword 
during the year the word "devotion," and let 
each of us write upon his heart the gracious promise— 
"The Lord will give strength unto his people." Let us 
be faithfully "his people," and let us earnestly desire 
and faithfully use the strength promised. Faithful is he 
that hath promised, who also will do it. So, then, if 
you lack the strength to use faithfully your talent, the 
fault is yours, not God's. You either have not his service 
close enough at heart or else do not make use of the 
strength he provides. "The Lord will give strength unto 

R3697 : page 6 

his people"— his trusting, faithful servants— those who 
are using to his praise the talents consecrated to their 
Master, however many or few those talents may be. 



1906 / "God Bless You" / 1906 



Our New Year's greeting is, "God bless you." It 
applies primarily to those nearest and dearest in the 
bonds of Christian fellowship in Present Truth; secondarily, 
to all who trust in the precious blood, in the 
merit of which alone there is forgiveness of sins and 
reconciliation with God and a basis of Christian brotherhood; 
thirdly, to the world in general, still blind and 
deaf to God's great salvation, but heirs of the great 



oath-bound covenant, "in due time;" fourthly, to those 
who oppose us and say all manner of evil against us, 
falsely, for Christ's sake— because we are heralds of his 
truth and grace. 

For all of these our wish is God's blessing, which, 
if received, maketh truly rich, and addeth no sorrow. 
If for our enemies and the world in general we pray 
opening of the eyes of understanding, surely with the 
Apostle we may offer the same prayer also for all the 
"brethren" and for ourself— a wider opening of our 
eyes of understanding. The Apostle's words are, "For 
this cause I bow my knees unto the Father. ..that 
ye may be able to comprehend with all saints what is 
the breadth and length and depth and height, and to 
know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge."— 
Eph. 3:14-19. 

We suggest as our motto for 1906 the words upon 
the motto cards designed by Sister Seibert (advertised 
in our issue of Nov. 15 last), viz., "In Due Time." 



"In Due Time." 
-I TIM. 2:6- 
"Be patient, therefore, brethren. 



We hope that the motto cards representing these 
sentiments so fully will be in all of our homes to assist us 
in the development of the grace of Patience, without 
which other graces of the Spirit cannot be matured. 
We cannot pack and mail a single motto for less than 
10c, but conclude to offer 5 in a tube, postpaid, for 
25c, to the intent that all may have them. We can 
endure many things with patience if we can but keep 
in memory that "in due time" that which is perfect 
will have come, ushering us into the joys of our Lord, 
and establishing peace on earth and good will among 
men. 



R3697 : page 6 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
THE CRISIS NEARING 



THE Federation of Religions, now fairly launched, we 
have been waiting for ever since we published our 
interpretation of Revelations, chapter 13, in 1881. 



We there showed that Protestantism would federate, that the 
Evangelical Alliance of 1842 was the start of it, and that 
it would be in full bloom when the Episcopal body should 
associate and lend the dignity of its claimed "Apostolic 
ordination." 

This combination is made ostensibly as the outcome of 
greater love amongst the Lord's followers, but really is the 
rolling together of the one end of the symbolic "heavens" 
for self-defense and to make an impression on the worldly. 

Really, this is a step toward political power. The 
masses are becoming too logical to be dealt with as formerly, 
and religion to be popular must assume a new role. The 
old-time preaching, "Ye must be born again" to "enter the 
Kingdom," backed up by the horrible dogma of the dark 
ages, that all not "born again" must go to a hell of eternal 
torment, can no longer be preached— the world will not accept 
it. The new gospel must be something which will appeal 
to the worldly wise as "practical religion," namely, 
good morals— in politics, in finance, in society, in the family. 
Everybody can understand and appreciate that much of religion, 
and everybody will support it, and the churches will 
thus pose not as representatives of Christ and the Bible's 
teachings as a whole, but merely representatives of Christian 
morals. The effect will be a growth of Christian-Phariseeism 
which will make clean the outside of the cup or platter, 
leaving the inside still unclean— unregenerate. 

So popular will Federated Churchianity become that to 
even criticize it will be a "crime" worthy of crucifixion in 
some form— socially and financially, if not physically. 

Politicians will quickly realize that their bread is buttered 
on that side, and be ready to enact legislation of any 
kind desired by the Federation. Mammon-worship will take 
on new forms temporarily, but power will soon debauch the 
unregenerate mass and drive out the regenerate faithful who 
may temporarily be misled by the great "Union" movement 
in the name of Christ, but without his Spirit or authority. 

The Scriptures clearly show that anarchy will speedily 
swallow up everything— social, financial, political and religious 
—in the great "time of trouble" with which, as the 
Scriptures everywhere show, this age is to close and the 
Millennium of our Lord's reign of righteousness to be ushered 
in. Socialism, already growing, undoubtedly is the seed out 
of which anarchy will develop, though many Socialists are 
no doubt hoping to the contrary— misled by their failure to 
appreciate the power of selfishness, which will exhaust every 
means and battle to the death on both sides of the question 
—to get wealth and to hold it. 

CHURCH UNION IN GREAT BRITAIN. 



Ardor for Church union in Great Britain has cooled considerably 
of late over the law which practically turns over 
the public schools to the care of the Church of England— 
the Episcopal Church. All other Protestant denominations 



there are known by the general term, "Nonconformists," because 

they refuse to conform to the services of the Church 

established by the law of the land. These now are bent on 

an attempt to secure the disestablishment of present Church 

and State union. The hope has been expressed that with 

all churches on an equal footing a general Church Federation 

of Protestants will follow. 

Now, a new suggestion is offered by Canon Henson of 
Westminster Abbey, namely, that an easier and a more popular 
course would be for the Government to recognize all 

R3697 : page 7 

Christian denominations (with certain limitations, possibly) 
putting all on a parity with the Episcopal Church. His suggestion 
is that this would be a practical union, and he 
favors it as a possibility. He says in a lengthy article:— 

"Clear the fiction of Apostolic Succession out of the 
way and Establishment will be no barrier to reunion. Leave 
that fiction paramount in the minds of the English clergy, 
and Disestablishment will only give freer play to the intolerance 
it inevitably generates. The deeper forces of our time 
are not moving in the direction of that severe individualism 
which would reduce the action and responsibility of the 
State to the lowest measures; rather we move toward 
a larger view of State action and State responsibility. 

"The logical goal of modern tendencies is not toward 
Disestablishment, but toward a fuller and worthier Establishment. 
Why should not the nation draw into its service 
all the organized Christianity instead of limiting itself to a 
single denomination? I rejoice to observe a beginning made 
in this direction by recent legislation, which has recognized 
for certain civic purposes the status of Nonconformist clergymen, 
and I would venture to hope that the final solution of 
the problem of religious education in the State schools may 
be reached by an extension of the principle of establishment. 

"If, even at the eleventh hour, more temperate counsels 
could prevail, and a resettlement of the educational difficulty 

R3698 : page 7 

could be arrived at by the combined efforts of the just 
and peace-loving men on both sides, it does not seem to me 
impossible that the cause of home reunion should receive a 
great impetus from this very educational conflict, which, for 
the moment, seems to put back by at least twenty-five years 
the hands of the clock which were slowly, very slowly, 
climbing toward union." 



Can it be that thus the two-horned beast [Great Britain] 
may give "life," energy, the effect of Apostolic succession, 
to the Protestant "image of the [Roman] beast"? (Rev. 13:15.) 
A very few years will demonstrate; but this appears 
to us a very likely course of fulfilment. 



RESULTS OF RUSSIA'S STRUGGLE. 



Matters are in a sad condition in Russia, but probably 
not one-fifth as bad as the majority of people surmise. In 
times past rioting has occurred in many cities of the United 
States, the details of which were learned by fellow-citizens 
only through the same channels as by the remainder of the 
world— through the newspaper dispatches. Doubtless the 
same is true in Russia, except in the immediate vicinity of 
the troubles. 

What is now occurring in Russia is awakening that 
stolid people marvellously. Even when order shall have 
again been fully restored the people will have gained such a 
knowledge of this power as will prepare them for the great 
climax which, according to prophecy, we believe will be 
reached by 1915. 

"The Internationals," extremists of the Socialist class, 
are credited with the chief direction of the Russian revolution. 
They have shown great skill thus far and may be 
esteemed as getting a schooling with the most stupid of 
"Christendom," which will prepare them for the great struggle 
to occur at the close of "the times of the Gentiles." 

RUSSIA'S THREE-SIDED MELEE 



The telegraphic reports from Russia are confusing to 
many. One time we read of the Socialists and students rioting 
and in conflict with the troops; again we read of massacres 
of Jews, to which the Government employees seem to 
give assent and secret aid. These seemingly conflicting reports 
can only be understood when we remember that there 
are three parties more or less in conflict: 

(1) The Socialists, mechanics, students, etc., who are 
moving for liberty— some for a constitution and a congress 
composed of the people's representatives, and some for out-and-out 
Socialism. 

(2) The old government party, sometimes styled the 
Bureaucracy. Amongst these are many of wealth and culture, 
who believe that any concessions to the growing discontent 
will surely lead up to further discontent and eventually 
disrupt Russia. This party is charged with being responsible 
for having brought on the Japanese war. They are influential 
and close to the Czar. 

(3) A third party is everyway conservative. It desires 
reform and peace under a midway government— neither 
autocratic nor liberal. Count Witte is at the head of this 
division. 

The Czar is credited with sympathy for this third class 
of his subjects, but has been closely pressed by the influentials 
of the second party until recently, when, under fear of 
the first party, he formally put Witte in office and issued a 



decree, or ukase, granting a constitution and congress. Had 
he followed this course sooner matters would have gone 
more smoothly, for at one time party number three was of 
considerable size. Many have deserted it for party number 
one— some because they have imbibed the theories and spirit 
of Socialism and some because they doubt the Czar's honesty 
or ability in respect to his ukase. 

Witte and his associates of the third party are obliged to 
operate largely through present office-holding governors and 
generals, whose sympathies lie with the second party— across 
Witte's path of governmental reform. It is these who have 
secretly sanctioned or aided the riots which have killed so 
many Jews— because the Jews are of the first party, namely, 
Socialist sympathizers and abettors. 

LATEST REPORTS 

As we write, the dispatches seem to imply that the Czar 
is in great perplexity, because the masses refuse to accept 
his ukase of freedom and are, by strikes and increasingly 
revolutionary methods, more than ever menacing the Social 
structure. He doubtless feels that he must do something 
and that quickly; and that his "olive-branch" ukase having 
been rejected he can do nothing now but fall back upon the 
second party and use force to crush the rebellious into submission 
or into death. Matters may not yet have reached 
this extreme, but if it has we doubt not there will be strenuous 
times in Russia before Socialists are reduced to 
submission. 



R3698 : page 8 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY FOR JANUARY 

-FOR EXPLANATION SEE PREFACE OF WATCH TOWER 
BIBLES AND WATCH TOWER, MARCH 1 1905- 

PRAYER 

1. What is prayer? "Prayer is the soul's sincere desire, 
uttered or unexpressed." Z. '98-27 (1st 

col. par. 2); F.680, par. 2, (1st sentence). 

2. What is the privilege and power of prayer? Z. '95-213 
(1st col. par. 1); Z. '96-161 (1st col. par. 1). 

3. What is the object of prayer? Z. '96-161 (1st col. par. 
2); Z/98-29 (1st col. par. 2); F.679, par. 1. 

4. What is the necessity for prayer? Z. '96-161 (1st col. 
par. 3); Z/99-184 (1st col. par. 2); Z/00-268 (1st 

col. par. 1, -"Manna," July 24); Z/05-297 (2nd 
col. par. 2). 

5. What is the necessity for persistency in prayer? Z. '96-162 
(2nd col. par. 3,4); Z/01-270 (2nd col. 

par. 2); Z/05-342 (2nd col.) and 343 (1st col. par. 1.) 

6. To whom and through whom should we pray? Z. '98-28 



(2nd col. par. 1); E.468, par. 2, (last sentence). 

7. Before whom may we pray? 
In secret, Matt. 6:5-9. 

Before believers, Jno. 17; Jno. 11:41,42; 

Matt. 18:19. 

Before believers and unbelievers, Lu. 3:21; Jno. 12:27-29; 

Matt. 27:46. 

In the public assembly of the saints, Acts 12:12; 1:14; 

I Cor. 11:4,5; 14:13,14. 

Z/98-27 (1st col. par. 5) to 28 (1st col. par. 2). 

8. What should be our manner of approach to God in 
prayer? Z. '95-213 (1st col. par. 3, 4); Z/98-27 

(1st col. par. 3,4); Z.'04-l 18 (2nd col. par. 3). 

9. What should be our position in prayer? Z. '99-184 
(1st col. par. 1); Z/05-297 (2nd col. par. 2). 

10. What are the conditions of acceptable prayer to God? 
F.679, par. 2, to 681, par. 2; Z/95-213 (2nd col. par. 1, 
-"Manna," June 10); Z/05-343 (2nd col. par. 3,4) 

to 344 (1st col, par. 3.) 



R3698 : page 8 

REPORTS FROM SOME OF OUR FOREIGN BRANCHES 

BRITISH BRANCH REPORT 

-1905- 

Total copies "Millennial Dawn" sold at cost 25,640 

" Booklets " " 6,075 

" "Dawns" in magazine form, " " 2,022 



Total Tracts, etc., sent out free 1,129,000 

These represented in tract pages 27,112,790 

Letters received 6,230 

" sent out 7,742 

FINANCIAL- 1 905 -ST ATEMENT 
L. s. d. 

Preaching, Pilgrim and Convention expenses 164 15 01 

Cost of tracts, freight, postage, and all other 
office expenses 1,133 18 10 



1,298 13 11 

TRACT FUND DONATIONS 

London L. 88 12 

The Provinces 554 7 2 

Special donations 400 1,042 19 02 



Deficit for 1905 L.265 14 09 



London, N.W., England, November 14, '05 
Dear Brother Russell:— 

The season of the year when the annual report and review 
of the work is made has again come round, and I have 
pleasure in giving you the working of the British Branch for 
the year ending October 31, 1905. As on previous occasions, 
we have had the privilege of reporting an advance in 
every branch of the work; though the pleasure in this is 
modified a little by the fact that the onward march is not 
quite as rapid as last year. I speak just now particularly of 
the sale of the "Dawns," in which, though we report an increase 

R3699 : page 8 

in circulation of nearly 2,000, we have not progressed 
as much as last year, when we advanced 4,000. Our total 
issue of "Dawns" and booklets is 33,741; truly a goodly 
total, and one for which we praise the Lord. It has happened 
this year that several of our colporteurs have had to 
relinquish the work for a time; some because of their own 
ill-health, and some for domestic reasons. We thank the 
Lord for the noble band of colporteurs, co-laborers in the 
harvest field. Their sacrifices, as well as their difficulties 
and trials are many, and we constantly remember them at 
the throne of grace, that they may be strengthened as they 
go from door to door or from place to place. We are often 
cheered and encouraged as we read their letters full of 
cheery optimism or of courage to pursue the work. We have 
yet much ground to be covered and we are still praying "the 
Lord of the harvest to send laborers into the vineyard." 

The Volunteer work, as you know, was started late in 
the season, and though of necessity we have not sent out as 
much ammunition as usual, of tracts in general we have circulated 
1,129,000, a larger number than ever. The ammunition 
for this season is very fruitful of inquiries and we hope 
for much result from it. The demand is still strong. 

The "Tower" list continues to grow all the time at one 
uniform rate. Yet, judging from the pleasure which the 
"Tower" gives when once it becomes a regular visitor, we 
imagine there are many who would be glad to have it did 
they know of it and of the generous provisions through which 
it may be obtained, even by those unable to pay for it. 

The receipts of the Tract Fund are considerably in 
advance this year. I have already informed you of the chief 
reason for this. One of the Lord's dear children, wishing to 
free the British Branch from the burden of debt, gave liberally 
of that which the Lord had given. As is generally the 
case, there are not many with us who are able to give largely, 
but the many smaller items swell into a good total by 
the end of the year, and give cause for rejoicing as the Lord 
prospers his work. 

With yourself I appreciate the cooperation of all the 
dear brethren, whether it be shown in the colporteur work, 



volunteer work, or by donation to the Tract Fund. Many 
who are unable to donate are able to distribute the literature, 
and all may be co-laborers with the Lord and with 
each other. The Pilgrim visits of Brothers McPhail and 
Edgar were very much enjoyed. 

Of the general work I could say much. The interest is 
getting more widely spread over the United Kingdom; and 
Ireland, through the labors of the few brethren there, is getting 
her opportunity to hear the "glad tidings." The meetings 
of the brethren in the various towns and villages are, 

R3699 : page 9 

generally speaking, making progress. Naturally the work 
grows most and goes forward the quickest where the attention 
given to the interests of the Kingdom is not divided with 
any personal interests. We could mention the labor of many, 
and, were it convenient, would gladly do so as an encouragement 
to them and to others. Many are laboring for the Lord 
unknown to the brethren at large, often with little apparent 
result; yet we are assured that of all work done for him, 
"Your labor is not in vain in the Lord." As we are not 
without signs of the coming "Confederacy," and of the growing 
political and social power of Non-conformity, there is 
need that we busy ourselves with the work that has been 
placed before us. Ours is a better cause than that political 
religious combination which proposes to amend the world. 
We know that amendment cannot come until the Kingdom 
comes into power. We wait to heal the world's woes, but in 
the meantime we can be preparing to "cast up the highway, 
gather out the stones and lift up a standard for the people," 
and there is no better way of doing these desirable things 
than by putting the Truth into the hands of the people. 

Praying the Lord's blessing upon all his dear children, 
and for you that you may have grace and strength in abundant 
measure. 

I am, dear brother, yours as ever, in Him, 
J. HEMERY. 



GERMAN BRANCH REPORT 

-1905- 

Copies of "Millennial Dawn" sold at or below cost 2,979 

" Booklets, 3,770 

" Dawns in magazine form 3,250 

* * * 

Letters received 3181 

" sent out 3220 



Free sample tracts and Towers, represented in tract 
pages 21,074,400 

FINANCIAL STATEMENT 

Expended for Pilgrim service 1,108.90 

The total amount expended for printing, postage, 
freight and all other expenses of the work 18,202.28 



19,311.18 
Tract fund donations 3,125.57 



Deficit for 1905 *Marks 16,185.61 



*The statement of this in dollars would be about one-fourth 
the amount in marks, a mark being equivalent to 24 cents of 
U.S. money. 

Elberfeld, Germany, Nov. 11, '05 
Dear Brother Russell:— 

I now have the pleasure of sending you a statement of 
the work of the German branch during the year just ended. 

We might have reason to wish for a more rapid spread 
of the Truth on the continent of Europe, especially in the 
Protestant countries of Germany, Holland and Switzerland, 
but we are assured "the Lord knoweth them that are his" 
and who are hungering for a clearer insight into his plans 
and purposes, and that he will "seek and find" his own 
sheep. We have various evidences of how the Lord is doing 
that very thing and rejoice therein. 

As the accounts show more particularly, we have been 
enabled to circulate 21 million tract pages of free literature 
and ten thousand "Dawns" and booklets. We may hope 
that some of the seed will ultimately show some fruitage in 
the gathering of the Lord's people to the Lord and his feast 
of fat things from his Word. We are constantly securing 
addresses of earnest Christians, many of whom may be of the 
class who do not really bow their knees to Baal. 

Our Pilgrim service this year has not been very extended. 
The Colporteur service has thus far proved itself impracticable 
for Germany, or it may be we lack capable and 
experienced colporteurs. It seems to be a fact, though, that 
poor circumstances of a large proportion of the people, the 
spread of infidelity and socialism, together with the large 
percentage of Roman Catholics in this country, the ever-increasing 
prices of food and taxes, and perplexities innumerable 
of the small merchant, etc., and the fight with carnal 
weapons of Protestants against the encroachments of Catholicism 
on the one hand and the loss of faith in the virtue and 
supremacy of Protestantism over Catholicism on the other 
hand, as manifested in the Rome-ward leanings of the Kaiser 
himself— that all these things are creating and have created 
a general contempt for religion of every kind. 

May the Lord grant us wisdom to let the light of the 



Truth shine as the only guide to a place of refuge from the 
storm and tempest for all who are truly his, as the poet has 
said:— 

"When the storms of life are raging, 

Tempests wild on sea and land, 
I will seek a place of refuge 

In the shadow of his hand." 

With much love from us all, in loving sympathy for all 
the Lord's people in every land, in every clime, and commending 
ourselves to their and your prayers for our heavenly 
Father's and our dear Master's leading, I am, 

Faithfully yours in Christ and his blessed service, 
O. A. KOETITZ. 

P.S.— The mutiny of the Russian soldiers is evidently 
driving the Kaiser to desperation. He fears the bad example. 
The Socialists claim the sympathies of the great majority 
of the soldiers, officers and men, whether in the standing 
army or in the reserves. To the Socialists their regime 
or a republic seems within sight, and it must seem folly to 
them to hear the Kaiser talk of the soldiers as belonging to 
him personally, to whom they are compelled to give the oath 
of allegiance. 

As true soldiers of the cross we may even get some inspiration 
from the words of the Kaiser to his soldiers respecting 
soldierly qualities. I translate as follows:— 

THE KAISER'S SPEECH TO RECRUITS 

"Recruits! Since you have now rendered me the oath of 
allegiance you no longer belong to yourselves alone. Through 
it you have been received into the great family, whose calling 
it is to protect the Fatherland when it is in danger. By this 
oath which you have rendered in view of these glorious field-emblems 
you have become mine! You have thereby taken upon 
yourselves [under stress] a great responsibility toward the 
highest lord [of the empire]. I expect that you will be conscious 
of this. I greet you as my soldiers! Wherever it may 
be, remember what a privilege it is that you may belong to my 
corps of Guards, with its great and glorious memories from the 
times of your fathers. Many are jealous of you for this privilege, 
and you may well be proud of it; therefore always remember 
your oath. Remain true to it, even as your comrades who, 
in a far country, far from home, have now for twelve months 
been subject to all kinds of deprivations, doing their duty and 
fighting a hard battle for the Fatherland and for German culture. 
This is the special trait of the German soldier, that he 
willingly follows the call of his king, without murmuring and 
hesitation, all in faith and confidence in his king, and in confidence 
in his God, who will not forsake the upright. Therefore 

R3700 : page 10 

continue steadfast in prayer, for the calling upon God gives 



strength, even in the most difficult hour when one is inclined 
to give up, not to despair but to look forward with courage. 
Thus do your duty in obedience and you will not fail to receive 
acknowledgment from your superiors. Practise self-control 
and never grow weary of today's promise. May this day be to 
you all a constant source of soberness and a stimulation to zeal, 
for your entire life, especially since his majesty the King of 
Spain has so highly honored and distinguished the Guard 
corps by his presence. To his majesty the king of Spain, 
Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!" 

"Berlin, Nov. 13.— According to the 'Local News,' the Kaiser 
yesterday, after receiving the oath of allegiance from new 
recruits in Potsdam, addressed them as follows: 'You see here 
an altar, upon it a cross, the emblem of all Christians. As 
such you today gave the oath in support of the flag. I wish 
and hope that you will always remember this oath. Just now 
a memorable event comes to my mind. When Emperor Leopold 
of Austria delivered the supreme command of the army to 
Prince Eugene, handing him the marshal's staff, Prince Eugene 
grasped a crucifix and held it high with the words: "This 
shall be our supreme general." Such an attitude I expect of 
you. I want pious, brave soldiers in my army and no mockers. 
You have the privilege of service in the Guards of Potsdam, 
where you will be constantly reminded of the great soldier-king 
who not far from here has his last resting place, and of 
the most glorious history of Prussia. Show yourselves worthy 
of this special distinction by special cultivation of the soldierly 
virtues and set a good example to the others in godly fear, faithfulness 
and obedience." 



OUR PATHWAY. 

Our lonely hours 

In meditation sweet, 
Our nothingness to own 

In his grace complete. 

The narrow way, 

Our path, from day to day:— 
Gently he leads, 

Tho rugged be the way. 

He went before, 

And Sorrow's cup did drink:— 
His father's will 

His ministry fulfil. 

A Priest is he, 

In mercy he doth feel:— 
The weak and lonely, 

By grace he'll ever shield. —John LaDow 



R3700 : page 10 

THE GLORIOUS PROCLAMATION. 

--LUKE 2:l-20.-JANUARY 1 .- 

Golden Text:— "For unto you is born this day in the 
city of David a Savior which is Christ the Lord." 

THE message of the angels to the shepherds on Bethlehem's 
plains sounds more and more precious to each 
child of God in proportion as he grows in grace and 
knowledge. As his eyes and ears of understanding open 
more widely to the lengths and breadths of God's great plan 
of the ages, that prophetic message is the more highly esteemed 
as an epitome of the entire Gospel. Nor can our 
attention be too frequently called to the great event which 
lies at the foundation of that message— our Savior's birth. 

It matters not that December 25th is not the real anniversary 
of the Savior's birth, but probably the anniversary 
of the annunciation by the angel Gabriel, the anniversary of 
the Virgin Mary's conception, our Lord being born nine 
months later on the calendar, or about October 1 . One so 
great, whose birth, death and resurrection from the dead 
means so much to the human family, may be remembered 
and celebrated any day, every day, by all who appreciate 
what he has done for our race. Since, then, the majority of 
Christian people have become habituated to the celebration 
of December 25th as our Lord's birthday, we need make no 
protest, but join with all in celebrating that day with rejoicing 
of heart, giving gifts and remembrances one to another, 
thus copying divine favor, which gave to mankind the Son 
of God as a gift of mercy and love for our redemption. 

For four thousand years and more the promises of God, 
clothed in more or less of obscurity, had been given to mankind, 
intimating that ultimately the great curse of sin and 
death which had come upon the world through father Adam's 
disobedience in Eden would be rolled away, and instead of 
a curse, a blight, would come a blessing of the Lord with 
life-giving refreshment. In various types, figures and shadowy 
promises this lesson had come down through the ages to 
the time of our Lord's birth, especially amongst the Jews, who 
were the divinely favored and covenanted people. And since 
the Jews were of a commercial spirit, many of them were to be 
found in all parts of the civilized world; and thus amongst 
every people the faith in the one God and the hope of Israel 
through a Messiah were more or less made known, so that at 
the time of our Lord's birth we read, "All men were in expectation" 
of a soon-coming Messiah. Doubtless this expectation 
was built upon the interpretation of Daniel's prophecy, 
which we now see clearly marked the year of our Lord's 
majority, when he was thirty years of age and made his consecration 
to his work and received the begetting of the holy 
Spirit, his anointing as the great antitypical High Priest and 
as the great antitypical King over Israel and the world. 



FROM BETHLEHEM TO NAZARETH 

In olden times there were honorable cities and mean 
cities. Nazareth was generally recognized as one of the latter, 
while Bethlehem was distinctly one of the former— the 
City of David, Israel's beloved king. The Scriptures explain 
to us that Mary, our Lord's mother, and Joseph, her husband, 
were both of the lineage of David, and that in a seemingly 
accidental manner the prophecy was fulfilled which foretold 
that Messiah would be born in Bethlehem.— Micah 5:2. 

The Roman empire at that time bore rule over the whole 
world, the Jews being subject to it, but waiting expectantly, 
restlessly, for the coming Messiah, who would deliver them 
from being subject people and make of them the ruling caste 
in his Kingdom, the dominion of the world. Rome's great 
emperor, Caesar Augustus, was in power at this time, and 
had sent forth his decree for a polling or census of the whole 
world for purposes of taxation, etc. Luke informs us that it 
was in response to this royal decree that Joseph and Mary 

R3700 :page 11 

went up to their native city to be enrolled, and that thus it 
was that Jesus was born in Bethlehem, and on account of 
the great concourse of people at the same time and for the 
same purpose, accommodations being scarce, the stable of 
the inn, or khan, was used by some as a lodging. Joseph and 
Mary, being of the late comers, were forced to occupy these 
humble quarters, and thus it was that the King of glory, 
whose Kingdom is by and by to rule the world, was in the 
time of his flesh born in a stable and cradled in a manger. 

THE ANGELS AND THE SHEPHERDS 

Noble shepherds those must have been to whom the 
Almighty sent the angelic message respecting the birth of 
Jesus, the Messiah, which has rung down the ages and reached 
our ears— the message which thrills us the more in proportion 
as we are able to grasp its meaning. First a single 
angel appeared to the shepherds and allayed their fears, saying, 
"Fear not; behold I bring you good tidings." It would 
appear that fear is one of the dominating impulses of the 
human mind, especially in conjunction with any revelations 
from the Lord. Men realize— even the best of the race- 
that they are imperfect and that the Almighty and his laws 
are perfect. Instinctively the world seems to realize that a 
curse or condemnation of the Almighty rests upon it, and instinctively 
it fears a further curse and further condemnation, 
realizing its continual and increasing sinfulness. The same 
is true today with all except the comparatively few who are 
well informed respecting the divine character and plan. Thus 
the subject of religion is generally obnoxious to the world in 
general— a subject which they prefer to avoid, because of a 
feeling of guilt and a dread of further knowledge and 
condemnation. 

It is for the true children of God today, as it was for the 



angels at that time, to assure the world that God is better 
than all their fears— that God so loved the world as to redeem 

R3701 :page 11 

them from the just sentence of death, the curse that 
came upon all as inheritors of Adam's imperfection and 
sentence. 

"Good tidings" is another translation of our word 
"gospel." How beautiful the thought that the gospel is 
really and truly good tidings. Alas, for the misrepresentations 
of God's plan, under which so many of his professed 
people misrepresent his character and his Word, and apply 
the term "gospel" to their various messages from the dark 
ages, teaching purgatory and eternal torment as the portion 
of the race. Let us get away from this false thought and get 
the truth that the gospel is good tidings. The angel elaborated, 
saying that his message was good tidings of great joy, 
which should be unto all people. Ah, thank God, his plan is 
wider and deeper and higher and grander than anything we 
had ever conceived. The gospel message is not merely to be 
good tidings to the comparatively few that now have ears to 
hear and eyes to see its beauties, but in God's due time it is 
to be good tidings of great joy to all people. 

As every member of Adam's race shared in his fall and 
in the curse of death which came upon him as a result, so 
every member of the race was included in the great redemptive 
sacrifice which our Lord Jesus offered and which was 
finished at Calvary. God's plan in Christ, as it is being 
worked out and shall ultimately be accomplished, will mean 
great joy for all people, and the tidings of this were given at 
the very moment of our Lord's birth, because he was the one 
through whom all the glorious things of the divine purpose 
and plan shall ultimately be accomplished. 

THE CAUSE, THE LOGIC, OF THE MESSAGE 

The message took cognizance of the fact that it was to 
reasonable people, who would want to know why the unchangeable 
God, who had once pronounced a curse, 
should at any time so amend and alter matters as to supplant 
the curse with a blessing. The messenger states the 
philosophy of the divine plan, "Unto you is born this day a 
Savior, which is Christ [Messiah] the Lord." There we 
have the key to the entire Gospel statement of how God 
could be just and yet be the justifier of sinners who accept 
Jesus. The word "Savior" here signifies life-giver, and how 
beautiful is the thought that as death is the wage of sin, the 
curse upon the race, this Messiah who was born is to be the 
one who will rescue the race from the sentence by giving 
them life again. The explanation of how he would give 
life was not given, nor was it necessary at that time; but now, 
in the light of developments, and with the explanations furnished 
through the Spirit in the New Testament, we see how 
that our Lord's voluntary sacrifice of his life, dying the just 
for the unjust, settled the claims of divine justice against 



Adam and thus incidentally against all who shared his 
sentence. 

Truly the more we see of the divine plan for our salvation, 
which began to take shape in the birth of Jesus, the 
more we feel like shouting with the angelic choir praises to the 
God of heaven, thankfulness for his mercy to the children of 
men. It mattered not that the babe born in Bethlehem was 
the Savior only in prospect, that he could not even be anointed 
to do his work until he reached manhood's estate thirty 
years later; it mattered not that even then it would be necessary 
for him to lay down his life gradually through three 
and a half years of his earthly ministry, to be finished at 
Calvary; it mattered not either that the resurrection was 
still three days after that, and his ascension forty days later, 

R3701 :page 12 

and that the blessing in general would be deferred for nearly 
nineteen centuries thereafter. As the angels could sing 
and rejoice at the first budding of the divine plan of salvation, 
so also can all who have faith in the ultimate outcome 
rejoice with joy unspeakable and give praise to God in the 
highest and to his Son our Lord. 

"SAVED BY HOPE" 

Although nearly nineteen centuries have rolled away 
since that angelic message was delivered, it has not yet been 
fulfilled except in a limited measure by faith to those who 
have the eye of faith and the ears of faith, in all a "little 
flock." But the tidings of great misery for nearly all people 
has been spread abroad in the name of Christ, much to 
the discredit of the divine plan and to the dishonor of the 
divine character. Instead of carrying joy the message has 
very generally carried grief and sorrow, especially to the kind 
hearted and more generously disposed. Indeed we may say 
that no message of the Lord Jesus, either true or false, has 
ever reached all people. Even today, after nineteen centuries 
of propaganda, only a comparatively small portion of 
the human family have ever heard of the only name given 
under heaven and amongst men whereby we must be saved 
—"nor is there salvation in any other."— Acts 4:12. 

What, then, shall we say of the salvation which is 
come to those who have truly accepted Christ as their Savior, 
and who are today rejoicing in him as such, and who by 
faith are seeing the salvation of God begun in their own 
hearts and yet to be fully accomplished under the whole 
heavens? This the Apostle calls the salvation by hope. 
His words are, "We are saved by hope." (Romans 8:24.) 
We are not saved actually; we are still surrounded 
by sin, pain, sighing, crying and dying; the curse is not yet 
rolled away. All that the best of the Lord's people have 
received is salvation by hope, by faith. Yet this anticipation 
of the future salvation, of the resurrection from the dead, of 
a participation in the glory, honor and immortality of the 
divine nature promised to the faithful, is so strong, so clear, 



that those who possess it are enabled to rejoice with joy unspeakable 
and full of glory, even in the midst of trials and 
difficulties and weaknesses and unfavorable conditions incident 
to the curse which still rests upon the race. 

A PROPHECY OF GOOD THINGS 

Yes, the angelic message was a prophecy of good things 
to be accomplished for the Church and the world during the 
Millennial age. The Church is to have the first blessing. 
The first resurrection is to be composed only of the blessed 
and holy who shall live and reign with Christ during the 
Millennium, the thousand years in which Satan shall be 
bound, and when the good influences of truth and righteousness 
shall enlighten the whole earth. The declaration of 
the Scriptures is that the deliverance of the Church will 
come early in the morning of that Millennial day, as the 
prophet declares, "God will help her early in the morning." 
-Psalm 46:5. 

But much as we rejoice in the glorious hopes of the 
Gospel set before us who now see, who now believe, who now 
rejoice with joy unspeakable, we are glad that the divine 
mercy and love are of such lengths and breadths and heights 
and depths as to encompass the whole world of mankind, 
and to provide a blessing for every member of Adam's race 
through him who loved us and bought us with his precious 
blood. 

It will be during the Millennial age that this prophecy 
of the angel will have its fulfilment, and the great Savior 
who has already redeemed us by his sacrifice will stand 
forth as the King, the glorified Messiah, and establish his 
dominion of righteousness in the world for the blessing and 
uplifting of every member of the race. In harmony with 
the words of the Apostle, those will be times of refreshing, 
"times of restitution of all things spoken by the mouth of all 
the holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21.) 
If the Lord had based the hope of the world upon some 
works of merit or righteousness of the world's doing, then 
indeed we might have feared— indeed the more we know of 
the world the less hope we would have. But, on the contrary, 
the Lord has based the entire proposition for the future 
blessing, not upon our worthiness, but upon the worthiness 
and sacrifice of his Son— To you is born a Life-giver, 
which is Messiah the Lord. 

How it adds to our enjoyment of the coming age blessings 
to know that the trials and difficulties of this present Gospel 
age are subject to the divine supervision in the interest of the 
little flock that is now being gathered in advance from amongst 
men— the "elect," the Church. We see how the present 
trials and difficulties are the chiselings and polishings necessary 
to our development in the fruits and graces of the holy 
Spirit in the character-likeness of God's dear Son, our Lord, 
our Hope, our Bridegroom. How joyful the thought that 
soon the elect number called from the world to be the Bride, 
the Lamb's wife, will be completed and enter into her glory. 
How precious the thought that then they shall be privileged 



with their Lord and Master to extend the divine favor of 
blessing and uplift to the world. What higher honor or 
privilege or blessing could possibly come to any? 

THE ANGELS' SONG 

It was after the giving of the message of good tidings 
and great joy by the heavenly one that a host of angels appeared 
to the shepherds, saying, "Glory to God in the highest, 
and on earth peace, good will to men." This, too, is a 
prophecy. It is not yet true, but will be fulfilled in every 

R3701 :page 13 

particular in God's due time, which we believe is now nigh, 
even at the door. Not yet does God receive glory in the 
highest, not yet is there peace amongst men. Quite to the 
contrary. God's name is blasphemed, not only by those who 
vulgarly and in ribald jest take the divine name in vain, and 
not merely by the heathen who worship devils and think 
they are gods, but even by Christian people God's name is 
blasphemed every day. For be it known that blasphemy is 
any dishonorable misrepresentation of another. God be merciful 
to us, for at some time or other every one of us 
doubtless has blasphemed the holy name in this manner— by 
misrepresenting the divine character and divine plan, by picturing 
the God of love and mercy and justice and truth as 
the originator, the planner, the perpetuator of the eternal 
torment of the great mass of his creatures, born in sin and 
shapen in iniquity, born to sin as the sparks to fly upward. 

But the Lord had mercy upon us because we did it ignorantly. 
And we also should have compassion upon others 
who still ignorantly misrepresent our God, and our energies 

R3702 : page 13 

should be continually bent to their assistance, that the eyes 
of their understanding might open more widely to perceive 
the lengths and breadths and heights and depths and know 
the love of God which passeth understanding. 

Noting that peace on earth and good will to men have 
not followed the Savior's birth thus far, and discerning that 
this is a prophecy of what is to be accomplished during the 
Millennium, many have been inclined to change the translation 
of this verse so as to have it read, "On earth peace 
amongst men, in whom he is well pleased." However, by 
thus changing it the statement would not be true, for even 
the Lord's people have no peace on earth. Whatever peace 
they have is in their hearts, and based upon their faith in 
the Lord and in the glorious things which he has promised. 
Our Lord himself and the apostles testified to this, assuring 
us that whosoever in this present time would live godly 
should suffer persecution, that a man's foes would be they of 
his own household, etc. (2 Tim. 3:12; Matt. 10:26.) Let 
us not confuse ourselves nor abridge the testimony of the 
Word, but with the eye of faith look forward to the day of 



Christ in which all these glorious things shall have their fulfilment, 
in which peace shall indeed fill the whole earth with 
the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, bringing divine favor 
and rolling away the curse from the entire groaning creation, 
as pointed out by the Apostle.— Rom. 8:22. 

Not even with the inauguration of the Millennium will 
this prophecy be fulfilled: not until its close, when the human 
family shall have been lifted by the Kingdom regulations 
out of sin, sickness, pain, sorrow and death, up, up to 
all that was lost in Adam— not until then will there indeed 
be glory to God in the highest, not until then will there be 
peace amongst men. Nor are we to understand that the entire 
race will be appreciative of the divine love and favor 
even after they have fully seen the righteousness of God in 
Christ manifested. On the contrary, the Scriptures seem to 
clearly teach that there will be a class who will then prove 
unfit for life eternal, unappreciative of the divine favor, and 
it is with pleasure that we learn that all such shall be utterly 
destroyed from amongst the people in the Second Death. 
Thus eventually, by the close of the Millennium, Satan and 
all wilful wrongdoers having been destroyed, the time will 
come as declared in the Scriptures when all voices in heaven 
and in earth and under the earth shall be heard praising 
God, him that sitteth upon the throne, and the Lamb forever 
and ever. Hosanna! Glory to God in the highest! 
Peace and good will to men! will be the final shout of a redeemed 
race when the great plan of salvation shall have 
been fully outworked according to the divine plan set forth 
in the Scriptures. 

FROM GLORY TO A MANGER. 

The time of our Lord's birth is quite clearly fixed. We 
have gone into the subject in detail in "Dawn" Vol. II., and 
will not here repeat. The notable census made by order of 
Caesar Augustus included the civilized world of that day, 
and according to Jewish custom each family and tribe were 
enrolled therein. Both Joseph and Mary, being of the Davidic 
line, went to the city of David— Bethlehem. The city 
is a small one on a hillside. Nearly all of it appears to good 
advantage in the cut on preceding page. 

The inns or hotels of that land are very different from 
ours: they are neither hotels nor drinking saloons, but entered 
from a court-yard, as in the cut. Various large unfurnished 
rooms are at the service of the traveller, who carries 
with him his wraps, in which he sleeps, and his food and 
utensils for such light housekeeping as he may choose to do. 
Stalls for horses, camels, etc., are provided on the ground 
floor, and in the event of a crowd, as on such a census occasion, 
it is no uncommon thing for people, finding the upper 
large rooms all crowded full, to make themselves nearly as 
comfortable in the stabling department. Thus it came that 
the Lord was ushered into the world, which as the Logos he 
had made (John 1:2), in a most humble manner. 

It was there that the shepherds found the babe, as predicted 
by the angels, and went forth proclaiming the fact; 



but Mary made no boasts but waited for God's due time. 



R3702 : page 14 

GIFTS TO OUR KING. 

--MATTHEW 2:1-12.-JANUARY 14.- 

Golden Text:— "My son, give me thine heart."— Prov. 23:26. 

OUR lesson is concerning the wise men of the East, 

who came seeking the new-born Jesus, the King of 

the Jews, with presents of myrrh, frankincense and 

gold, and doubtless we shall be able to gather from this incident 

some valuable suggestions respecting our obligations to 

the great Messiah, and the propriety of renewing these and 

increasing them now at the beginning of another year. 

The wise men— according to tradition, three in number 
—arrived in Jerusalem and began making inquiries respecting 
the newly-born Jewish King. The news soon spread, and 
the holy city was in commotion because, according to the 
prophets, Messiah, promised for centuries, was due to appear 
about that time; and we read again, "All men were in expectation 
of him." This expectancy naturally would be heightened 
by the coming of the wise men or magi from a far 
country— supposedly Persia— to show homage to Messiah. 
The news spread, and finally reached the royal palace and 
King Herod himself. The latter, doubtless on his own account, 
felt a kind of jealousy toward any being who would 
be likely to share in any measure the royal honors and dignities 
and thus to detract from his own importance. But 
additionally, no doubt, he felt that as the representative of 
Caesar's government, the protege of the Roman Empire, it 
was his duty to see to it that no king should arise in the 
land under his jurisdiction, whose title or claims would in 
any measure conflict with those of the Caesars. 

THE BRIGHT MORNING STAR 

Herod, therefore, sent for the wise men. Feigning a 
deep interest in their quest, he made a critical inquiry of 
them how they knew about Messiah in their far-off country, 
how they knew where to look for the babe. They replied 
that they had seen his star in the east. The eastern magi 
were astrologers, and affected to read in the stars the history 

R3703 : page 14 

of nations and individuals— they were astrologers rather 
than astronomers. To what extent the Lord may have written 
the history of nations and of men in the arrangement of 
the stars, we will not attempt to decide, but assuredly for the 
world in general the starry heavens have been the great book 
of God, as the Psalmist explains, "Night unto night showeth 



knowledge." With the written Word of God in our possession 
now we neither have need of traditions of men nor of 
old wives' fables nor of astrologers' guides, because "we 
have the more sure word of prophecy; whereunto you do 
well that you take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a 
dark place until the day dawn and the day star arise in your 
hearts. "--2 Pet. 1:19. 

Without attempting to determine how much or how little 
truth attaches to astrology, we have the assurance that 
there was a truth connected with the manifestation of a special, 
peculiar star which guided the wise men of the east to 
know of Messiah's birth and to know to which country he 
belonged, so that they came to the capital city of that country. 
Moreover the Lord may have given them some additional 
explanation of the matter, even as he subsequently 
warned them in a dream. Herod cunningly affected to be 
deeply interested in the wise men in their search for Messiah. 
He called the wise men of Judea to assist. These were not 
astrologers, but men learned in the Law and in the prophets 
—chief priests and scribes. Thus he put the wise men of 
Israel into conjunction with the wise men of the east, inquiring 
where the prophets had foretold that the Messiah should 
be born. They promptly answered, "Bethlehem of Judea," 
and for that city, only six miles distant, the eastern magi set 
out, with the promise that they would return again and identify 
to him particularly the babe king and where he might 
be found, ostensibly that the king might also go to worship 
at his feet, but really that he might improve the opportunity 
and use such knowledge for the destruction of the babe 
Jesus. 

En route for Bethlehem the miraculous star which they 
had seen in the far east appeared to them again, apparently 
as a ball of light or of fire travelling near the earth, and 
serving as a guide until they had rejoicingly reached the very 
house and found the babe and his mother. Professor 
Charles A. Young, LL.D., of Princeton University, asserts 
that it is not a rare occurrence for stars to suddenly blaze 
up in the heavens and for a time to be the brightest, and then 
suddenly fade in a year or two; and that such a star was 
observed in 1901. Our thought, however, is that the latter 
was merely the appearance of a star, a bright electrical luminous 
spot. 

WISE MEN OF THE EAST 

"We are informed by Tacitus, by Suetonius and by Josephus 
that there prevailed throughout the entire east, at 
this time, an intense conviction, derived from ancient prophecies, 
that ere long a powerful monarch would arise in Judea 
and gain dominion over the world."— Farrar. 

"Virgil, who lived a little before this, says that a child 
from heaven was looked for, who should restore the Golden 
Age and take away sin."— Jacobus. 

"Confucius had prophesied the appearance of such a 
deliverer; and a deputation of his followers going forth in 
search of him were the means of introducing Buddhism into 



China. "-Abbott. 

"But the clearest of all these prophecies was one by 
Zoroaster. The Nestorians say that Zoroaster was a disciple 
of Jeremiah, from whom he learned about the Messiah and 
talked concerning him to his disciples."— Persian Missionary. 

In this connection we should remember that Daniel, 
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego were at this time princes 
of Persia and intimate with the wise men of that country, 
which was at that time the principal nation of the world. 
It is easy to see how traditions would be handed down 
through that channel, and especially may we suppose that 
Daniel's prophecy respecting the time of Messiah's birth 
would be well known to the disciples of Zoroaster, Persia's 
wise men. Furthermore, there were Jews scattered abroad 
throughout that country who still more or less kept alive the 
thought of Israel's hope for the great Messiah so long 
promised of God, prophesied of as the bringer of blessings 
not only to Israel but through them to all the families of 
the earth. 

R3703 : page 15 

MYRRH, FRANKINCENSE AND GOLD 

God chose as messengers of his good tidings not only 
wise men but reverential men, men of faith; and his choice 
of these messengers from the east to arouse the people of 
Judea and Jerusalem and to be heralds of the great King 
was not an exception to the rule. Although heathen men, 
in the sense of not being of the nation with which God had 
thus far dealt and to whom he had thus far confined his 
gracious promises, they were, nevertheless, good men, reverential 
men, who delighted to know of the coming blessing of 
peace on earth and good will amongst men through whatever 
channel or nationality the Lord should be pleased to find 
his representative and messenger. 

In one respect many of Christendom could learn numerous 
important lessons from these wise Gentiles. No false 
patriotism stood in their way to hinder their appreciation of 
any manifestation of divine favor to the children of men. 
And when they found the Savior they were nothing daunted 
by the fact that his home surroundings were of the humbler 
sort. They worshiped him in three senses of the word: 
(1) They fell before him, prostrated themselves, thus physically 
expressing their reverence. (2) They worshiped him 
in their hearts and with the tongue gave expression to their 
rejoicing and confidence. (3) They opened their treasure-box 
and presented to him three gifts appropriate to royalty: 
the myrrh representing submission, frankincense representing 
praise, gold representing obedience. 

"PRESENT YOUR BODIES LIVING SACRIFICES, HOLY, ACCEPTABLE 
UNTO GOD, YOUR REASONABLE SERVICE." 

The reverent spirit of these noble heathen men who had 
so little light, so little knowledge respecting the great Messiah 



and his work, will bring to our cheeks the blush of 
shame as we reflect that, favored with still brighter light to 
guide us to the Lamb of God, having seen his star in a still 
better and truer sense, having been guided to him by the 
prophecies, having found him not only a babe, but one that 
in prospect would bear our sorrows and carry our griefs 
and make his soul an offering for sin, that we by his 
stripes might be healed, what manner of oblation should 
we pour at the feet of him who loved us and bought us with 
his precious blood? With what deep reverence have we 
bowed the knee, prostrated ourselves, given outward evidence 
through our bodies of full submission to our great King, 
of whom we not only know but of whose gracious provisions 
for us and for the world of mankind we have heard, not 
uncertainly, but with the voice of him who speaketh from 
heaven? Have we offered our myrrh? Have we shown a 
willingness for service even to the extent of bitterness, a joy 
to honor the King to the extent of suffering with him? 
Have we worshiped him in heart, not with an outward form 
of godliness without the power— in other words, have we 
offered him the frankincense of heart adoration, appreciation, 
and gratitude? 

Have we laid at his feet our earthly substance— our 
gold? Have we realized that all that we have and all that 
we are are offerings far too small to be worthy of acceptance 
by the great King Immanuel? Is this our present attitude? 
and will it be our attitude through coming days even 
until the end of the present pilgrimage? 

The Apostle's words, "Present your bodies living sacrifices, 
holy and acceptable unto God, your reasonable service," 
apply not only to the primary consecration of our hearts to 
the Lord, but are, as the Scriptures express it, a covenant of 
sacrifice, an agreement to die daily to self and to be alive 
daily more and more in the Lord's service, to glorify him in 
our bodies and spirits which are his. If this has not been 
our attitude in the past shall it not be our future course? 
Shall we not in any event continue to grow in knowledge, 
to grow in love, in service, in worship and in the privilege of 
laying our little all at the feet of him who is our gracious 
heavenly King, whose Kingdom is so soon to be established 
and who has invited us to sit with him in his throne, to share 
his glory, to be participants as spiritual Israel in the great 
work of pouring out blessings upon the world of mankind, 
every kindred, people, nation and tongue? 

"MY SON, GIVE ME THINE HEART" 

Our Golden Text is well worthy of our remembrance 
here. It is not applicable to sinners, who are not sons in 
any sense of the word. There is a message to sinners, 
namely, a call to repentance, to the forsaking of sin and to 
the acceptance of the justification secured by the precious 
blood. But it is only to those who have repented of sin and 
who are seeking to live a repentant life and so far as possible 
to make restitution for wrongs of the past, and who are 
trusting to the precious blood of Christ— reconciled to God 



through the death of his Son— it is to these that this Golden 
Text is applicable, "My son, give me thine heart." 

When we give our hearts it includes all that we have 
and are in the highest and noblest and fullest sense— that 
which was illustrated by the three gifts of the wise men is 
all represented in this brief statement, "Give me thine 
heart." Whoever gives his heart to the Lord fully and unreservedly, 
gives his body, gives his worship and reverence 
and praise, and gives his earthly treasure, time, talents, influence, 
money— all— to be used in joyful service for the glory 
of the King. 

R3704 : page 15 

To those who have never taken this step we urge a 
prompt acceptance, irrespective of the gracious hopes we 
have of a transcendent reward of glory, honor, immortality. 
As the Apostle declares, it is our reasonable service. Reasonable 
people ought to be glad of the knowledge that God is 
willing to accept our service, and of the opportunity to present 
themselves under the covering of the merit of the dear 
Redeemer's robe of righteousness. 

To those who have already accepted the Lord's favor, 
who have already presented their bodies living sacrifices, 
who have already given the Lord their hearts, we urge a remembrance 
of the fact that the sacrifice once put upon the 
altar must remain there, and that the longer it remains the 
more joyful should be the service, the more appreciated 
every opportunity for sacrifice, the more thankful should be 
the heart and the more rich should be the experience in the 
peace of God which passeth all understanding, ruling in our 
hearts and preparing us more and more through the graces 
of the Spirit for the glorious things which God hath in reservation 
for them that so love him and so reverence his Son. 



page 17 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVII. JANUARY 15, 1906 No. 2 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 19 

Three Churches Unite in Canada 19 

For Great Church Union 19 

The Passover Memorial, April 8, 1906 20 

The Satisfaction of Justice 22 

"It Behooved Christ to Suffer" 22 

Reconciliation Through His Death 23 

Three Views of the Sacrifice 24 

"Our Sufficiency is of Christ" 25 

The Mediatorial Work 26 



Time in the Satisfaction of Justice 27 

"Holy, Harmless, Perfect" 28 

Preparation for the Kingdom 30 

page 18 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



CLUBBING WITH THE "DISPATCH." 



Many of our readers, desirous of having Brother Russell's 
Sunday discourses regularly throughout this year are subscribing 
for the Dispatch, which proposes to continue their publication, 
reporting them still more fully. The price of the Dispatch 
is 2c per issue or $6.00 per year. This their lowest rate 
is the lowest price at which they permit us or others to receive 
subscriptions. But as we get a clubbing or wholesale rate ($3) 
we give TOWER subscribers the benefit of it, thus: For the six 
dollars we include one year's subscription to the WATCH 
TOWER ($1) and anything we furnish to the amount of two 
dollars more. If you have already sent us this year's subscription 
to the WATCH TOWER send only $5. Dispatch subscriptions 
can not be received from places where they have an agent. 



OUR CROWDED MAILS 



Our mails are very heavy— some days as many as 350 letters. 
During the holidays we did our very best to fill the orders 
contained in these, accurately and promptly, but it taxed 
our capacity everyway. If errors occurred we will cheerfully 
do our best to rectify them if reported. Our Bible House helpers 
are perfect in intention, but not actually perfect. Each does 
his best to serve your interests, gladly— as unto the Lord. 

We have been unable to reply as we would have liked to 
all of your kind letters, telegrams and cards. Please accept 
our greetings of last issue in lieu of personal letters. You will 
be glad to know that all the indications for the new year 1906 
are favorable. Never before have we experienced so general 
widespread zeal for the cause and its service as now. 



R3704 : page 19 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THREE CHURCHES UNITE IN CANADA 



PRESBYTERIANS, CONGREGATIONALISTS AND METHODISTS 
AGREE 

Toronto, Ont— The central committee, composed of representatives 
from the Presbyterian, Methodist and Congregational 
churches throughout the Dominion, have agreed upon 
a code of doctrines that will unify the three denominations 
into one great Church, which, it is proposed, should be known 
as the "United Church of Canada." The revised confession 
of faith of the American Presbyterian Church will be used. 
The new Church is to be governed by the "General Conference," 
after the Methodist form, with a president as the chief 
officer. Below is to be a council, after the Congregational 
idea, with a chairman at the head. The next body is to be 
a "Presbytery," governed by a moderator. The plan will be 
submitted to the several denominations throughout Canada 
for approval, which it is expected to receive. 

FOR GREAT CHURCH UNION 



Concord, N.H.— A number of the Episcopal clergymen 
of the diocese of New Hampshire have made preliminary arrangements 
for the formation of an association which will 
have for its ultimate object the union of the Anglican Church 
with the Orthodox Church of Russia and other ancient 
churches of the East. The organization is the outgrowth of 



the thanksgiving service at Christ Church, Portsmouth, which 
followed the signing of the treaty of peace between Russia 
and Japan, and at which priests of the Episcopal and Russian 
churches officiated. The new organization will follow the 
lines of the "Eastern Church Association" of the Church of 
England and will have branches in all dioceses of the Episcopal 
Church in this country, if the plans of the promoters 
are successful. It is said that within a half dozen years the 
relations between the Russian and Episcopal churches have 
been growing closer, but until the thanksgiving evensong 
held at Portsmouth, there had been no general participation 
in one service by both Russian and Episcopal priests. 



Items such as the above quoted in these columns are 
not thereby endorsed. We print them as news— as showing 
the fulfilment of prophecy. We could more nearly endorse 
the following article from the "New York Tribune": 

THE INTER-CHURCH CONFERENCE 

Cooperation on a far-reaching scale seems to have been 
the main object of the recent Inter-Church Conference on the 
Federation of American Churches, held in New York city, 
and the eminent men and delegates of the conference, with 
hardly a single exception, predicted, as the result of Christian 
unity and denominational fellowship the ushering in 
upon the world of a reign of universal peace and righteousness, 
in fact, the setting up of the Kingdom of God. 

The writer notes that this most excellent state of affairs 
is to be brought about by potent forces and activities introduced 
in the realm of civil law, and using "the gateway of 
politics." No doubt those who are so enthusiastic for a vital 
unity agreeable to all sects, for a confederated power that 
shall reach to and be felt "in all Christendom," are well 
meaning; still, it must seem to some like only an iridescent 
dream; an attempt to reorganize society and introduce a 
"new order of things" by and through the aid of the civic 
power, instead of the apostolic process of the "new birth" 
and the operation of those powers which belong exclusively 
to the spiritual. 

One is led to inquire whether the proposed federation 
of all the churches into a substantial organization that shall 
make itself felt in the religious, the social and the business 
worlds is not, after all, a Church "trust." And if a Church 
"trust" will not its methods be something after the order of 
the methods of the great trusts and combines of the financial 
world? Will it not find a way to do away with competitors 
or those who do not believe in its principles and refuse to 
cooperate in its purposes? 

Surely it would be but a step to find the heretics, and 
likewise find a way to punish them. And whoever ponders 
the history of the fourth century and studies the acts and 
words of the great religious councils of those early days must 
see in the recent congress of religionists in New York an exact 



parallel; and the significance of a movement that 

will lead, as was clearly indicated by several of the speakers, 

to a world religion, must not be under-estimated. 

Back there, there was a cooperation and a federation on 
a magnificent scale. And the sure result was the ushering 
in of the scenes of the Dark Ages. It was a minority that 
lighted up the splendid gardens of Nero for the chariot races, 
their bodies soaked in petroleum, providing fuel for the lurid 
flames: it was a minority that underwent the tortures of the 
thumb-screw, the rack and the fagot, that endured the Spanish 
Inquisition and the exquisite punishments of a praying 
Torquemada rather than yield "the faith." It was the 
majority, the cooperative majority, that defined the civil and 
religious duties of man and provided punishments to fit the 
crime. 

R3704 : page 20 

Shall history repeat itself? We hope not. But let 
this federation or combination of all churches pursue its 
course to the last analysis, and we tremble for the results. 
Let ministers of the gospel strive for forgiveness of sin and 
regeneration, and legislators attend strictly to the business 
of providing punishment for crime. And let a wide distinction 
ever be made between sin and crime. There will 
then be little likelihood of religious persecutions. 

In the name of liberty to worship God "according to 
the dictates of one's own conscience," I want to enter a public 
protest against a federation or organization of churches 
that seeks to use the civil power to attain an end that allows 
only of spiritual methods, and to recommend to all the 
study of the life and trials of Roger Williams, the hanging 
of the Quakers, the whipping of the Anabaptists, the story of 
Daniel in the lions' den and the Hebrew worthies in the 
fiery furnace. 

All this was accomplished by a religious federation, 
which is only another name for a Church trust. Instead of 
a demand for a world religion that compels, let there be a 
plea for a genuine religion that implores. 
-JOHN S. WIGHTMAN. 

THE WORLD'S PERPLEXITY. 



On the opposite page we copy from "Doctor" Dowie's 
publication a cartoon which fairly well represents the present 
situation of "Christendom." But should not Doctor Dowie 
also be represented in the crowd, shouting, "I am for myself, 
as 'First Apostle,' Elijah,' and the 'Messenger of the Covenant" 
It would seem so ! 

Possibly some unfriendly critic may say, "Yes; and you 
are another who is adding to the Babel of confusion, forming 
a new division, 'the sect everywhere spoken against,' the 
no-name sect." 

Not so, we reply. It is not we but the Truth which 



causes the division, even as our Master foretold and exemplified: 
"I am not come to send peace, but a sword." As 
present truth did a separating work between the wheat and 
the chaff in the Jewish "harvest," so now present truth will 
be used of the Lord to separate the "wheat" from the "tares" 
in the present "harvest" of this age. 

It is true that our quiet, effective presentation of God's 
Word and plan does cause commotion and a great din, as all 
sects and parties at once shout against the faithful presentations 
of God's Word of "good tidings of great joy unto all 
people," as presented in MILLENNIAL DAWN. But that is 
Babylon's noise, not ours. It is their effort to obscure the 

R3706 : page 20 

light of the dawning new dispensation. It is their unavailing 
effort to drown the voice of the great Shepherd, who is 
now calling his true sheep out of every earthly pen to himself 
and the liberties and rest and food of the true fold. 

We preach not ourself but Christ. We substantiate 
nothing except by his Word. We make no laws, formulate no 
creed, deprive no sheep of his full liberty in Christ; but 
merely on every question quote the Word of the Lord, through 
the apostles and prophets. We boast nothing, claim nothing 
of ourself. We are content to serve the Lord and his flock 
to the best of our ability— exacting no tithes, no "honor of 
men," no confession of authority, no compensation; hoping 
merely for the love of the Lord and of those who are his 
children and have his Spirit. 

So far from forming or desiring to form a new sect, we 
ignore all sectarian systems and their claimed authority; we 
recognize only the "one Lord, one Faith and one Baptism" 
of the Scriptures and fellowship as a "brother" every person of 
decent morals who confesses faith in the "redemption through 
the blood of Christ," and especially all of this class who profess 
a full consecration to the Lord's will and services- 
whatever sect they may be in, or outside of all. 

The word "Catholic" signifies general or universal. We 
know of Greek Catholics, Roman Catholics, Anglican Catholics, 
etc., but we know of no other company of Christians 
which recognizes every Christian in the whole world in the 
same complete sense that we do, as stated foregoing. Hence 
to us the term Catholic, or Universal, most fitly belongs. 

Our Lord's petition for his "members"— "that they all 
may be one even as thou, Father, and I are one," was never 
meant to apply to sects and parties as is being attempted 
by the Federation movement now in progress. The Father 
and the Son are one in a very different sense from that. 
On the contrary, we occupy a position to which every true 
child of God can come if he chooses. And the best, the 
truest of all the sects and of those outside all sects are now 
being gathered to the Lord and to us, and all truly the 
Lord's in faith and in practice. 



R3706 : page 20 

THE PASSOVER MEMORIAL, APRIL 8, 1906 

FOR the benefit of our readers in foreign lands we make 
early announcement of the date for the celebration of 
the death of our Passover Lamb. Again we have the 
choice of two dates. All almanacs to which we have access 
show the date for the new moon after the spring equinox to 
be March 24th. If we calculate from that date, the Memorial 
night of the 13th of Nisan would fall on April 6th. On the 
other hand all the almanacs, so far as we are aware, show 
that the moon will not reach its full until April 9th. As 
we have already pointed out, the moon in the Scriptures is 
the symbol of the Jewish nation, and the intention evidently 
was to represent that the full measure of Israel's opportunity 
and test was reached at the time of our Lord's crucifixion, 
and that from that time the light of that nation began to wane. 

Unable to account for the discrepancy, or to see how it 
would require sixteen days for a new moon to reach its full, 
we made inquiry of the Allegheny Observatory astronomers, 
who seemed unable to account for the matter and merely confirmed 
the facts as given in the almanacs. They in turn 
referred us to the United States Naval Observatory at 
Washington, D.C., from whom also we received confirmation 
of the almanac dates, but they could give no explanation of 
the peculiarity of the discrepancy— why on this occasion it 
requires sixteen days for the moon to reach its full, while 
ordinarily it requires fourteen days. 

U.S. Naval Observatory, 
MR. C. T. RUSSELL, Washington, D.C. 

SIR,— I am in receipt of your communication of the 3 1 st 
ult. in which you state that you find in some 1906 almanacs the 
statement made that a new moon appears March 24, 6.52 p.m., 
and that it fulls April 9, 1.12 a.m., and also that it occurs to 
you that there must be some discrepancy in this, as the time 
would amount to 15 days and six hours. 

In reply I beg to advise you that the data given above are 

R3706 : page 22 

correct, the time being given in eastern standard time. By reason 
of the great eccentricity of the moon's orbit it not infrequently 
occurs that the time between the two above-mentioned 
lunations exceeds 15 days. 

Very respectfully, 

WALTER S. HARSHMAN, 
Professor of Mathematics, U.S.N., Director Nautical Almanac. 

Although we went to so much particularity to ascertain 
exactly the proper date for the celebration of the Memorial 
we do not wish to give the impression that the exact date is 
of importance. We are not under the Law, but under grace. 
Our observation of the Memorial Supper is a privilege and 
opportunity rather than an obligatory command. The principal 
thing would seem to be that we have a uniform time 



for its celebration and that we celebrate it with the right 
thought in mind, viz., as a memorial of the fulfilment of the 
type of the Passover lamb with the death of Jesus, the Lamb 
of God, the ransom price for the world. Christ our Passover 
is slain for us, therefore let us keep the feast. This and not 
something else we do in remembrance of him, and in confirmation 
of our covenant to be broken with him and to give 
our lives with his in the sacrificial services open to us as 
members of his body in the present time. We conclude that 
the most appropriate time for the celebration of the Memorial 
will be Sunday night, April 8th. The Jews adopt this 
same reckoning, celebrating Tuesday, April 10th, as the 
beginning of the Passover feast or fifteenth of Nisan. On 
this same reckoning the fourteenth of Nisan would be Monday, 
April 9th, and according to Jewish reckoning that day 
begins the previous evening, namely, Sunday evening, April 
8th. On this date, therefore, let us unitedly celebrate the 
Memorial Supper. 



R3706 : page 22 

THE SATISFACTION OF JUSTICE. 

"That God might be just, and the justifier of 
him that believeth on Jesus."— Rom. 3:26. 

EVOLUTIONISTS, and all those who deny the 
Scriptural narrative of Genesis, confirmed by 
the New Testament records— that man was 
created in the image and likeness of God, and that he 
fell from this perfection through disobedience into 
depravity, the fallen and imperfect condition— all such 
deny that justice needed any satisfaction. Their claim 
is that God is the author of all the sin and imperfection 
which we see about us, in that he created us in the 
blemished condition, but one remove from the brute, 
and that whatever improvement over the brute we have 
made is to our credit as a race, hence that neither as a 
race nor as individuals have we done anything to require 
divine condemnation. There could, therefore, 
be no depravity, and consequently no justice in either 
requiring or providing a redemption from the fall and 
condemnation— if, as they hold, neither of these ever 
took place. 

The Scriptural proposition is the reverse: that 
man, created perfect and upright in the divine image, 
was responsible for his conduct, and that his disobedience 
justly merited his loss of life; that the divine 
sentence, "Dying thou shalt die," is a just and reasonable 
one; that Adam's posterity, inheriting from him 
the weaknesses and frailties of the fallen state, have 
more or less increased continually the depraved constitutions, 
the variations which we see all about us in 
the physical, mental and moral conditions. As none 



of the race is perfect, none is worthy of eternal life 
under the divine arrangement, and the death sentence 
rests upon all. Thus the Apostle explains the matter, 
"By one man's disobedience sin entered into the world, 
and death as the result of sin, and thus death passed 
upon all men because all are sinners."— Rom. 5:12. 

The Bible proposition is that, since the death sentence 
is against every member of our race, none of 
them could justly be released from that sentence without 
a substitute, a ransom, an atonement for the sin, 
a satisfaction for the penalty. This is so universally 
the testimony of the entire Scriptures that time and 
space would fail us to quote the many instances both 
in the types and the literal statements on the subject. 
Nor is this necessary, for all Bible students are familiar 
with the numerous references to the Redeemer, the 
ransom, the sacrifice for sins, the "shedding of blood, 
without which there is no remission." 

"IT BEHOOVED CHRIST TO SUFFER. "--Luke 24:46. 

We see, then, that from the Bible standpoint it 
was absolutely necessary that as by a man [Adam] 
came death, by a man also [Christ] should come the 
resurrection of the dead. (1 Cor. 15:21.) So then it 
is evident that in the divine order there could be no 
resurrection without the ransom sacrifice being first 
given. This may seem to some to be contradicted by 
the facts, as they point us to certain individuals brought 
out of death before Christ came, and others awakened 
by him before he had paid the ransom price. But we 
reply that these exceptional cases were not violations 
of the rule in any degree, for these awakened ones were 
not really made alive. 

R3707 : page 22 

From the divine standpoint the whole world is in 
a dying and dead condition, and those who were awakened 
from unconscious death to a small measure of 
life common to the world were not resurrected, were 
not raised out of death, but were still in death, still 
under the curse, still under the sentence, "Dying thou 
shalt die." They were merely temporarily resuscitated. 
To have resurrected them would have meant more than 
an awakening: it would have meant that after their 
awakening they should be raised completely out of 
death into the fulness of life— such, for instance, as 
Adam enjoyed before the penalty came upon him. The 
Scriptures assure us that Christ was the first who 
should rise from the dead, and that his brethren, the 
Church, will be next in order, and that none others 
can be fully resuscitated, none others can have life in 
the absolute sense until the Church shall have received 
its higher life through the first resurrection. 



MANY CONFOUND SCRIPTURAL TERMS. 

When it is seen that the penalty against sin is not 
dying but death, and that it is not death for a moment 
or a year or a million years even, but death everlastingly, 
then it will be clearly seen that in order to have 
any future life it was necessary that the penalty pronounced 
by divine justice against our race should be 
cancelled before it could be blessed with the life eternal 
which the Lord has promised to those who believe and 
obey him. 

In referring to so complex a subject, the Scriptures, 
of course, use quite a variety of terms, and the 
difficulty of many is that they do not recognize the divine 

R3707 : page 23 

plan with sufficient clearness to distinguish between the 
shades of meaning properly attaching to these words. 
For instance, we have the words ransom, redemption, 
sin-offering, atonement, reconciliation, etc. It is true 
that these are all related to this great subject, but it 
is equally true that they do not mean the same thing, 
that they touch the subject from different standpoints. 
Only by gaining a clear Scriptural view of the whole 
matter of sin and atonement for sin and reconciliation 
of the sinner to God can we hope to have this entire 
matter clear and distinct before our minds, with the 
proper meaning attached to each word— the proper 
thought intended by the Lord in these words, which 
explain his plan. 

JUSTICE, WISDOM, LOVE AND POWER. 

Most people are so unmethodical in their own 
thinking, in their conduct of their own lives in respect 
to themselves and in respect to their dealings with 
others, that it is difficult for them to think of the heavenly 
Father, who is absolutely perfect in every quality 
of his being, and who preserves each of his qualities 
intact without allowing them to interfere the one with 
the other as being systematic and methodical in 
the administration of his government. Thus, with 
the Almighty, justice is declared to be the very 
foundation of his throne, his government. Nothing 
can ever be done by the Almighty that can 
violate his justice. Whatever his wisdom and love 
and power may plan must all be brought into full accord 
and alignment with this fundamental element of 
his character, of his government— justice. He cannot 
exercise love at the expense of his justice, but only in 
harmony with it. We must remember that in thinking 
of the Almighty we cannot measure him by ourselves, 
because we are fallen creatures, and the image of God 
originally granted to our race has been largely lost; 
hence only as we measure the Almighty by his own 



statements, his own declarations, can we get proper 
conceptions of the harmonies of his character. 

The divine word is immutable, unchangeable, as 
the Scriptures declare; hence the divine sentence of 
death was an unchangeable one. True, God might have 
put a different sentence upon our race. He could have 
sentenced us as a race to be cut off in death up to a 
certain time, decreeing that then the penalty should 
be considered as being paid in full and all the culprits 
be released. In that event no ransom sacrifice for sinners 
would have been necessary. But God purposely 
made his plan as it is in order to furnish the necessity 
for a Redeemer, and in order that his Son might have 
the honor of manifesting his loyalty and obedience to 
the Father even unto death, and in order that this 
obedient one might then be glorified before angels and 
men, exalted to the highest place next to the Father. 
Likewise the Lord purposed that a certain little flock 
should be selected from the world to be the Bride of 
Christ, and thus to be, through relationship to Christ, 
members of the seed of Abraham and heirs of the great 
Oath-Bound Covenant made to Abraham, joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ their Lord in the inheritance of the 
Millennial Kingdom which is to bless all the families of 
the earth. 

THE DIVINE PROGRAM. 

As it was optional with the Almighty what the 
penalty should be for Adam's sin so long as it was in 
line with justice, so also it was optional with him how 
that penalty should be met so long as no principle of 
justice would be violated. He has chosen a method 
which most wonderfully exhibits divine wisdom, divine 
love and divine power. He has purposed the reconciliation 
of the world to himself through Christ (2 Cor. 5: 19.) 
This reconciliation is in two parts: first, he arranged 
for the reconciling of his own justice, the meeting 
of the demands of his own justice; and, second, 
provided that those who should come to a knowledge 
of this gracious arrangement might turn their hearts 
from sin to righteousness, to God, to be reconciled to 
him, to submit themselves to his will, to come back 
into harmony with him, forsaking sin. 

So far as the world is concerned this reconciliation 
is still future— God is not yet reconciled to the world, 
and the world is not yet reconciled to God. That the 
world is not in a reconciled condition needs no argument 
in proof; that God is not reconciled to the world 
can be equally substantiated by the Scriptural statements, 
which declare that only believers have yet escaped 
the "condemnation which is on the world." The 
world is represented as still being aliens and strangers 
and foreigners, without God, and having no hope. 
(Eph. 2:12.) The curse is still represented as being 
against the world, but the promise is given us that by 



and by, when the divine plan shall have been unfolded 

still further, the time will come when there shall be no 

more curse, no more sighing, no more crying, no more 

dying, because the former things shall have passed 

away. (Rev. 21:4.) So long, therefore, as divine condemnation, 

the curse, the sentence of death, rests 

against the world, it is evident that God is not yet 

reconciled to the world nor the world to him. 

RECONCILIATION THROUGH HIS DEATH. 

The Apostle assures us that we (true believers) 
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. That 
is, Christ before we were born effected a work for believers 
on account of which they are no longer reckoned 
a part of the world nor under the world's condemnation. 
We have escaped the condemnation which is 
upon the world, we are justified toward God by his 
grace through the blood accepted by us in faith. Because 
of this reconciliation, this justification, the Lord 
counts us as holy, ignoring and covering from his sight 
all the blemishes and weaknesses we have received 
through heredity. And when such justified ones present 
their bodies living sacrifices to the Lord's will and 
service, they are acceptable, the Apostle tells us. 

This class throughout this Gospel age have experienced 
the first step of regeneration, namely, the 
begetting of the holy Spirit; the second step, the birth, 
to the faithful, comes in the first resurrection, when 
like our Lord we shall be born from the dead as his 
brethren, under another figure his body members, under 
another figure his Bride and joint-heirs. To this class, 
to whom divine justice is already reconciled, and who 
are already reconciled to God in that they have given 
up their wills to him and are seeking to walk after the 
Spirit— to this class the Apostle declares God has "committed 
the ministry of reconciliation."— 2 Cor. 5:18. 

That is to say, all such are recognized as God's 
ambassadors in the world, and are commissioned to 
tell the good tidings in the world in accord with our 
text, that God, while still just and without violation of 
his own justice, is able to justify those who believe in 
Jesus, because Jesus by the grace of God tasted death 
for every man, and gave the ransom price in his great 
sacrifice finished at Calvary. But while we are thus 

R3707 : page 24 

God's ambassadors telling the story, the Lord assures 
us that not all will hear it— that only a certain class 
have ears to hear the message, and that only those who 
have faith to believe the message can receive the blessing 
which we announce. These who now believe and 
enter into rest through faith are but a few, "not many 
wise, not many great, not many learned hath God 
chosen," but "chiefly the poor of this world, rich in 



faith, to be heirs of the kingdom"— a "little flock."— 
1 Cor. 1:26; Jas. 2:5; Luke 12:32. 

DECLARING THAT GOD IS RECONCILED. 

This ministry of reconciliation which consecrated 
believers are now privileged to engage in as members 
of the body of Christ, as his representatives, is a costly 
ministry or service. Although the message is good, the 
darkness hateth the light, and the light-bearers, we are 
assured, must expect to suffer persecution, must walk 
in the footsteps of the Captain of their Salvation. Those 
who will not take up their cross to follow him cannot be 
counted in as his ambassadors. The trials, the difficulties, 
the oppositions, the persecutions encountered 
are all parts of the test which the Lord requires of 
these, as demonstrating their loyalty to him and to the 
principles of justice and mercy and love— represented 
in him and his laws. 

However, the Lord has a provision for the world— 
those now deaf and blind— in the next age, and the 
divine arrangement is that those who now suffer because 
of their loyalty to the Lord and because of their pleasure 

R3708 : page 24 

in the privileges of ambassadorship, shall be the 

divine representatives before the world in the coming 

age. The conditions will then be so changed that these 

ambassadors and their message will no longer be misunderstood. 

The special testings and trials of the 

narrow way will by that time have selected all the 

elect, the Bride of Christ. Then the way and glorious 

opportunities will open before the world, that all may 

have the eyes of their understanding opened wide and 

their ears unstopped, that they may know positively 

respecting divine wisdom, justice, love and power, and 

that these are all operating through Christ for the blessing 

of all the families of the earth. That period is 

called the "day of Christ" in contrast to the present 

period, which is represented as being the night of sin, 

under the darkness and influence of the prince of this 

world, Satan. 

"In that day" the work of reconciliation will go 
grandly forward, for undoubtedly the great majority 
of mankind, as soon as the curse shall be removed, as 
soon as the difficulties and obstructions to faith shall 
be out of the way, will be glad to know of opportunities 
for coming back into harmony with their Creator. And 
then all the willing and obedient shall be uplifted to 
full perfection of life, to full restitution to all that was 
lost, with added blessings, while the wilfully disobedient 
or goat class, followers of the example and spirit 
of Satan, will with him be destroyed in the Second 
Death. 



CHURCH AND WORLD DISTINCT. 

From the foregoing all should be able to see how 
distinctly separate in the divine plan are the Church 
and the world— that atonement, reconciliation, has already 
been effected for the Church, for believers, for 
the household of faith and for none others, but that 
the world is to have a rolling away of the curse in fullest 
measure as an outcome of the great redemption work 
of Christ— in God's due time. 

If, now, we have the matter clearly before our 
minds— if, looking into the divinely appointed types 
of the Old Testament and their corroborations in the 
New Testament, we find that God distinctly outlined 
these separate dealings with the Church and with the 
world, our faith and obedience and joy in the Lord will 
be increased. We have already set this matter forth 
in detail in a pamphlet entitled Tabernacle Shadows of 
the Better Sacrifices. All of the interested doubtless 
possess it; and any too poor to purchase may have it 
free, on application. In it we call attention to the fact 
that the great and important event in Israel's history 
known as the Day of Atonement typified, illustrated 
the whole work of this Gospel age. 

The sin offerings of that typical Day of Atonement 
were two, first the bullock, second the goat. The bullock 
represented our Lord Jesus, the goat represented 
those who walk in his steps, the little flock. The sacrifice 
of the bullock was for a specific purpose and effected 
that purpose; the sacrifice of the goat of the sin offering 
was for a different purpose and effected that purpose. 
The bullock with its fatness well represented the man 
Christ Jesus in his perfection sacrificed on our behalf; 
the lean, wayward goat with little fat well represented 
the leanness, the poverty, the natural unfitness of the 
Church to be associated with her Lord and to present 
herself a living sacrifice with him upon the altar, to have 
fellowship in his sufferings, that in due time she might 
have fellowship also in the glories that are to follow 
in the Kingdom. 

THE PRIEST SACRIFICED THE BULLOCK. 

Be it noted that our Lord Jesus was typified both 
by the bullock and the priest; that the bullock represented 
him as the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself 
a ransom for all; that the priest represented the new 
mind, the holy Spirit, by which our Lord was begotten 
again at the moment of his consecration. During the 
three and a half years of our Lord's ministry he was 
the priest, and his body was the sacrifice, reckoned 
dead. In the type the priest went immediately into the 
Holy of the Tabernacle, which represented his standing 
before God as now no longer a man but a New Creature. 
The first vail represented his consecration to death, and 
his rising on the other side of it to newness of life as a 



spirit being begotten of the holy Spirit. 

As a "New Creature" our Lord spent the three 
years and a half of his ministry in the holy, enlightened 
by the light of the golden candlestick, divine truth, fed 
by the shew bread, the divine promises and blessing, 
while he himself ministered at the golden altar, offering 
up his two handsfull of incense upon the fire, the fragrance 
penetrating beyond the veil, the second veil, into 
the Most Holy, as a cloud resting above the Ark of the 
Covenant, the Mercy Seat. That offering of the incense 
by the priest in the Holy represents to us the 
light in which our heavenly Father viewed his Son and 
his offering of himself in the trials and difficulties of 
his life during the three and a half years of his consecration. 
As a whole it was sweet incense to the Lord, a 
fragrant incense, holy and acceptable. 

THREE VIEWS OF THE SACRIFICE. 

At the same time that the incense was being offered 
in the Holy the fat was being offered on the brazen 
altar in the Court, and those who saw the fat consumed 
upon the altar and how rapidly it was consumed because 
of the fatness could appreciate that a great and 
fat sacrifice was offered to the Lord. Those in the Court 

R3708 : page 25 

who thus beheld our Lord's sacrifice from the human 

standpoint were believers, those in sympathy with him, 

the apostles and others. But there was still another 

class who looked to Jesus and who saw his daily sacrifice 

and who viewed his course in a different light— the 

Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, who were in opposition 

to him. To these his very sacrifices spoke foolishness, 

they were a stench in their nostrils, and their 

standpoint of view is also represented in the type by 

the burning outside the camp of the hoofs, horns, entrails, 

hide, etc., of the bullock. Here we have the 

three-fold view of our Lord's sacrifice: that of his opposers, 

that of his followers and that of the Father. 

When our Lord died all three of these fires, so to speak, 

were finished, his incense was all offered, the fat was all 

consumed, the world's detestation of his good works, 

the hatred with which they of the darkness hated him 

who was of the light was at an end— he troubleth them 

no more. 

BEYOND THE SECOND VAIL. 

The next step of the priest was to pass under the 
second veil. This represented our Lord's death at 
Calvary. He was under that veil parts of three days 
and rose on the other side the veil, a perfect spirit 
being, born of the Spirit. And it was only a few days 
thereafter that he ascended on high and approached 



the Mercy Seat, there to appear in the presence of God 

for us, as the Scriptures declare. Bear in mind that he 

did not appear for the world but for us, for believers. 

He is not the world's advocate before the Father. We 

have an advocate with the Father, he is our representative, 

he now speaks for us. (1 Jno. 2:1.) In the type 

this is shown by the statement that the priest sprinkled 

the blood upon the Mercy Seat and before the Mercy 

Seat in the shape of a cross, the head of the cross being 

on the Mercy Seat, the lower end of it pointing and extending 

toward the veil. 

The Apostle tells us that Christ offered up his own 
blood, but by this we do not understand him to mean 
that any of the literal blood of Jesus was taken into 
heaven, but rather as the blood shed represented the 
sacrificed life of the Lord, so in the antitype our Lord 
presented before the Father the evidences of his death, 
applying a measure of that benefit, a measure of the 
merit of his sacrifice on behalf of the Church, his body, 
and all the household of faith, but none of it on behalf 
of the world, none of it outside the household of faith. 
This is clearly shown in the type, for the priest, we are 
told, made an offering for himself and his house. His 
house, the Levites, typified the household of faith, himself 
represented his sons the underpriests, and in the 
antitype represented the Church, the members of the 
body of Christ under Jesus as the Head, as it is written, 
"God gave Jesus to be the Head over the Church, 
which is his body." 

The statement of the type is most explicit: that 
the atonement made for this sacrifice, by the sprinkling 
of the blood of the bullock, was an atonement not 
for all the people but merely for a limited, special class 
of them, all belonging to one tribe, the Levites, who 
represent here the household of faith. (Leviticus 16:6,17.) 
It will be noticed that this is in full, 
in absolute accord with what we have already seen, 
to the effect that the reconciliation has not yet reached 
the world but merely believers, and that the world 
still, as the Apostle says, lieth in the wicked one. (1 John 5:19.) 
The whole world lies under the curse, the 
sentence; they are not yet released, the curse has not 
yet been rolled away. Only we, only believers, have 
escaped the condemnation; only we have passed from 
death unto life; only believers have gotten free from 
the curse, the sentence, and are no longer aliens, strangers, 
foreigners from God's covenant promises. 

SACRIFICING THE LORD'S GOAT. 

Now note the second sacrifice. After finishing the 
one part of atonement, as already noted, the priest continued 
the work of the day's atonement and made 
another offering, namely, the goat. It is not true that 
Christ after having gone into heaven, into the Most 
Holy, came out again, sacrificing himself again as a man, 



making another sacrifice for sins in his own person. 
Indeed he had only the one human nature, and when 
it was sacrificed the work of Calvary was finished. 
Hence this second sin offering is not another offering of 
the man Christ Jesus, but it is an offering of his body. 
Nevertheless, in harmony with the divine plan, Christ 

R3709 : page 25 

accepts and the Father accepts all those who come 

unto the Father by him through faith in his blood, and 

who in harmony with the call present their bodies 

living sacrifices. These all are counted as members of 

the body of Christ; so the work of this Gospel age has 

been the sacrificing of the members of the body of 

Christ. It was the Head that did this sacrificing as 

represented in the type, as represented also in the 

figure of baptism. We give ourselves to the Lord, we 

receive his mind, and in proportion as his spirit dwells 

in us richly, in that proportion we are glad to be "living 

sacrifices." Thus by his spirit upon us he wills in us 

"to will and to do the Father's good pleasure." And 

the Father's good pleasure respecting us is the same as 

respecting the Only Begotten, namely, that we should 

show our devotion to his will, to his plan, to his righteousness, 

by such faithfulness as will bring us in the present 

time tribulation and cost us self-sacrifice, even as a 

similar course cost our Lord his life. 

Not that all the members of the body of Christ 
will necessarily suffer on the cross, nor that they will 
all necessarily suffer some public, shameful death. On 
the contrary, in the figure of the Scriptures all the 
members of the body of Christ are beheaded, not literally, 
for not even the apostles so suffered death, but 
figuratively beheaded— each must lose his own self-will, 
his own headship, and must become members of 
the body of Christ, knowing no head, no will but the 
will of his Lord. All who thus sacrifice their wills are 
accepted of the Lord as members of his body, and these 
are represented in the sacrifice of the goat, which he 
has been offering as a part of himself, as a part of his 
own sacrifice throughout this Gospel age. 

"OUR SUFFICIENCY IS OF CHRIST." 

The making of these two sin offerings does not 
imply that the first offering was insufficient. On the 
contrary, the Scriptures assure us that the whole merit 
of redemption resides in the Lamb of God, whose sacrifice 
takes away the sin of the world. But as our Lord's 
testing was necessary as a demonstration of his loyalty 
to the Father even unto death— was a consideration in 
respect to his high exaltation to the glory, honor and 
immortality— so in the Father's plan none can ever 
reach that same plane and be his joint-heirs in the 
Kingdom except as they shall demonstrate that they 



are possessed and controlled by the same spirit as that 
of their Redeemer. Hence the arrangement has been 
made that while Christ's death was a full value for the 

R3709 : page 26 

redemption of Adam and all his race, and full value 

for the sin, and atonement for the whole world of mankind, 

God has been pleased to apply that merit in an 

indirect way of first imputing righteousness to the Church 

and allowing the Church thus to be adopted as members 

of the body of Christ, and as members of his body 

permitting the Head to see to our sacrificing as parts 

of his own sacrifice, that he might thus offer us up as 

acceptable sacrifices, as a part of himself, that we 

might ultimately be with him partakers of his divine 

nature and sharers of his glory. 

"IF WE SUFFER WITH HIM." 

In this view all the Scriptures agree, that the sufferings 
of Christ are being filled up by the Church, 
which is his body. This, the Apostle tells us, was what 
was prophesied in olden times, namely, "the sufferings 
of Christ and the glory that would follow." The glory 
has not yet come, though we believe it is near. The 
reason for the long delay of the glory has been that the 
sufferings of Christ might be completed. Had it been 
the Father's plan that only Jesus was to suffer and only 
Jesus was to be glorified, then indeed the glory might 
have come more than eighteen centuries ago. The delay 
of the glory is in our interest, that, as the Apostle 
declared, "We might fill up that which is behind of 
the afflictions of Christ."-Col. 1:24. 

In harmony with this statement are all the promises 
and encouragements of the New Testament; for instance 
the Apostle's statement, "If we suffer with him 
we shall also reign with him," "if we be dead with him 
we shall also live with him." (2 Tim. 2:12; Rom. 6:8.) 
After pointing out that we are heirs of God, joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ our Lord, the Apostle adds the conditions, 
namely, "If so be that we suffer with him." 
In expressing his own hope of a share in the Kingdom 
with our Lord the Apostle declares that he counts all 
things but loss and dross in comparison with the privilege 
of knowing him and the fellowship of his sufferings, 
being made conformable to his death, that he 
might also know, experience, the blessed honors and 
favors of our Lord's resurrection, the first resurrection, 
to glory, honor, immortality, the divine nature. 

Coming back to the type, we see that the sacrifice 
of the goat was identical with that of the bullock in 
every particular: The priest shall do with the goat as 
he did with the bullock. The little fat of the goat was 
placed upon the altar, its small hoofs, horns and skin 
were burned without the camp, and represented the 



opposition of the world to those who are the Lord's 
true followers; and the High Priest again, as representing 
this class, the members of his body, offered incense 
upon the golden altar, and at the conclusion he 
again went into the Most Holy with the blood of the 
goat, which he sprinkled as he had previously done 
with the blood of the bullock, but not for the same 
purpose. The Lord's members have no share whatever 
in any atonement for themselves, no power to do aught 
to cleanse themselves from any sin or stain or to lift 
themselves out of condemnation; all that was done for 
them before they had any privilege of sacrificing. This 
second sacrifice of the Day of Atonement, we are specifically 
told, was to "make atonement for the sins of the 
people"— Israel in general outside the priestly tribe 
representing the world outside the present household of 
faith.-Lev. 16:15. 

Throughout the Day of Atonement all the Israelites, 
representing all the families of the earth, were 
excluded from divine favor. They were under sin, 
under the curse, and conducted themselves in a manner 
to correspond with this thought. They fasted and 
wore sackcloth and ashes and humbled themselves in the 
dust, waiting for the completion of the Atonement Day 
sacrifices, which would reconcile them to God and bring 
his blessing. They continued so until the second sacrifice 
of the Atonement Day had been completed, until 
the blood of the goat had been offered for the sins of 
the people. Then the High Priest came out of the 
Tabernacle. He had finished the work which he went 
in to do. He changed his garments. Laying aside the 
white linen garments of the Day of Atonement he put 
on the garments of glory and beauty, his usual habiliments, 
and went forth to the people at the altar, and 
raising his hands gave them the blessing of the Lord 
Jehovah, which represented the forgiveness of the sins 
of the world, the rolling away of the curse or the sentence 
of death, the bringing of the whole world back into 
relationship to God. Then the people arose from the 
dust and gave a shout of thanksgiving. These pantomime 
doings were all typical.— Heb. 9:24,28. 

Throughout this Gospel age, the antitypical Day 
of Atonement, the whole world has been under condemnation 
except the few who have heard of the grace 
of God and accepted the same, and who thus have become 
reckonedly of the favored, antitypical tribe of 
Levi, the household of faith. As for the remainder of 
the world, the Apostle explains their condition of sackcloth 
and ashes, saying, "The whole creation groaneth 
and travaileth in pain until now— waiting for the manifestation 
of the sons of God."— Rom. 8:22. 

In the type Natural Israel waited for the great 
High Priest, in the antitype the world waits for the 
great High Priest Jesus, the Head of the Church, and 
the members of his body— the glorified sons of God, 
who at the second advent of Christ and the establishment 



of his Kingdom will be revealed to the world in 
power and great glory, to give them knowledge of the 
remission of their sins, and to give them every assistance 
in uplifting them and in restoring all the willing 
and obedient to harmony with the Lord. 

THE MEDIATORIAL WORK. 

To rightly understand the foregoing is to discern 
that our Lord Jesus in his own person has been the 
Mediator between the Father and the household of 
faith during this Gospel age, and that in the divine 
order he is now selecting the members of his body, 
who with him and under him as the Head will be the 
Mediator between God and the world in the age to 
follow this— during the Millennial age. 

We are not to lose sight of the fact that all the 
responsibility is with the Head, and that the Lord 
requires of every one who shall be accepted as a member 
of the body of Christ that he shall lose his own 
headship, his own individuality, and shall accept instead 
the will and mind of Christ. As the Apostle 
says, "We have the mind of Christ," who is our head. 
-1 Cor. 2:16. 

From this standpoint Jesus is always the Mediator 
—just as a man weighing a hundred pounds might fill 
an office, and if afterward he took on flesh and weighed 
two hundred pounds or more, he would still be the 

R3710 : page 27 

same man; what he added to his bulk would in 
no wise interfere with his individuality. So it is 
with Christ, he merely adds on these members. His 
own individuality is maintained, however many members 
may be added. It is still Jesus, still the Christ, who 
would be thought of and addressed, and the whole work 
accomplished is still the work of Christ. This is merely 
the divine method by which a little flock from amongst 
men are privileged to become associated with Jesus, 
in suffering with him now, in being glorified with him 
by and by. This is marvelous in our eyes, and none 
but our God would or could have conceived so broad 
and deep and high and glorious an arrangement. 

JESUS A RANSOM FOR ALL. 

Several texts come to mind, as, for instance, "By a 
man came death, by a man also comes the resurrection 
from the dead," "Jesus Christ by the grace of 
God tasted death for every man," "He gave himself 
a ransom for all, to be testified in due time." (1 Cor. 15:21; 
Heb. 2:9; 1 Tim. 2:6.) How do these texts fit 
in to what we have found to be the established testimony 
of God's Word respecting the relationship of the 
Church to her Lord in the sufferings as well as in the 



glory to follow? 

They all fit perfectly when rightly viewed. They 
declare that the whole merit of the world's salvation 
was through Jesus— that is, centered in his death. 
Every Scripture so teaches; not a single Scripture implies 
that there is merit or efficacy in the sacrifice of 
the body members of Christ aside from the merit which 
those members received first through the sacrifice of 
Jesus. It is the merit of Christ, therefore, that reaches 
the world, that blesses the world, that is the ransom 
price for the world, although it is made to come through 
a circuitous route instead of going directly to the world. 
A portion of the world receives the blessing first, the 
believers; but the blessing does not stop with them, 
but does flow through them to all the families of the 
earth. These texts are all in full accord in ascribing 
the whole merit of salvation and the complete satisfaction 
of Justice to the merit of our Lord's sacrifice 
finished personally at Calvary, but by divine consent 
continued indirectly through his adopted members. 

TIME IN THE SATISFACTION OF JUSTICE. 

Let us inquire respecting the time of the satisfaction 
of Justice. Was Justice satisfied when the Lord 
left the glory which he had with the Father and was 
born a babe? No! Was it satisfied when he reached 
manhood's estate and had presented himself, the man 
Christ Jesus, at the time of his baptism, consecrating 
his life? No! for although the Father there accepted 
the sacrifice, and evidenced the acceptance by the giving 
of the holy Spirit, the sacrifice itself was not yet 
complete. Was Justice satisfied at the close of the three 
and a half years' ministry, when on the cross he cried, 
"It is finished?" No! Satisfaction was not yet accomplished, 
though the means of satisfaction was now in 
our Lord's hands. Was satisfaction of Justice accomplished 
when our Lord ascended up on high and appeared 
in the presence of God for us? Yes, we answer. 
Justice was satisfied so far as the "us" class was concerned, 
but not beyond the "us," the believers, the 
"household of faith." As already shown the curse still 
rests upon the world, which is still declared of the Lord 
to be under "condemnation." 

Does the sacrifice of the Lord's people throughout 
this age down to the present time satisfy Justice? No! 
All the members of the body of Christ are counted in 
as one, and the sacrificing of the body members is not 
yet completed. Will Justice be satisfied when the last 
member of the Church shall have suffered as a member 
of the body of Christ? No ! it will still be necessary 
for the "Head," after having supervised the sacrifice, 
to present the "members"— to present before the Father 
the evidence that these adopted members followed in 
his steps, completed their consecration even unto death 
faithfully. Thus he will present us before the Father 



"blameless," "irreproachable." (Phil. 2:15.) Then the 
merit of this adopted portion of our Lord's sacrifice will 
be presented on behalf of the world, and, as shown us 
in the type, the Father is sure to accept it and to grant 
the full blessing, which will mean the rolling away, in 
every sense, of the sentence, the curse now resting 
upon the race.— Col. 1:26,27. 

"EVEN SO, FATHER, FOR SO IT SEEMED GOOD IN THY SIGHT. 

Was it necessary for God to arrange the 
matter thus that the Church might have fellowship in 
the sufferings as well as in the glory of Christ, might 
be a part of the sin offering of the Day of Atonement 
as members of the body as well as his members in the 
throne? We answer that nothing was necessary except 
as God had previously determined to make it so; but, 
as the Apostle declares, this is a part of the mystery 
hid from previous ages and generations, that we should 
have fellowship, participation, with the Messiah in the 
sufferings as well as in the glory. 

As we have seen, the fact that any atonement 
sacrifice was necessary was merely of the divine 
arrangement. God could have put a penalty upon 
Adam and his race that would not have required a redemption 
sacrifice. He chose the redemption plan because 
it would the better illustrate his government and 
the laws of his empire, that it might illustrate his wisdom, 
justice, love and power, and he added this 
feature of allowing the Church as members of the body 
of Christ to be participants with him as a further illustration 
of the same divine wisdom, justice, love and 
power. From God's standpoint the whole transaction 
of redemption is one, divided into two parts. 

If the Day of Atonement were represented by the 
personal sufferings of our Lord Jesus' sacrifice, the 
antitype would be three and a half years at least; but 
when we see the full meaning of the divine plan we 
perceive that the Atonement Day lasts for nearly nineteen 
centuries, and that the "times of restitution of 
all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets 
since the world began" are delayed, until at the conclusion 
of this Atonement Day the great antitypical 
Jubilee shall be fully ushered in. 



R3710 : page 28 

HOLY, HARMLESS, PERFECT. 

-LUKE 2:40-52.-JANUARY 21- 

Golden Text:— "Jesus increased in wisdom 
and stature and in favor with God and man." 



ONE peculiarity of the Bible, which differentiates it from 

all other religious books, is its candor, its faithfulness 

to facts. Without specially preaching against 

them it mentions the weaknesses, the blemishes, the failures 

of the various heroes which it draws to our attention: Mother 

Eve's deception, father Adam's disobedience without deception, 

Abraham's error in not properly acknowledging his 

wife, Moses' mistake in respect to the smiting of the rock the 

second time, the shortcomings of Eli, Samson, Saul, David, Solomon 

and others of Old Testament times. The New Testament 

similarly mentions the strife amongst the apostles as to who 

should be the greatest, the wrong spirit of James and John 

in connection with the Samaritans, Peter's denial of the Lord, 

the dispute between Barnabas and Paul respecting John and 

Mark, etc. This faithfulness of the Word of God in pointing 

out that there is none righteous, no not one, amongst all the 

race of Adam— that all need forgiveness, reconciliation to the 

Father through the atoning sacrifice— proves the reliability 

of its testimony. 

Noting that the Scriptures were written by various pens 
during a period of sixteen centuries, and that they all manifest 
the same uniformity, honesty, impresses upon us all the 
more the full import of their declarations respecting Jesus— 
that he was "holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." 
This was in accord with the predictions of the 
prophets respecting Messiah, also with the narrative of his 
birth, boyhood, youth, manhood, to his resurrection and ascension 
to glory. Angels and men declare to us that he was 
separate from sinners, that his life came not from the impaired 
and condemned Adamic stock, but was a transference 
from a spirit existence previously enjoyed. His perfection, 
his keeping of the divine law, his acceptance with the Father, 
were fully demonstrated and assured to us in that "God 
raised him from the dead on the third day."— I Cor. 15:4. 

THE BOYHOOD OF JESUS 

Our lesson (v. 40) declares that prior to his reaching 
his twelfth year he had been growing in stature and in 
strength and was gradually being filled with wisdom. We 
are not to forget that he was separate from sinners, nor to 
expect that other boys at his age should manifest the same 
degree of wisdom. Quite to the contrary— inheriting blemishes, 
mental, physical, moral, they would not belong to the 
same class at all. Our Lord Jesus is not a pattern for the 
natural man, and in harmony with this thought he is not 
introduced to us as our exemplar until he reached the age of 
manhood, consecrated his life to the doing of the work which 
the Father had committed to him, and had begun his ministry 
under the anointing of the holy Spirit. 

Nor is his earthly ministry nor his teachings the example 
or pattern for the world: these are merely for his footstep 
followers, his disciples— those who, justified through 
faith in his blood, have similarly made a covenant with the 
Lord by sacrifice, by full consecration of themselves to live 
not unto themselves but unto him who died for them. 



Doubtless there is heavenly wisdom in connection with the 

limited description given us of the childhood and youth of 

our Savior. These were not our examples, and indeed any 

attempt to measure the ordinary boy or youth by that glorious 

and perfect standard would have undoubtedly been discouraging 

—perhaps to an injurious degree. Let us not, 

then, attempt to imagine with particularity what the Lord 

has seen fit to cover and not reveal. Let us content ourselves 

with the simple narrative, with the meager testimony 

of the Gospel on this subject— that Jesus developed in wisdom 

as well as in physical strength. 

R3711 : page 28 

THE GRACE OF GOD UPON HIM 

The word "grace" signifies that which gives pleasure, 
as loveliness of form or character, or the most admirable 
virtues. Hence the grace of God signifies his favor, that Jesus 
as a child was such a one as the Father had pleasure 
in, and, reversely, such a one as reflected in his form and 
character the grace, perfection, the beauty which is of God. 
John, speaking of our Savior, says, "We beheld his glory, 
—the beauty of the only begotten of the Father." All this 
speaks perfection in its most absolute sense, and would be 
very discouraging not only to other children but to their 
parents also were it understood that the boy Jesus was given 
of God to be a pattern or model for others. On the other 
hand it is important for us to know this, as corroborating 
the testimony that he was undefiled, separate from sinners, 
holy and acceptable to the Father from infancy to manhood. 

In divine providence our Lord was not only born under 
favorable religious influences, but trained in that way. His 
mother and her husband were pious, reverent, and evidently 
disposed to be obedient to every feature of the divine Law 
to the extent of their ability. In accord with the demands 
of the Law they went annually to Jerusalem to the feast of 
Passover, the great religious gathering which called the typical 
people from one end of their land to the other to a special 
worship of the Lord, to a special remembrance of their 
deliverance from Egypt, to their adoption as his people and 
incidentally to the observance of a type of the coming blessings 
through the killing of the Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sin of the world, and whose flesh is meat indeed 
and whose blood is drink indeed— symbolically. 

JESUS A SON OF THE LAW 

It had been the custom of Joseph and Mary to go to 
these feasts every year, and doubtless Jesus, as he grew 
older, went with them. The one mentioned in our lesson was 
noteworthy above the others because of our Lord's conduct 
on this occasion— different from what it had previously been 
and what it subsequently was. Under the Jewish custom a 
boy at twelve years of age was supposed to make some kind 
of a consecration of himself, some kind of a special recognition 



of the Law, on account of which he was called a "son 
of the Law," a child of the Law. 

The wisdom in which our Lord had been growing up to 
that time, like all other things pertaining to the Jewish system, 
was intimately interwoven with the Law and the prophets. 
He recognized himself as being not the son of Joseph but 
the son of God, and knew that he had come into the world 
on a special mission, and it was a preliminary step on his 

R3711 : page 29 

part to gain wisdom respecting the work he was to do as it 
had been outlined in the promises, in the Law, and through 
the testimonies of the prophets. Wise far beyond his years 
because of his perfection, his mind doubtless seized upon the 
custom of the twelfth year: doubtless he wondered if this 
custom of becoming a son of the Law did not in some sense 
of the word imply that he at that age should become in 
some measure identified with the Law as a student, or in 
some other capacity. 

Of winsome manner, in favor with man as well as with 
God, and wise hearted, Joseph and Mary found little necessity 
for keeping close watch over his doings. He was apparently, 
for a child of his age, especially well able to take care 
of himself. Hence it was that on returning from the feast 
they went a full day's journey before noticing that he was 
not with any of their company, and had evidently been left 
behind at Jerusalem. It required a day to return to Jerusalem, 
and on the third day seeking him they found him in 
the Temple. They were amazed to see a child of twelve 
years seated amongst the doctors of the Law, listening to 
their discussions and asking questions. We are not told of 
the nature of the questions of those three days, but we may 
be sure that they all pertained to the Law and the covenants 
and the prophets respecting Messiah and his work. 

Jesus, having already pondered these matters in his own 
mind, was now seeking all the wisdom he could secure from 
those who would naturally be best informed on these subjects. 
Doubtless a part of his inquiry was at what age Messiah 
could in any measure begin his work, and whether or 
not the custom of considering a boy the son of the Law at 
twelve years of age was founded upon anything in the Law 
or was merely a human tradition. Apparently he would 
have been glad to have found something in the Law to have 
justified his entrance upon some department of the Father's 
business, but found nothing, as this was merely a provision 
of the Talmud and not of divine authority. 

In response to their gentle chiding that he had caused 
them worry, uneasiness, and that they had been seeking him, 
Jesus replied, "Why need you have sought me? Did you not 
know that I would be somewhere about my Father's house?" 
We prefer this free translation, in accord with the revised version, 
to the one given in our common version. We may be 
sure that those days spent in the Temple, studying the exceeding 
great and precious promises of God's Word, were a 
feast to that wonderful child's expansive and expanding 



mind. Apparently he had reached the solution of his queries, 
and determined that it was not in accordance with 
divine providence that he should in any sense of the word 
begin his ministry or public work at this time. In harmony 
with this conclusion we read that he returned with them to 
Nazareth and was obedient to them— did not attempt to 
begin his heavenly mission. 

"TRAIN UP A CHILD" 

We cannot encourage imperfect parents to expect to rear 
imperfect children full of wisdom and the graces of perfection, 
but we can assure them that very much indeed depends 
upon the way in which they train their children as to what 
kind of men or women they shall become, and whether they 
shall bring to their parents happiness or unhappiness, sorrow 
or joy. It is a sad fact that many parents train up their 
children in the way they should not go— plant in them the 
wrong sentiments, which subsequently bring forth characteristics 
of which they are ashamed, for which they reproach and 
reprove the children, and against which the children when 
grown may be obliged to battle for the remainder of life. 
What a blessing it would be both to parents and to children 
did the former rightly understand how early the training and 
disciplining is necessary— that it should begin in the parent 
before the child is born; that discipline, obedience, insisted 
upon with firmness and kindness, should be inculcated from 
the day of birth persistently. 

Where a child has been reasonably well born, has been 
reared under the influences of a Christian home, in which the 
Bible is the recognized standard, in which one or both the 
parents are consecrated to the Lord, in which prayer is 
a constant testimony to that parent's faith in the Lord and trust 
in his providential care, in which the parent not only seeks 
to exemplify the fruits of the Spirit— meekness, gentleness, 
patience, long suffering, brotherly kindness, love— but seeks 
to inculcate these in the children, the child so trained under 
such experiences would, we believe, very generally be ready 
at the age of twelve years to make a consecration of himself 
to the Lord— to seek after and strive to follow the instructions 
of the divine message. 

The promises to those who early give their hearts to 
the Lord are known to us all, and many have proven their 
wisdom— "They that seek me early shall find me;" "Train 
up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he 
will not depart from it." (Prov. 8:17; 22:6) Train up a 
child to sow wild oats, to go thoughtlessly, irreverently, selfishly 
through the world, and when he is old it will be very 
difficult indeed to turn him out of the ruts of selfishness into 
the highway of decency, consideration and love for others. 

We will admit that ours is a very difficult day in which 
to properly rear children. Nevertheless, instead of making 
the parent lax and indifferent in respect to his obligations, it 
should lead him to the greater diligence and to the more 
earnestly seeking of wisdom from on high, that he may so discharge 
his duty toward the child as to bless it for life with 



a proper foundation of character laid in the proper cement 
of appreciation of justice, righteousness, mercy and truth. 

ADVANCED IN WISDOM 

The statement that Jesus progressed in wisdom and 
stature, and in favor with God and man (v. 52), relates to 
the period of his life from twelve years of age upward to the 
time of his presentation to Israel in his thirtieth year as the 
Lamb of God. Apparently not Mary only kept the things 
which she had heard and seen in her heart, pondering how 
they would develop and how the words of the angel Gabriel 
would be fulfilled in her son, but Jesus also kept the whole 
matter a secret with himself up to the proper time, when he 
entered publicly at the earliest moment upon his ministry. 
Undoubtedly this was the course of wisdom; he was not 
yet anointed to preach, hence had no authority so to do. 

Similarly all who hear the good tidings now would best 
not begin to minister the truth to others by explaining it until 
first they have received of God the unction from on high— 
the anointing of the holy Spirit. Before they begin their 

R3711 : page 30 

ministry they should make the consecration whose acceptance 
by God would bring them unto the place of adoption 
and anointing, and qualify them for the telling of the good 
tidings of great joy which ultimately shall be unto all people. 



R3712:page30 

PREPARATION FOR THE KINGDOM. 

-MARK 1:1-11. -JANUARY 28- 

Golden Text:— "Prepare your hearts unto 
the Lord, and serve him only."— I Sam. 7:3. 

JOHN THE BAPTIST was our Lord's forerunner, 

foretold in the Old Testament Scriptures, as indicated 

by the opening statements of this lesson. 

He was the messenger of Jehovah to announce Messiah and 

to do a work amongst the Jewish people, which is prophetically 

described as making straight or ready the path before 

him. We are not to confound this reference to a messenger 

of Jehovah preparing the way before Jesus with the title 

given to our Lord himself, the "Messenger of the Covenant." 

Both John and Jesus were messengers or representatives, but 

the latter, on a far higher scale, was the Messenger through 

whom God's covenant with mankind was about to be established 

—the Messenger or Mediator of the New Covenant, 

sealed through the precious blood, and to become operative to 

the world in general during the Millennial age. 



HERALDING THE MESSIAH 

As the Scriptures point out, John was just six months 
older than Jesus, and as both began their ministries at the 
age of thirty, it follows that John had been preaching just 
six months when Jesus came to him for baptism at the opening 
of his ministry. What kind of a work did John do during 
those six months? The answer is given us in verses seven 
and eight. He announced himself the forerunner, the trumpeter 
as it were, of the great Messiah, and declared that it 
was necessary that the people should come into a condition 
of heart-repentance if they would be ready for the 
Messiah and prepared to enjoy the blessings and favors 
of God which Messiah would dispense. John 
made no pretensions of being the Messiah himself, but 
humbly declared that the one who would be shortly made 
known to Israel as Messiah was so much greater that he 
(John) would not be worthy to stoop down and 
loose the fastenings of his shoes— his sandals. He proclaimed 
that those who would be ready for Messiah and the Kingdom 
should not only renounce sin and reform their lives but 
should publicly declare the same— symbolizing it by a baptism 
in water. And yet he assured them that this baptism 
which he performed for them was as nothing compared to 
that greater baptism which Messiah would give to the faithful 
—a baptism of the holy Spirit; yea, also, to some a baptism 
of fire. 

John's prophetic message was most distinctly fulfilled. 
Those Israelites indeed who received Jesus as the Messiah 
were in due time, at Pentecost, baptized with the holy Spirit 
from the Father as members of the body of Christ. Moreover, 
a work of grace was continued with the Jewish nation, and for 
over thirty years the apostles and other believers sifted thoroughly 
that people for every true grain of wheat and gathered 
them into the Gospel garner— into the anointed body, the 
Church. Then, all the true wheat having been found, the 
fire came upon the remainder of that nation— the fire of 
trouble which consumed and destroyed their national polity, 
causing indescribable suffering and scattering the remainder 
of that people throughout the earth. Some were baptized 
with the holy Spirit and some with fire. 

GOD'S UNPRETENTIOUS SERVANT 

John the Baptist is described as the last of the prophets. 
With him the old dispensation terminated, as with our Lord 
the new dispensation began. Apparently adopting somewhat 
the manner and dress of Elijah of old, his prototype, 
John, was conspicuous amongst the people by reason of the 
simplicity of his dress, which indicated that his entire life was 
devoted to the special service of the Lord— that he was not 
seeking to serve earthly or selfish interests in any respect- 
comparatively he had nothing, wanted nothing, needed nothing. 
The messenger of Jehovah, he could have been provided 
for sumptuously; but as God would speak not merely 
to the great but especially to the humble and lowly, his 



representative or messenger appeared amongst men under 
humble conditions. And it was the most humble that had 
the hearing ear for the Lord's message. Nevertheless we are 
informed that great multitudes went out, and excitement 
prevailed amongst the people— a revival service. John and 
his disciples were kept busily engaged telling the people 
that Messiah was near, that the Kingdom would shortly be 
set up, that they must repent of their sins if they would be 
ready for a share in that Kingdom, and baptizing those who, 
turning to God, confessed their sins. 

When Jesus came to John and requested baptism another 
account tells us that John demurred, declaring that our Lord 
had no sins that he needed to repent of— that if either one 
needed baptism it was John himself. The inference is that 
John did not urge any to be baptized, except such as realized 
themselves to be transgressors against the Law, who 
had not been living up to its requirements to the extent of 
their ability, and that himself and others who had been living 
consistent lives did not need this baptism. We are to 
remember the Apostle's words, that the whole nation of Israel 
had been baptized into Moses in the sea and in the cloud 
when they left Egypt. (I Cor. 10:2.) They were still in Moses, 
cept as they had neglected the Law Covenant which he 
established. John's baptism was intended to bring the 
hearts of the people back into accord with the Law, into 
accord with Moses, that thus they might be ready for transfer 
from Moses to Christ— from the typical house of servants 
to be made the antitypical house of sons. "For Moses verily 
was faithful as a servant over his house, but Christ as a son 
over his house, whose house are we if we hold fast."— 
Heb. 3:5,6. 

HOLY, HARMLESS, SEPARATE FROM SINNERS 

The Lord did not say to John, "You are mistaken, I 
am a sinner," for he never denied what the Scriptures 

R3712:page31 

everywhere set forth— that he was holy, harmless, undefiled 
and totally separate from the race of sinners. Indeed he 
did not explain to John why he was baptized nor what his 
baptism signified. John could not have understood, none 
could understand our Lord's motives until after Pentecost. 
In the light of the New Testament we see that our Lord's 
baptism was a new thing, totally distinct from John's baptism; 
that it symbolized or represented a baptism unto death 
—a burial of the will into the will of God, and the beginning 
of a reckonedly new life as a reckonedly new creature, 
symbolized by the rising from the water. 

Thus our Lord's baptism into water symbolized a baptism 
into death, a consecration to death; and this consecration 
he fulfilled in the subsequent three and a half years of 
his ministry, which ended on the cross with his cry, "It is 
finished." And this is the baptism which belongs to us his 
followers— not a washing away of sins, not a returning to 



Mosaic covenant relationship as Jews but a consecration of 
our justified selves, the presentation of our mortal bodies, 
living sacrifices, holy, acceptable to God, our reasonable service 
—to be completed in our natural death and in our resurrection 
beyond the vail. 

"MY BELOVED SON" 

An account of this same baptism of our Lord in another 
Gospel represents John as saying, "I, John, saw and bare 
record"— respecting the dove, etc. This lesson merely recites 
the fact that the heavens were opened and the Spirit 
like a dove descended upon the Lord, and a voice from 
heaven said, "Thou art my beloved son, in whom I am well 
pleased"— without saying he saw the dove or heard the 
voice. Our thought is that John the Baptist alone witnessed 
this testimony to our Lord's relationship to God, that he 
alone saw the messenger of divine favor, and that he and 
Jesus alone heard and understood the voice. It was not 
necessary that others should see and hear. John was to be 
the witness, and this evidence was given him in order that 
he might declare, as he did, that the Lord had previously 
given him an assurance that the one upon whom he should 
see the holy Spirit descend and abide was the Messiah, and 
that this prediction was fulfilled upon the person of Jesus. 

Similarly throughout this Gospel age the world 
knoweth us not: it sees not our anointing of the holy 
Spirit. It merely knows that the claim is made for the 
Church that, as the body of Christ, its members are recipients 
of the same holy Spirit that came upon Jesus the Head 
—that we are all baptized by the one Spirit into one body. 
(I Cor. 12: 13.) All that the world can see is the fact of 
this baptism. The effect upon the Lord was his devotion to 
his Father's work, the ministry of the Truth, even at the 
cost of the sacrifice of his life. And so with the Church also; 
it has a ministry of the Truth even unto death— laying down 
our lives for the brethren. The world recognizes a difference 
between this spirit and the worldly spirit, and yet 
knows not, appreciates not, but thinks rather of the Lord's 
faithful as they thought of Jesus and the apostles— that 
they are unwise, foolish, in spending time, influence, talent, 
means, in what the world regards as the "foolishness of 
preaching." 

We have seen in previous lessons that while John was 
a partial antitype of Elijah on a limited scale, he by no 
means fulfilled the entire type. He was, we might say, an 
antitype on a small scale to the little nation of Israel. The 
Kingdom was indeed offered to natural Israel, but only a 
remnant of that people had heartily repented of sin and 
were truly ready to welcome Messiah, and the rest were 
blinded, while the few were received of the Lord at Pentecost 
and became the nucleus or foundation of the Kingdom 
which, during this Gospel age, has progressed in development 
in embryo— unborn, unseen of the world, unknown. 
Soon the completed embryo will be born in the resurrection, 
and thus the Kingdom will be fully established in power and 



great glory— the Christ. 

Not only are we called of God to be heirs of God and 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ in the Kingdom which is soon 
to be established under the whole heavens, but, additionally, 

R3713 : page 31 

we are privileged of the Lord now to be the antitypical 
Elijah, the antitypical John the Baptist. Throughout the 
entire Gospel age the Church in the flesh has been doing 
toward the world a work similar to that done by John to 
the Jewish nation— announcing Messiah, not in the flesh, but 
the glorified Christ, Head and body, and the Kingdom which 
he will set up. This greater John the Baptist or greater 
antitype of Elijah, the Church in the flesh, has exhorted the 
world, or as many of them as have had ears to hear the 
message, to repent of sin, to reform their lives, to come near 
to the Lord in heart, that they may be prepared for the great 
changes that are imminent, when Messiah shall now shortly 
take unto himself his great power and reign. 

Those who accept the message are urged to make a 
consecration of themselves to the Lord and thus to prepare 
their hearts for his Kingdom. Our announcement also is 
that the great Christ of glory will shortly appear on the 
scene and that all in harmony with him will then receive a 
blessing of the holy Spirit— not the first fruits but the completed 
blessing, the resurrection to glory, honor and immortality 
—while to the remainder of mankind will come the 
great time of trouble spoken of by the mouth of the holy 
prophets from the beginning, a time of discipline and purification, 
that the whole world may learn the lessons necessary 
to their harmony with the Lord, that they may be ready to 
receive the blessing which his Kingdom will put within their 
reach. 

Let us, dear brethren and sisters, who are privileged to 
be heralds of the coming Kingdom, be earnest, zealous as 
was John the Baptist, giving comparatively little heed to the 
customs and formalities of the world, and giving very diligent 
heed to our appointed work, to show forth the praises of our 
heavenly Bridegroom, to announce him to all, to make known 
to all the terms and conditions of his favor and to bear witness 
to his presence now in the harvest time of this age, that 
his fan is in his hand, that he will thoroughly purge the 
threshing-floor of all chaff, that he will gather the wheat 
into the garner of his Kingdom, and that the great majority 
of Christendom will soon enter the great time of trouble. If 
faithful in this ministry as the antitypical Elijah on this side 
the vail, we may feel sure of our acceptance as members of 
the body of the Anointed One on the other side the vail, and 
thus have participation in the sufferings of the present time 
and in the glories and dignities of the future. 



page 33 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVII. FEBRUARY 1, 1906 No. 3 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 35 

Evolutionists in Trouble 35 

The Confusion (Babel) of Christendom 35 

Johnstown and Binghamton Conventions 36 

Berean Study for February 37 

Australasian Branch Report 37 

The Battle of Temptation 38 

Tempted Forty Days 39 

Our Lord's Earnestness 40 

"Like As We Are" 41 

Misapplication of Scriptures 43 

"Him Only Shalt Thou Serve" 44 

Called to Higher Service 45 

Why Are We Not Subject to the Law? 47 

R3694 : page 34 

THIS JOURNAL AND ITS SACRED MISSION 



THIS Journal is one of the prime factors or instruments in the system 

of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension," now being presented in 

all parts of the civilized world by the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & 

TRACT SOCIETY, chartered A.D. 1881, "For the Promotion of Christian 

Knowledge." It not only serves as a class room where Bible Students 

may meet in the study of the divine Word, but also as a channel of communication 

through which they may be reached with announcements of 

the Society's Conventions and of the coming of its traveling representatives 

styled "Pilgrims," and refreshed with reports of its Conventions. 

Our "Berean Lessons" are topical rehearsals or reviews of our Society's 
published "Studies," most entertainingly arranged, and very helpful 
to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, 
viz., Verbi Dei Minister (V.D.M.), which translated into English 
is, Minister of the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International 
S.S. Lessons is specially for the older Bible Students and Teachers. By 
some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This Journal stands firmly for the defence of the only true foundation 
of the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 
through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 
aransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (I Pet. 1:19; 
I Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 
and precious stones (I Cor. 3:11-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 
of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 
of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 
that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 
God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men 



as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 
is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 

workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 
Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 
the chief corner stone of his Temple, through which, when finished, 
God's blessing shall come "to all people," and they find access to 
him.-I Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28: 14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing, of consecrated believers 
in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 
"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 
the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 
and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 
place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 
"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a ransom 
for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; Jno. 1:9; I Tim. 2:5,6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 
as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 
hisjoint-heir.-I John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 
the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 
witness to the world; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the 
next age. -Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 
to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 
of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, 
at the hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church— when all the 
wilfully wicked will be destroyed.— Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, Editor. 



LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



YOUR WELCOME LETTERS. 



We are always glad to hear from the dear brethren and 
sisters, and especially so when they write their business communications 
on a separate sheet, and when their writing is 
plain and easily read. Please be specially careful with the 
signature and address. 

Friends in foreign lands will please not send us postal 
cards with writing on the face other than address, as there 
is a penalty attached here to all such cards. Also remember 
that letter postage from foreign countries to U.S. is the equivalent 
of 5 cents each one-half ounce, and any deficiency is 
charged to us at double rates. 

page 34 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 



Our announcements of this book in two bindings seem not 
to have been understood. The price in cloth binding is now 
$1.50; in leather binding, on thin paper, gold edges, divinity 
circuit, pocket size, $2.50. These prices include postage, 
and also entitle the purchaser to one year's subscription to 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER, gratis. If your subscription is 
already paid we will extend it one year. The Diaglott is 



not sold at less than these low prices, whether the TOWER 
subscription is desired or not. 



R3713 : page 35 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
EVOLUTIONISTS IN TROUBLE. 



EVOLUTIONISTS certainly deserve some commiseration: 
they so frequently forget themselves 
and tell things against their own theory. 

For instance, whilst telling us that Africa was the 
cradle of mankind from which by evolution various 
races advancing have spread over the earth; and while 
hunting in that field for a claimed "missing link" between 
the "least developed" of mankind and the monkey, 
they unthinkingly blurt out a completely different 
story. 

In an article on Irrigation, Prof. A. W. Hadley 
now gives it as his opinion that Africa once had a 
wonderful civilization, whose "stupendous" plans and 
perfect "technical details" were so grand that "later 
efforts are paled into insignificance." If thousands of 
years have brought degradation to the inhabitants of 
Africa, does not this down the Evolution theory and 
exalt the Bible teaching of a fall? We quote from 
Prof. Hadley's article as follows:— 

ENGINEERING PAST AND PRESENT. 

"The ancient period has to do with that accomplished 
during the reign of the Pharaohs, kings of Egypt 
who ruled 4,000 years ago, and carried out irrigation 
plans so bold in conception and colossal in execution 
that modern works are dwarfed into practical 
insignificance. 

"Recently discovered ancient writings and subsequent 
investigation by scientific explorers reveal substantial 
evidence to the effect that the famous six 
cataracts of the Nile between Assouan and Khartoum 
are not, as had been supposed for ages, mere works of 
Nature, but are, instead, the ruins of gigantic works of 
man, who constructed them for irrigation, power and 
navigation purposes. 

If this be true, then is Egyptian irrigation, like its 
civilization and literature, but another of the "Lost 
Arts of the Ancients;" for so stupendous were the 
plans and so perfectly were the technical details of 
engineering carried out that later efforts paled into 
insignificance. 

"For hundreds of miles over the barren wastes on 



either side of the Nile, where history tells us there once 
flourished populous cities, can now be found the traces 
of great canals extending northward to the Mediterranean 
and, in fact, radiating over the entire Soudan. 
These are found to lead to the vicinity of the several 
cataracts where the gigantic blocks of granite which 
form them extend for more than a mile across the river 
and are visible at low Nile. Furthermore, these blocks 
are of a peculiar formation of granite, totally unlike 
any other rock in the vicinity, and found only built 
up in this way at the several cataracts. 

"As additional writings are discovered and exploration 
progresses the evidence continues to grow 
until we are now practically convinced that immense 
areas in the great Soudan, with its miles of trackless, 
sun-scorched waste, were once under the most intensive 
cultivation, and the support of a vast population. 

"Who may say but that the surviving ruins of 
the pyramids, temples and tombs were but at the elevated 
gateway to such a region, and that there now lies 
hidden beneath hundreds of feet of silently shifting 
sand the graveyard of an empire, with its cities, towns 
and hamlets and its one-time fertile valleys; but with 
its inhabitants destroyed or scattered panic-stricken or 
degenerate to the four corners of the Earth?" 

THE CONFUSION (BABEL) OF CHRISTENDOM. 

We every now and then hear of some great 
scholar who has spoken or written things which 
have shaken the faith of many. Then we note 
announcements that his arguments have been met 
and refuted by some other professor: that Christian 
faith is saved, &c. The fact of the matter is that so 
much confusion reigns on theological questions in the 
minds of many that they know not what they are 
discussing. They will not look at the Truth, but will, 
without reading, denounce it on the strength of some 
one's opposition. They are blind and dote on things 
they do not comprehend. 

For illustration, Prof. Haeckel, a German scholar, 
has been whacking away at all revealed religion in a 
publication, "The Riddle of the Universe." Because he 
attacked openly "Orthodoxy" could understand him 
and concluded it should be frightened because he so 
intimated. At once a champion is found in the person 

R3713 : page 36 

of "Sir Oliver Lodge, D.Sc, F.R.S., LL.D.," whose 
array of titles implies worldly wisdom. He declares 
that he can refute Haeckel. "Orthodoxy" grasps the 
suggestion with joy! not because Orthodoxy knows 
what he will say or cares much, but because he says he 
is on her side and he has influence and titles. 
The Christian Commonwealth devoted an entire 



page recently to Sir Oliver Lodge's arguments and commented 
on them thus:— 

"In view of the world-wide circulation of Prof. 
Haeckel's attack on the fundamentals of the Christian 
Faith— for that is what his "Riddle of the Universe" 
amounts to— the publication of Sir Oliver Lodge's reply 
is a matter of the first importance to all Christians, 
especially preachers and teachers." 

With such indorsement what spiritual wisdom 
might we not expect. From among other unchristian 
and unscriptural presentations we quote below some 
extracts which, going out thus labeled "Orthodox," 
will no doubt do far more harm than Prof. Haeckel's 
nonsense, more plainly labeled infidelity. Thus it is 
everywhere: professors and ministers are posing as 
defenders of Orthodoxy who, most decidedly, are unbelievers 
in the fundamentals of Christianity. 

Among other things Sir Oliver Lodge said, as 
quoted in "The Christian Commonwealth" (we are 
glad that we are not participators in its common wealth 
of error): 

"I believe that the universe is struggling up towards 
something, and that we are agents, that God 
does not work without agents. We have to lend Him 
a helping hand; certain things will not be done on this 
planet unless we do them. We have the power to help 
and the power to refuse help or even to hinder." 

Sir Oliver Lodge's vague ideas respecting a Nature 
God may be guessed from his statement following. He 
is wholly adverse to the Bible teaching of man's creation 
in God's image, his fall through sin, his redemption 
by the sacrifice of Christ and his hope of resurrection 
to more than was lost by obedience to the Redeemer 
when his Kingdom comes. We quote:— 

R3714:page36 

"I will just tell you the speculations that I have 
had reason to make on this subject, and I would recommend 
you to read Myers' two volumes on Human Personality. 
It is all wrapped up in that "subliminal 
self" notion— that "we are greater than we know," as 
one of the poets puts it; that not the whole of us is 
incarnated at any one time. If we are persistent and 
do not go out of existence, it follows that in some sense 
we never came into existence. The idea that we have 
persisted in the past and must persist in the future is 
as old as Plato— there is nothing new in it; it seems to 
me that at birth a bit of that large self was incarnated, 
and then as the body grew and could hold more, more 
and more as it were leaked into it— sometimes more, 
sometimes less. When more of it leaks into the 
body and displays itself here, we say, "There is a 
great man;" when only a little, a very little, we say, 
"He is not all there." We are none of us quite "all 
there," and when this body is worn out we rejoin the 



big lump, so to speak, and then another bit will be 
incarnated at another time, and so on. You may call 
that a suggestion of reincarnation, though it is not 
exactly that. The same individual John Smith will not 
appear again as William Jones, but it may be that 
different bits of that large lump will associate themselves 
with matter for a time for the training which it 
appears can only so be got— a kind of peculiar training 
that appears to be got by living on a planet, and utilizing 
material particles which we pick up out of this 
planet, obtained from beef and mutton and cabbages. 
We walk about for a time and utilize the things we 
find here, then we go back, and I should think it is very 
likely that another portion of us is incarnated, perhaps 
a bit of the same, perhaps a portion wholly different. 
Perhaps when a child dies in infancy and goes back it 
will have another chance. But I am not now talking 
science, I am talking speculation, but it is based on 
those facts which you find elaborated in Myers' book— 
the facts of abnormal memory, multiple personality, 
trance states, unusual phenomena altogether, not by 
any means thoroughly understood, and yet which must 
be studied if we are to throw light upon this great 
problem." 



R3714:page36 

JOHNSTOWN AND BINGHAMTON CONVENTIONS. 

THE One-Day Convention at Johnstown, Pa., on January 
14, was an enjoyable event. Friends from the surrounding 
towns met us there with hearty greetings which we as 
fully reciprocated. About seventy-five were present at the 
morning rally, only a portion of whom could be present 
also at the evening session, others however taking their places 
to the total of about 100 of the interested. 

The afternoon session was for the public— a cure for 
infidelity— "To Hell and Back." The dear friends had 
spared no effort to have the meeting well advertised by 
newspapers, window-cards, etc., and their labors were blessed 
and rewarded by the large crowd present at the Opera House 
—about 1400, some standing. We understand that special 
invitations were sent to all the ministers of the city, and were 
told that five of them, if not more, were present. One of 
them shook hands after the service, and most cordially approved 
what he had heard; another partially approved, but 
was argumentative. We hope for some results, though we 
may not know fully this side the vail. It seems impossible 
that so many people should give thoughtful attention for 
nearly two hours without being helped in some degree. 

BINGHAMTON, N.Y., had its One-Day Convention on 
January 28. We missed the pleasure of the morning Rally, 
but know from reports, as well as from the zeal of those in 
attendance, that it was uplifting, helpful. It does the friends 



good to mingle their hearts and voices, and we consider 
these Rallies amongst the special blessings of such occasions 
—nearly all participate and nearly all get a special refreshing. 

The afternoon session was in the Opera House, which 
holds about 1500. It was jammed, and it is said that nearly 
500 went away for lack of room. Earnest faces indicated 
deep attention and thoughtful interest. The Lord 
only knows which hearts were ready for the Truth and the 
blessing which it surely carries with it. 

The friends must have done excellent work in thoroughly 

R3714:page37 

advertising the meeting. It seems, too, that circumstances favored 
them: the newspapers made game of the topic, saying that 
it would be a "personally conducted tour by Pastor Russell 
to hell and back." This later they corrected at the instance 
of the friends, who explained that the topic would be treated 
in a most reverent manner. Then the Street Railway Company 
declined to allow the posters on their cars, and the newspapers 
took the matter up, claiming that they should have 
fulfilled their agreement. 

The evening meeting was a heart-to-heart talk to the 
friends of the Truth, partially reported in the newspapers 
and thus accessible to those of you who desire it. The topic 
was, "Selling the Birthright." 



R3715 : page 37 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY FOR FEBRUARY. 

-FOR EXPLANATION SEE PREFACE OF WATCH TOWER 
BIBLES AND WATCH TOWER, MARCH 1, 1905.- 

STUDIES IN PRAYER 

1 1. How should we distinguish between worshipping 
God "in spirit and in truth," and mere lip-service? 
Matt. 15:7-9; Jno. 4:23,24; Z/96-284 

(2nd col. par. 1, 2); 285 (2nd col. par. 1); 287 (1st 
col. par. 2, and 2nd col.); E.478, (top of page). 

12. Why should our petitions be for help "in time of 
need"? Heb. 4:16; Z/98-23 (2nd col. par. 1). 

13. Can we come too often to God in prayer, or is any 
affair of our lives too trivial to bring to his attention? 
Z/95-214 (1st and 2nd cols); 215 

(1st col. par. 1 to 4). 

14. Why will not our Heavenly Father give us the things 
needful without our asking? Z.'03-8 (2nd col. 

par. 1); Z/01-270 (2nd col. par. 1). 

15. How may we learn not to "ask amiss," and thus 
have all our petitions answered? I Jno. 5:14,15; 
Z/96-163 (1st col. par. 1 to 3); Z/03-204 (1st col. 

par. 1, and 2nd col.); Z/04-90 (1st col. par. 1); Z/04-122 



(1st col. par. 1); Z/01-270 (2nd col. par. 3). 

16. Why does God delay answering our prayers? Lu. 11:5- 
Z/04-121 (2nd col. par. 2, 3); Z/01-270 

(2nd col. par. 2); Z/05-343 (1st col. par. 2 to 2nd 
col. par. 2); Z. '05-346 (1st col. par. 1). 

17. Should we strive to co-operate with the Lord in 
answering our own prayers? Z. '05-331 (1st 

col. par. 3, 4, and 2nd col. par. 1); E.244, par. 1, to 
245, par. 1. 

18. For what should we pray? 

For the Holy Spirit, Z/05-346 (2nd col. par. 2); 

Lu. 11:13; E.242 to 245. 

For wisdom, Jas. 1:5,6; F.686, par. 2. 

For one another, I Thess. 5:25; Jno. 17:20; Eph. 1:16; 

Col. 4:2,3. 

For "the harvesters," Matt. 9:38; Z/00-156 

(1st col. par. 1). 

For our enemies, Matt. 5:44; Acts 7:60; "Manna," 

March 21. 

For "all men, for kings, and those in authority," 

I Tim. 2:1,2; Z/05-222 (2nd col.). 

Special occasions for prayer,— see Z. '96-163 

(1st col. par. 5) to 164 (1st col. par. 1); "Manna," 

June 25. 

19. For what should we not pray? I Jno. 5:16; Z.'01-46 
(1st col. par. 7); Z/96-164 (1st col. par. 2); Z/05-346 
(2nd col. par. 1). 

20. Is it proper to pray for the conversion of sinners? 
Z/98-29 (1st col. [last sentence of first half], 

and par. 1); Z/04-122 (1st col. par. 2). 



R3714:page37 

AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH REPORT. 

MELBOURNE, Australia, Nov. 1, 1905. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is again my duty and great pleasure to hand you 
the report of the Tract Fund expenditures and receipts, 
and of Publications circulated through the Society's 
Australasian Branch during a year. 

As the years roll on, and Faith, grounded on the 
testimony of God's Word, comes the nearer to that 
realization of her conviction concerning the things as 
yet unseen, and in which she rejoices with joy unspeakable 
and full of glory, her sister, Hope, well instructed, 
learns to tinge with brighter hues for her the borders of 
the clouds of trouble with which the passion of selfishness 
in its greed of gain and power is rapidly obscuring 
the outlook on the world, ecclesiastical, social, political 
and commercial. And one of the greatest incentives 
to Hope to use her brightest colors on these ever-darker 
clouds is what those of the Lord's people whose spiritual 
perceptions have not been dulled by the cares of 



this world may now "see" and "hear" in the progress 
of the harvest. 

Two classes of laborers are engaged in the great work: 
the one class, by far the greater, numerically, is working 
among the "tares," binding them by means of errors 
into their various bundles, religious, social and political; 
with these we have nothing to do. The other class of 
laborers seeks the "wheat," in order that by means of 
the Present Truth it may be gathered into one body, 
of which the Lord Jesus himself is the Head. "Gather 
my saints unto me," is the command to them, and this 
is the labor in which we esteem it an honor to be joined. 

In the past year there has been a notable increase in 
the circulation of the MILLENNIAL DAWN Series in 
this portion of the field. The Colporteurs who came out 
from the United States and Canada, with the Australasians 
who have left all to join in the same service, have 
had their hands full of labor and their hearts full of joy 
as they have sought to thrust in the "sickle" by distributing 
the volumes, and subsequently have been 
brought into touch with eager inquirers after the Truth, 
desiring to know the way of the Lord more perfectly. 
Others are contemplating entry into this blessed service, 
and there is opportunity for still others to say to the 
Lord, "Here am I, send me." 

Viewed from the practical standpoint, the best day's 
work done by a Colporteur in this portion of the field 
has been in securing orders for 105 volumes in one day; 
103 of these were afterward delivered in a half day. 
The same colporteur maintained an average of 50 volumes 
per day for two consecutive months. Certainly, 
this is exceptional; but it may be taken as a straw, indicating 
the direction of the wind, and an encouragement 

R3714:page38 

to those who are asking what share they may 
have in the great doings of the harvest time. 

But for those who cannot seize opportunities like the 
above, there is the Volunteer Work of Tract Distribution. 
Our statistics show that this has had attention 
in the last twelve months; but we sometimes wonder 
whether the friends realize that a large supply, well 
assorted, is maintained here, and that the tracts are to 
be had for the asking. Indeed, in no other way are 
they supplied, no charge being made for them under 
any circumstance. We shall hope to be called on more 
largely than ever for these little messengers. 

It has been the writer's privilege to make a Pilgrim 
Tour of about 5,000 miles in Eastern Australia and 
New Zealand. In all parts visited, it is plain to be 
seen that the "eagles" are being gathered to the "carcase." 
(Luke 17:37.) The largest attendance at meetings 
was at Sydney, where 200 to 300 came to the Chart 
Talks announced for the public. Besides this tour, 
there have been occasional extra meetings in and near 



Melbourne. 

Yet, the influence exerted by the Truth, when compared 
with the enormous power of Error, seems very 
small; and were it not for the assurance that God's 
Word does not return unto him void, but accomplishes 
his good pleasure, and prospers in the thing whereto he 
sends it, one might feel discouraged. But we do not 
know all things. We do not know the way of the wind, 

R3715 : page 38 

or other wonders of the works of God; neither do we 
know how hearts here and there may be in process of 
preparation for the reception of the Truth. We cannot 
tell where the good-ground heart may be found. But 
as surely as clouds full of rain empty themselves upon 
the earth, and as surely as the fallen tree remains in the 
place where it fell, so surely shall the bread-corn (truth) 
cast upon the waters (peoples) be found after many days. 
Therefore, "in the morning sow thy seed, and in the 
evening withhold not thine hand; for thou knowest not 
whether shall prosper either this or that, or whether 
they both shall be alike good."— Eccl. 11:1-6. 

The financial report tells its own story. Without the 
generous cooperation of the Head Office, in this and 
other ways, the Australasian Branch could not go on 
as it does. 

Seeking a continued interest in your prayers and those 
of all the dear brethren scattered abroad, I remain, 
dear Brother, Your servant and His, 

E. C. HENNINGES. 

AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH SUMMARY 

PUBLICATIONS CIRCULATED. 

Copies of DAWN and TOWER DAWN 17,703 

Copies of Booklets 1,996 

Total 19,699 

Tract Pages sent free 4,218,600 

Letters and Cards received 1,686 

Letters and Cards sent 2,490 

Total 4,176 

EXPENDITURES L. s d 

Pilgrim Work, expense of meetings, etc. 216 18 5 
Cost of literature sent out free, rent, 

gas, etc., etc 256 5 

Postage, freight, etc., 73 12 6 

Total 546 15 11 

Receipts from Australasia 108 12 6 



Deficit 338 3 5 

[We should remark that the deficit above shown, 
also those of the German and English Branches previously 
reported, are all owing to the Headquarters at 
Allegheny. These were all included in our principal report 
and its statement of a deficit.— EDITOR.! 



R3715 : page 38 

THE BATTLE OF TEMPTATION. 

-MATTHEW 4:1-11. -FEBRUARY 4.- 

Golden Text:— "In all points tempted like 
as we are, yet without sin."— Heb. 4:15. 

WITH sin came selfishness— indeed "original sin" 
sprang from selfishness, which has marked its 
development at every step for now six thousand 
years. Selfishness is the mainspring of a battle not only 
against benevolence and righteousness but against everything 
that stands in its ambitious way. It has led to all 
the conflicts of the world, both personal and national. 
While it is evil and only evil in itself, it may, under God's 
providences, serve a useful purpose in the development of 
character. As God stands for every principle of goodness, 
righteousness, mercy and truth, Satan stands for or represents 
all the adverse principles of sin, covetousness, injustice, 
untruthfulness, unprinciple, selfishness in its every 
form. Sooner or later each individual esteemed worthy of 
divine favor and life must be tested along this line of principle 
—faithfulness to God and the principles of righteousness 
against lack of principle, selfishness. 

The apostles record the temptation of Jesus along the 
line of selfishness, after his anointing with the holy Spirit. 
Doubtless as a child and as a young man he had temptations 
along this line such as are common to others, and 
doubtless his perfection of being made this as nothing, so inwrought 
must love have been in the very constitution of a perfect 
being such as he was. It may surprise some that his temptation 
could be as great, yea, much greater, after the anointing 
of the Spirit. This, however, was the case. Moreover, 
it is well to remember that our Golden Text, "Tempted in 
all points like as we are, yet without sin," does not refer 
to the ordinary temptations experienced by our Lord 
in common with others before his anointing. It was 
our Lord's trials, temptations and victories as a New 
Creature that constituted him the Captain of our Salvation 
and our pattern— "Tempted in all points like as we 
[new creatures] are." 

LED BY THE SPIRIT INTO TEMPTATION 



We should never voluntarily go into temptation. Reverence, 
humility and caution should deter us. We should 
have such a realization of our own imperfection that we 
would seek to avoid temptation and pass by on the other 
side. Nevertheless, when temptations do come to us we 
should be of good courage, remembering that greater is he 
who is for us than all they that be against us, that he has 
promised never to leave or forsake us, and that his strength 
shall be perfected in our weakness if we will by faith accept 
of his aid. 

We must not expect to escape temptations, trials, difficulties, 

R3716 : page 39 

perplexities, because only through these can we be 
developed, perfected in character. Only the tried ones 
could ever be declared overcomers. Sin, error, is all about 
us, and presented to us not only by the world and Satan 
but also by the attitudes of our own flesh. If we be without 
trials, without temptations, without difficulties, we may 
be sure that we will never be overcomers and never receive 
the crown of glory and join t-heirship with our Lord, the 
Head, the Captain, the Leader of the overcomers. We are 
not forgetting the request of the model prayer, "Lead us 
not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one." 
But for the foregoing reasons we incline to prefer the 
rendering of this verse as given in the Emphatic Diaglott, 
"Abandon us not in temptation, but deliver us from the 
Evil one." As our Lord declared, "It must needs be that 
offences [trials] come." 

Our Lord was led by his own spirit, his own mind, to 
go into the wilderness and thus indirectly into trials and 
difficulties there experienced. So it is with the Lord's followers. 
It is through their holy minds or dispositions, the 
result of their full consecration to the Lord and their reception 
of the begetting of his Spirit, that they, too, are led 
into temptations, trials, difficulties similar to those which 
our Lord experienced. 

TEMPTED FORTY DAYS 

The account in our lesson speaks of our Lord's temptation 
as occurring at the close of his forty days in the wilderness, 
but Mark and Luke in referring to the same forty days 
imply that our Lord was tempted for the entire period. 
Both thoughts are evidently correct: he was tempted during 
the forty days, tested, tried as respects his own mind, his 
own disposition to do the Father's will, while the temptation 
narrated in our lesson, which occurred at the close of the 
forty days, was a special conflict with Satan— Diabolus. 
And we here remark that this name Diabolus is always in 
the Greek used in the singular number, evidently referring 
to Satan, the prince of demons. The matter is confused before 
the mind of the English reader by the fact that our 
common version Bible uses the word devils, in the plural, 
whereas the Greek in such places is a totally different word, 



signifying demons. 

Errors entertained by many hinder them from properly 
appreciating the matter of our Lord's temptation. Some, 
with the theory that he was a spirit being who merely assumed 
a human body and pretended for a time to be a man, 
can have no proper appreciation of this account until they 
drop their misconception and accept the Scriptural declaration 
that "he who was rich, for our sakes became poor"— 
that "he was made flesh"— that he was actually the "man 
Christ Jesus" and no longer the spirit being; but humbly, 
voluntarily, stripped of his glory, honor and privileges as a 
spirit being, became subject to all the limitations of a perfect 
man, corresponding to father Adam and his perfection 
before he sinned and came under the divine sentence of 
death. 

"ABOUT MY FATHER'S BUSINESS" 

Some things our Lord knew most distinctly, other 
things had not yet been revealed to him by the Father. 
Even as the boy of twelve we find that he knew that he had 
proceeded forth and came from God, that he had come into 
the world on a special mission, and that he must be about 
his Father's business. Learning that he could not enter 
upon the Father's business, "the work thou gavest me to 
do," until he was thirty years of age, he patiently awaited 
the time and hid his identity and contented himself with 
being a faithful son in the humble sphere in which divine 
providence had placed him. But just as soon as he had 
reached the appointed age he hastened to make his covenant 
with God, symbolized by his baptism— namely, a full consecration 
of his every talent and power to do the Father's will 
even unto death. At the time noted by our lesson he had 
done this and had received the anointing and filling of the 
holy Spirit. He now stood at the threshold of his great 
work, and realizing its importance and that now it was due 
time for him to understand the divine plan which he was to 
execute, that he might do it thoroughly and in full accord 
with the divine will he sought the wilderness, that in solitude 
he might know thoroughly the proper course for him to 
take in announcing himself as Messiah to Israel and the 
world. 

WORTHY THE LAMB SLAIN 

Symbolically our Lord shows that it was not possible 
for him to know the completeness of the divine plan until 
after he had demonstrated his worthiness to be the heir of 
all things, and until that worthiness was proven by his obedience 
unto death, even the death of the cross. In the symbols 
of Revelation he points this out to us, showing how the 
divine plan had long been in the Father's hand a sealed 
scroll, and how that no one in heaven or earth had been 
found worthy to open that book or scroll or to understand 
the particulars of the divine program until he, as the antitypical 
Lamb of God, had been slain, and by his sacrifice 



had demonstrated his worthiness to receive wisdom, honor, 
dominion and might. Then to him was the scroll or book 
of the divine plan entrusted in its every detail, that in due 
time all the wonderful provisions of the divine plan might 
be fully executed in the glorification of the Church and the 
blessing of all the families of the earth.— See Revelation 5. 

Those forty days, we may safely assume, were spent in 
meditation and prayer, our Lord being led to this course by 
his spirit of devotion to the Father, his anxiety to do the 
Father's will in the Father's way. He had neither Bible 
nor concordances nor other assistance in the study of the 
divine predictions, but he had instead the perfect memory 
and the eighteen years of hearing the reading of the Law in 
the Synagogue. We may safely say that he knew the entire 
Word of God by heart. He had known it for some time, 
and not only had exercised his own thought upon it but 
had also inquired of the most learned their views. He evidently 
realized that it was not due time for him to have a 
clear and full understanding of the prophecies until he had 
received the holy Spirit— that the divine revelations were 
only intended to be understood by those enlightened by the 
holy Spirit. He therefore now expected and doubtless realized 
newer and clearer views of the subjects he had been 
studying from childhood respecting his personal mission and 
the manner in which it was to be executed, as foretold in 

R3716 : page 40 

the shadows of the Law and in the veiled testimonies of the 
prophets. 

"TEACH ME THY WILL, O GOD" 

In fancy we may see our Lord meditating upon how he 
was to be the Mediator of a new Covenant, the antitype of 
Moses, who mediated the Law Covenant. In our minds we 
may with him watch the procedure of the going up into the 
mountain, the receiving of the commission and the preaching 
of it to the people under a vail, and how this transaction 
not only represented a first advent but a second advent in 
glory. We may presume that he studied carefully the type 
of the sin offerings, the Day of Atonement sacrifices, by 
which propitiation for the sins of the world was to be 
accomplished. 

We may in our mind's eye see him unravelling the symbol 
of the typical Jubilee year and noting the blessings of 
the Millennial age which shall ultimately come to all who 
should become the Lord's people through him. 

We see him studying the type of the Israelites bitten by 
the serpents in the wilderness of Sin, and how their looking 
with faith upon the brazen serpent was the cure. 

We may see him endeavoring to apply this to himself 
as the antitype who should be made sin, treated as the sinner 
in the interest of the sin-smitten ones. 

We may see him wrestling with the prophetic statements 
of Isaiah respecting the one who would be led as a 



lamb to the slaughter; how he should be a man of sorrows 
and acquainted with grief, and that the people of Israel 
would be ashamed of him and hide as it were their faces 
from him, giving him no support, no assistance or cooperation 
in the work he had come to do; how the Lord would 
lay on him the iniquity of us all, that by his stripes we 
might be healed. 

We see him wrestling with the statements made by the 
prophet Daniel, some of which were in process of fulfilment 
and therefore to be understood; others sealed by God and 
impossible to be understood by any— waiting times and 
seasons which the Father had put in his own power, of 
which neither the Son nor the angels of heaven, any more 
than others, were informed. 

We see him studying the symbolical representations of 
the establishment of the Kingdom of heaven at the close of 
a certain period of the world's history, and how it would be 
with power and great glory; how previously Messiah would 
be cut off, not for his own sins but for the sins of the people, 
and how he would seal up the testimony, anoint the 
most holy, etc., etc. 

OUR LORD'S EARNESTNESS 

These studies— interspersed, we may be sure, with 
prayer— seemingly occupied our Lord's attention so completely, 
so fully, so thoroughly for those forty days that he 
had no thought for anything else. We may infer that he 
neither ate nor slept, for the record is that at the close of 
the forty days he afterward hungered. So intent was his 
perfect mind upon the great subject with which he wrestled 
that it absorbed all of his vitality, energy, in this effort to 
know the Father's will in order that he might do it. We 
can very readily suppose, too, that he experienced various 
temptations during these forty days of study; that although 
he was separate from sinners and all sinful thoughts or 
ambitions, nevertheless it would be quite a test to his loyalty 
of purpose to so interpret the Scriptures as to see in 
them the great sufferings, trials and disappointments which 
he afterward experienced. Continually there would be the 
opportunity of taking a different view of the matter— the 
opportunity of construing the course outlined for him another 
way than that which would mean so much of degradation 
and dishonor to the One despised and rejected of men 
even unto death, even the death of the cross. 

R3717 : page 40 

"STUDY TO SHOW THYSELF APPROVED" 

There is a great lesson in all of this for all of the 
Lord's followers. If it was the wise and proper course for 
the Master to go aside for the study of the divine plan before 
beginning his public ministry, how much more should 
his followers feel it incumbent upon them as fallen beings 
with imperfect judgments to seek counsel of the Lord's 



Word and Spirit to ascertain what work the Lord would 
have them do in his vineyard before beginning any work. 
If this course were more generally followed there would be 
far less ranting done in the name of the Lord, fewer would 
feel that it was their privilege to rush in and work for the 
Lord without first studying carefully the divine will or program 
respecting that work— lest they should be hinderers 
of the Lord's plan which they desire to serve. 

Let us more and more apply each to himself the Apostle's 
words to Timothy, "Study to show thyself approved 
unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, 
rightly dividing the Word of Truth." Until we do study we 
will have every reason to doubt our preparation or usefulness 
in the Lord's service. First comes consecration, wholly, 
unreservedly; and secondly, as the first step in the fulfilling 
of that vow, comes the study of the divine will, the divine 
Word, the divine plan; and following that comes labor in 
the Lord's vineyard. 

THE TEMPTER CAME TO HIM 

At the close of the forty days of personal, earnest 
study, and when our Lord had reached a conclusion respecting 
the divine program as outlined through the Law and the 
prophets, and when in doing so he was exhausted in mind 
and in body, then the tempter came, the representative of 
all subtlety, a liar from the beginning. As the Lord's followers 
we can from experience say that this is the Adversary's 
general course— to intrude himself and his temptations 
at the opportune moment of our greatest weakness. 
While busily engaged in searching for the Father's will our 
Lord was not molested by the tempter, but as soon as he 
had digested the subject and reached a conclusion, and 
while his perfect but overtaxed human powers needed and 
sought refreshment, recuperation, that was the moment of 
the tempter's assault. Let us remember that it is the same 
with us who are his footstep followers, how he was tempted 
in all points like as we are. 

We have found some of the Lord's faithful people surprised 
at first because they had so few trials, and we have 
always admonished such to use such a period of rest for 
study, for putting on the whole armor of God, that they may 

R3717 : page 41 

be able to stand when the assault shall surely come later 
on. Apparently the Lord's providences safeguard us at the 
very beginning of our experiences until we have sufficient 
opportunity for reaching a firm and definite conclusion in 
our own minds respecting his will, as presented to us in his 
Word. Whoever fails to use this period faithfully, earnestly, 
will find himself so much the weaker, so much the more liable 
to defeat, when the testings from the Adversary come a 
little later. It is also to be noted that these peculiar trials 
and temptations which come to us as the Lord's followers 
do not reach us until after we have attained the point of full 



consecration to the Lord. Neither do we have the privilege 
of coming to a clearer appreciation of the teaching of the 
Word until after such a consecration. 

"AS AN ANGEL OF LIGHT" 

The account does not say and we therefore cannot 
know whether Satan appeared to our Lord personally 
or not. The fact that he was tempted in all points like 
as we [his brethren] are seems to imply that Satan did 
not appear to him personally, because he does not so 
appear to us in connection with our temptations. We 
may be sure, however, if there were any personal appearance 
it would be that of an angel of light, and not 
at all as Satan is vulgarly pictured, with hoofs, horns, 
etc. If Satan were to present himself in any vulgar 
form to any in harmony with the Lord, the effect would 
be to at once disarm the temptation. We may be 
sure, therefore, that Satan would adopt no such course 
at any time. 

The Apostle puts us on our guard, that rather we are 
to expect the Adversary's temptations along the line 
of an angel of light— a minister of the Truth. He always 
affects to be a helper and not a hinderer of the 
Lord's people. He would show them how to get along 
in the world much more smoothly and more happily; 
he would bless them; he would turn their narrow, rugged 
path into a path of roses; he would be their friend, 
their counsellor, their guide. Only after they had followed 
him awhile would they find, when well under his 
power, that he is a murderer from the beginning and 
abode not in the Truth. As illustrations of some of his 
misrepresentations in our day note the claims of Theosophists, 
Spiritualists, and Christian Scientists. These 
all affect to lift mankind to higher planes, to free them 
from pains and trials, and to give them a higher wisdom, 
guidance and instruction than that which they might 
receive from the divine Word and the light which shines 
therein from the cross of Christ. 

"LIKE AS WE ARE" 

Not like as the world was our Lord tempted, not 
like as we are tempted as natural men and women, but 
like as we are tempted who have become new creatures 
in Christ through a full consecration of our hearts, 
based upon our justification through his blood. Our 
Lord's temptations correspond to the temptations of 
this class only. 

Our temptations are from three different quarters, 
well represented in the three tests put to our Lord by 
Diabolus. First the flesh, second the world, third the 
adversary himself. All of our Lord's trials as a New 
Creature were from these three quarters, and all of the 
trials of his followers as New Creatures are from the 
same. Let us, while following our Lord's experiences, 



apply the same to ourselves. 

TEMPTATION FIRST--THE FLESH 

Self-gratification is to some extent proper, but there 
are limitations. Those who are consecrated to the 
Lord may not seek to gratify themselves, their appetites, 
in any manner contrary to the divine arrangement— to 
do so would be sin. This rule applied to our Lord as 
well as to all his followers. After his forty days' fast 
he was very hungry, and the tempter's suggestion to 
him was that of a friend. Jesus was reminded that he 
was the Son of God, that he had every right to all the 
favors of God, that his hunger was a legitimate craving 
of nature, that there was nothing sinful in being hungry, 
and that he had therefore the right, the privilege, to 
reasonably gratify his appetite. All this was true. The 
next suggestion was, You have the power— you have 
just received the anointing of the holy Spirit— you may 
therefore at your pleasure command these stones and 
they would turn to bread; power to do this is vested in 
you by God. Use that power now for the supply of 
your needs. Why should you hunger? Take counsel 
of a friend, appreciate my interest in you; if I were an 
enemy I would prefer to see you starve to death or at 
least prefer to see you suffer. 

How insidious was this temptation! It had in it 
many elements of truth, and apparently was kindly and 
well meant. There was just the one flaw which our 
Lord's keen mind at once discerned, and his loyal heart 
at once repudiated the advice. He reasoned, This holy 
Spirit, this power I have received in my anointing, was 
not intended to be used for self gratification; it was my 
begetting of the Spirit as a New Creature, to the intent 
that as a great High Priest I might lay down my life, 
might sacrifice myself as a human being. If now I 
should use this holy power, which was given me for the 
purpose of sacrificing, in an opposite direction, to heal, 
restore, to strengthen the mortal body which I have 
just delivered to death, it would be wrong— it would 
be using the power of God in an opposite direction from 
the divine intention. However hungry I feel I cannot 
do this. My life is in my Father's hands. I have been 
here these forty days under the guidance of the holy 
Spirit, seeking to know and to do the Father's will, I 
have not forfeited my life by disobedience, I may therefore 
conclude that while I am thus about my Father's 
business naught shall harm my Father's child. Hence 
I conclude that my hunger will not prove really injurious 
to me. My answer to this temptation of the Adversary 
will not impugn his motives in mentioning it, for that 
would be unkind and needless. My reply is: Bread 
is not the only thing by which man shall live; every 
word of God is a word of life. I have been feeding upon 
this heavenly food, I am strong in my spirit, in my determination 
to do my Father's will. I will not use improper 



means for my refreshment of body. The Father 
will be able to make up to me whatever disadvantage 
may accrue through my faithfulness to him. His will 
be done in me. 

SPIRITUAL PRIVILEGES NOT FOR SELFISH USES 

How are the Lord's followers tempted as he was in 
this respect? We have no power to turn stones into 
bread. No! But having received the holy Spirit, 

R3717 : page 42 

it is within the range of our opportunities to use the 

same contrary to our consecration, to use it for our 

physical benefit— for instance, to make merchandise of 

the Gospel, to preach that which would be pleasing to 

the natural man and bring us worldly applause and approval 

and wealth and social caste, etc. This would 

be selling our birthright for the mess of pottage. Those 

who see the matter in its true light, those who are in 

the right attitude of heart to appreciate the matter, 

will not do this but will say, Natural food alone will not 

sustain us. We cannot live except as we have the 

smile, the favor, the approval of the Lord our God. To 

live without that would not be living for us. 

Another temptation coming to some of the Lord's 
consecrated ones along this line would seem to be in 
the teaching that to some extent prevails, that they 
should go to God with every ailment and pain and thus 

R3718 : page 42 

use their privileges as anointed members of the body 
of Christ for the healing of their mortal bodies, which 
they have already in consecration surrendered to death. 
Would this be right? Would it not be along the same 
lines as our Lord's temptation to use the privileges and 
opportunities and powers that were his as the anointed 
one to comfort, strengthen and upbuild his mortal body? 
We believe that the cases are analogous, and that it is 
highly improper for any of the Lord's people who have 
received of his Spirit, who have made a consecration of 
their lives, to ask for any special intervention of the 
Lord's power on their behalf, to attempt in any manner 
to use their privileges as members of the Royal Priesthood 
to minister to their flesh. 

On the contrary, so far as their fallen flesh is concerned, 
they have all the rights and privileges of the whole world 
to food and raiment and anything that in the Lord's 
providence may come to their attention as being healthful, 
strengthening, call this food or call it medicine as 
we please. It is our holy Spirit privileges as Royal 
Priests that cannot be invoked for earthly advantage, 
because this relationship to our Lord was not granted 
us for such a purpose, but rather that under this holy 



Spirit relationship we might the more efficiently lay 
down our lives for the brethren. It is in vain that some 
reason that they merely desire physical health that they 
may better perform their sacrifices to the Lord. The 
Scriptures declare that obedience is better than sacrifice. 

Let us accept such temporal, physical blessings and 
mercies as divine providence grants us with gratitude, 
with thankfulness, and let our holy spirits, our holy 
minds, intentions, so use our mortal bodies as to make 
the best use possible of our talents, opportunities, and 
conditions for the service of the Lord, not asking for 
resuscitation or special strength as our Lord did not, 
but accepting such favors as the Father might grant 
to us unsolicited— "Your Father knoweth what things 
ye have need of before ye ask him." "After all these 
things [food, raiment, health, etc.] do the Gentiles seek." 
-Matt. 6:8,32. 

TEMPTATION THE SECOND-THE WORLD 

Satan did not stop to argue the question; he saw 
that it would be useless as soon as he perceived that the 
Lord's stand had been firmly taken. And so we also 
have the promise, "Resist the tempter and he will flee 
from you."— Jas. 4:7. 

But although Satan fled, desisted from the first temptation, 
he speedily brought another, still in a friendly 
manner. Paraphrased, his proposition was this: "I 
carry you in mind to the roof of the southern wing of 
the Temple, which overlooks the valley of Hinnom 
[Gehenna]. A leap from that altitude would attract 
the attention of all the people, especially the most religious 
class, if done at the hour of the day when large 
crowds gather in the Temple. It would be a wonderful 
way of announcing your mission and showing at the 
same time the divine power which is in you. And there 
is a Scripture which implies that this was to be the way 
you would make an announcement of your Messiahship. 
It reads, 'He shall give his angels charge concerning 
thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up lest thou 
dash thy foot against a stone.' (Psa. 91:11,12.) This 
Scripture would undoubtedly be fulfilled by the leap 
I am suggesting, and the people, realizing its fulfilment, 
would apply the Scripture directly to you and would 
all give attention to you as Messiah. They would all as 
a whole become your followers, and your mission would 
be thoroughly launched in one day." Longfellow 
practically pictures the scene: 

"Unto the holy Temple on Moriah, 
With its resplendent domes and manifold 

Bright pinnacles of gold. 
Where they wait thy coming, O Messiah! 
Lo, I have brought thee! Let thy glory here 

Be manifest and clear. 



"Reveal thyself by royal act and gesture 
Descending with the bright triumphant host 

Of all the highermost 
Archangels, and about thee as a vesture 
The shining clouds and all thy splendors show 

Unto the world below." 

Again the suggestion had the appearance of being a 
friendly one. Could it be that Satan was really interested 
in the Lord's mission? Could it be that whereas 
he had been the tempter at first he was now sincerely 
desirous of undoing his work and becoming a co-laborer 
with and a helper of the Lord Jesus in his mission? 
Would it not be a great item in itself to gain first of all 
the great tempter who had misled so many, and, by 
converting him, to begin the work with his co-operation? 
And were not his words wise? Would it not provoke a 
general comment all through Palestine, and awaken the 
people to a realization of the power of God in their midst 
in the person of Jesus? 

THOU SHALT NOT TEMPT GOD 

All of these thoughts and many more doubtless came 
to our Lord in connection with the tempter's suggestion. 
But his study of the divine plan during those forty days, 
and the conclusions he there reached, quickly settled 
our Lord's decision that he could not take such a course, 
that it would not be consistent with the divine plan 
which he saw outlined in the Law and the prophets, 
and that anyway such a procedure would not be according 
to proper lines, reasonable conduct; that in thus 
leaping from the Temple parapet he would in a measure 
be tempting God by going contrary to the established 
law of gravitation. He could readily see that if in the 
performance of some obligation, some duty, he should 
miss his footing and fall from the Temple, that the Lord 
would be able to protect him, that he would receive no 

R3718 : page 43 

injury; but it would be quite another matter for him to 
adopt a plan for serving God that was contrary to what 
he recognized to be a law of nature. Not by merely 
curious wonder-working was he to be known to the people, 
but by the working of the works of him who sent 
him; by giving illustrations, in the healing of the sick 
and the blind and the lame, of the great work of God 
in restitution which would be accomplished through him 
later, during the Millennial age. The Adversary had 
no more to say, it would have been useless; he left him 
so far as that temptation was concerned. 

Have the followers of Jesus temptations along this 
line? 

Yes, we answer. The world continually looks to 
those who confess their relationship to the Lord as sons 



and who profess to have received the spirit of adoption, 
and urges them to show or attempt to show some marvel 
in his favor, if they would prove that they are specially 
the Lord's children. 

"THIS GENERATION SEEKETH A SIGN," 

said our Lord, and thus it is with every generation, 
every people— the whole world. The world wants 
miracles or outward show of sanctity and great professions. 
Some responding to this spirit of the world 
have adopted peculiar dress. Monks, nuns, quakers, 
and others make profession of wonderful powers received 
through laying on of hands, and would thus 
impress the world along worldly lines. Others claim 
the power by magic words to change the bread and wine 
into the actual body of Christ, and authority then to 
sacrifice him. We cannot suppose that sane people 
really believe that they do anything of the kind; we 
must suppose that they do it for a spectacular effect 
upon the world. Similarly the red and purple and gold 
and white and black robes, miters, not now enjoined. 

The world seeks after signs of healing, wonder-working 
magic, etc., and the nearer the Lord's people approach 
to these things the more they may expect to 
influence the world. Romanists are leaders along these 
lines, and have relics of saints, garments, bones, etc., 
to which reverence is attached in the minds of all classes 
except in the most civilized lands. Many of these things 
are attempted also by the Mormons, Spiritualists, 
Christian Scientists, and magnetic healers, and there is 
a general tendency amongst all denominations to attempt 
something of the spectacular whereby to arrest 
and fix the attention of the public. 

As our Lord avoided anything and everything spectacular 
so should also his followers. True, our Lord 
performed some miracles of healing, but we should remember 
that the numbers healed as compared with 
the whole number of the people was comparatively 
small. We should remember also that these were the 
foretold witnesses by which he should be recognized, 
that they were foreshadowings of his coming glorious 
work of restitution to all the families of the earth, which 
shall be accomplished in due time during the Millennial 
age. True, also, there were miraculous gifts and 
tongues in the early Church, which we see through the 
Apostle's statement were designed for the establishment 
of the Church until the work of grace should more 
thoroughly be developed in the hearts of the Lord's 
people, when the fruits of the Spirit should and did 
supplant the miraculous gifts of the Spirit. 

The Lord's people should be on guard against any 
unreasonable procedures in the proclamation of the 
Gospel. The service of ambassadors for God is a 
reasonable service, and those who are in proper line in 
the footsteps of Jesus will be found to possess more 



and more of the "spirit of a sound mind."— 2 Tim. 1:7. 

MISAPPLICATION OF SCRIPTURES 

Note in connection with this temptation of our Lord 
that the Adversary quoted Scripture in support of his 
position, and that our Lord met the temptation not only 
upon reasonable, logical grounds, but with the Scriptures 
also. The lesson in this is that we not only need 

R3719 : page 43 

to have the Bible in our possession and be able to read 
it, but we also need the guidance of the holy Spirit, 
the spirit of a sound mind, in our application of the 
Word to the affairs of life. Our Lord did not dispute 
that the Father could give the angels a charge over 
him to bear up his feet, to preserve him from injury, 
but he did reason correctly and in harmony with the 
Word that it would be wrong for him to tempt the Lord, 
to try the Lord, to test the Lord's ability. Instead of 
proving the Lord and having him co-operate with a 
wonder-working spirit, we should the more carefully 
investigate the teachings of the divine plan, to ascertain 
and follow the course marked out for us in the Lord's 
providences, our reasonable service, even to the extent 
of the using up of our mortal bodies in reasonable methods, 
in the promulgation of the Truth. 

In the light of the unfolding of God's plan we see 
that the living members of the Church constitute the 
feet of the body of Christ— the last members. We 
see further that in the prophecy which Satan quoted 
reference is had to the serious difficulties and trials of 
our day which would precede the feet members, "The 
hour of trial which shall come upon the whole world, 
to try them that dwell upon the earth."— Rev. 3:10. 

We see that in our day there is a stumbling-stone permitted 
for the testing of our faith and patience and 
loyalty; that whoever is of the proper character will be 
aided of the Lord to victory, so that the stumbling-stone 
to such will be a stepping-stone to higher riches of grace 
and blessing. We hear the Apostle speaking of our 
day and saying, "Who shall be able to stand?" (Rev. 6:17.) 
And the answer is that all the faithful in Christ, 
all the true members of the elect body, will stand in 
this day of testing, because the Lord will give his messengers 
a charge, a message in their interest, that they 
may bear them up in their hands by their power, lest 
they should be stumbled in this time. Nothing shall be 
able to stumble, to deceive, the very elect.— Matt. 24:24. 

TEMPTATION THIRD-THE DEVIL 

All of these temptations were of the devil, but from 
different standpoints. The third one was Satan's own 
temptation in a special sense or degree, in that it was 



along the subtle lines which he himself has seemed to 
follow in all his work as an adversary of God and of 
righteousness. 

In this temptation the Lord is taken, not physically 
but in the spirit of his mind, up into a high mountain— 
a very exalted kingdom. Physically he was all this 
time in the desert near Jerusalem, and as a matter of 
fact there is neither in that desert nor anywhere in the 
world a mountain from which all the kingdoms of the 

R3719 : page 44 

world could be viewed except with the mind's eye. The 
very high mountain or high kingdom superior to all 
earthly kingdoms was Satan's own dominion of the 
world. For a long time by usurpation he has been the 
prince of this world, who now worketh in the hearts 
of the children of disobedience, and who blinds the 
minds of those who believe not the Gospel. (2 Cor. 4:4.) 
Not that Satan is known to be the ruler and is recognized 
as such, nor that God has given him this dominion, 
but by deceiving mankind he has usurped the control of 
their minds. He is the great deceiver of whom we read 
that in the Millennial age our Lord Jesus shall bind him 
that he shall deceive the peoples no more.— Rev. 20:3. 

In this temptation Satan seems to have entered 
sympathetically with our Lord in his work, as though 
he had said to him, "I see that you are bent upon doing 
a thorough work, and that to some extent you realize 
the difficulties which are before you— the impossibility 
of bringing order out of present confusion. You see 
the world of mankind steeped in sin and ignorance and 
superstition, taking pleasure in war, licentiousness and 
falsehood. You long to recover them, to establish a 
dominion of righteousness in which all the people shall 
be blessed and brought to see the advantage of obedience 
to God, of lives of peace, sobriety and happiness. 
I am with you in this matter. I also deplore the wretched 
condition of the world; I have been a witness to its 
degradation for four thousand years, and am now ready 
to join with you or rather to have you join with me in 
the work of lifting the world out of its deplorable 
condition. 

"It was not my original design to bring such a blight 
upon mankind. I wanted to have a dominion, I wanted 
to be a ruler; there was no chance in heaven, because 
everything there was strictly under the rule and guidance 
of Jehovah God; therefore I endeavored to establish 
a kingdom amongst men. I will admit that humanity 
as it is at present is no credit to me or to my 
reign of centuries. I am willing to turn over the entire 
matter to you, to exert all the influence and power 
which I possess amongst men and to thus give you the 
control of the whole world to lift them up, to bless them, 
to do them every good, if you will but recognize me in 
connection with this dominion of earth. This is the 



short road to all that you desire to accomplish for man, 
and it is the only road, for you may well judge that 
if you do not take up with my proposition I will oppose 
you at every step and you see what my influence is 
amongst men. Not only will you yourself have most 
rugged experiences, but all who will attempt to co-operate 
with you I would oppose, so that there would 
practically be no opportunity for doing the good you 
have come into the world to accomplish except as you 
have my assistance and co-operation." 

"HIM ONLY SHALT THOU SERVE" 

Our Lord's answer came promptly; we might paraphrase 
it thus: "O, Lucifer, it is true that you have 
great power, that you could co-operate, that you could 
also on the contrary oppose the work in which I have 
engaged and to which I have just consecrated my life. 
You rightly judge that my flesh shrinks from such a 
terrible conflict as I realize is before me, and that if 
the work could be accomplished in an easy, peaceable 
manner it would be my joy to have it so. But I remind 
you that my life is not consecrated to the work but to 
the Father, my God, and from this standpoint you are 
not only God's opponent, adversary, but also my adversary, 
in that you are endeavoring to alienate my 
affections and loyalty from him. Get thee behind me, 
I will not recognize you, I must follow the right course, 
well expressed in the Scriptures which say, 'Thou 
shalt reverence the Lord thy God and him only shalt 
thou serve.' There can be no compromise. You are 
on one side of the matter and God is on the other side. 
You may oppose me in my work in every way within 
your power to the extent that the Almighty will permit 
you. No more can you do, and if this in the 
Lord's providence shall bring me trials, disappointments, 
pain, suffering, death, I have already pledged 
myself to God to the full extent of all this." 

The temptation was ended, our Lord's firmness 
and uncompromising loyalty to the Father and to 
his plan were fully vindicated; he was prepared 
now for the ministry of three and a half years, 
and knew to expect that from start to finish he would 
have the opposition of the adversary in every sense of 
the word— even unto death, even the death of the cross. 

SIMILAR TEMPTATIONS BEFORE HIS BRETHREN 

In what respect are we tempted as was our Lord in 
this final temptation? We reply that similarly the 
adversary comes to us with suggestions respecting a 
compromise of the Truth. As the eyes of our understanding 
open to see to what extent evil has a dominating 
influence in the world, and that fidelity to the Truth will 
cost us all that we have, in that same proportion usually 
comes the suggestion to compromise, to try to accomplish 



the good by more or less fellowship and partisanship 

with the evils that are in the world. It is along 

this line that many in the nominal churches justify themselves 

in respect to the worldly forms and customs introduced. 

Fairs, private theatricals, games, etc., are 

all compromises intended to attract the worldly by having 

the Church approach as nearly as possible to the 

world's conceptions and ideals and standards, etc., and 

yet with a view not to degradation but to uplift the 

world. This was exactly the course which Satan proposed 

to our Lord and which he rejected. All who 

would follow in the footsteps of Jesus must also reject 

every compromise with the world— "Ye are not of the 

world even as I am not of the world, therefore the world 

hateth you."— John 17:16. 

Let us remember the words of our Lord, that those 
who would be his disciples should sit down first and 
count the cost before they enter upon discipleship, before 
they make the consecration of their lives, before 
they take upon them the holy name, "members of the 
body of Christ," the Church. And having taken their 
stand with the full knowledge that the way in which 
they are going is a narrow one, full of trials and difficulties, 
and that its further end is death, they will, with 
this view before their minds and such a consecration, be 
less likely to be sidetracked by the deceiving oppositions 
of the Adversary. Rightly instructed by the 
Word of the Lord they know that no real blessing could 
have come to the world except through his death, and 
to whatever extent he might have yielded to the Adversary's 
proposition for an easy way would have been 
a hindrance to that consummation. 

R3720 : page 45 

Likewise they know that all the Church, the elect of 
God, called to walk in his footsteps now, are to take 
up his cross and follow him and be faithful even unto 
death if they would have the crown of life. They see 
that in the divine order the blessing of the world can 
come only through the sacrifice of the Christ, Head and 
body. The more they come to understand the lengths 
and breadths and heights and depths of God's great 
plan, the more they see the wisdom of the divine arrangement 
and the impossibility of the success of any 
other. The sacrificing priesthood of the present time 
is to constitute the glorious Royal Priesthood of the 
future, through which all the families of the earth are to 
be blessed. All who would constitute themselves members 
of this Royal Priesthood must learn at the very 
beginning of their experience to say, Not my will nor 
my way, but thy will and thy way, O Lord, be done. 

Let each of us as followers of the Master be prompt 
in giving our response to the Adversary's proposition 
of compromise. He who dallies with temptation increases 
its power every moment; hence the propriety, yea, the 



necessity, of an absolute consecration of the heart, the 
will, at the beginning: on that foundation the daily conflicts 
with the world, the flesh and the Adversary become 
much more simple and lose much of their power. 
Meantime let us pray as our Lord directed, "Abandon 
us not in temptation, but deliver us from the evil one," 
realizing that of ourselves we are no match for the Adversary, 
that our help is in the Lord, and that greater 
is he who is on our part than all they that be against us. 



R3720 : page 45 

CALLED TO A HIGHER SERVICE 

-LUKE5:1-11.-FEBRUARY 11.- 

Golden Text:— "Be ye therefore followers 
of God, as dear children."— Eph. 5:1. 

OUR lesson relates to the calling of Peter, Andrew, 
James and John to be our Lord's constant 
companions, and the training for their 
work as apostles after his glorification. A period of 
about a year elapsed between the temptation in the 
wilderness and the scene of this lesson on the Lake of 
Galilee. In the meantime some of John's disciples and 
others had accepted Jesus as their teacher in heavenly 
things and were more or less in his company. Peter, 
Andrew, James and John being amongst these. It was 
about this time that John was imprisoned, and Jesus' 
ministry seems to have become more vigorous 
thereafter. 

As the narrative shows, Jesus was on the shore of 
the Lake of Galilee, and the public attracted to him— 
hungry for the word of life— pressed so closely as to 
inconvenience him, and he stepped into one of the 
fishing boats moored to the shore. It was Peter's 
boat, and our Lord requested him to push the boat a 
little from the shore, from which position he could 
the more easily address the large crowds on the shelving 
beach. Peter and his brother Andrew were managing 
one of the boats, and James and his brother John 
another of the same partnership, while hired helpers 
were also assisting (Mark 1:20.) They were cleaning 
and mending their nets, for they had been out all night; 
they were preparing for the next night's fishing, for at 
that time it appears that most of the net fishing is done. 
These fishermen and perhaps others in the same vicinity 
proceeded with their work while the Lord was 
preaching, no doubt giving earnest attention to his 
words at the same time. 

"LAUNCH OUT NOW" 



When our Lord had finished his discourse he suggested 
to Peter that he take the boat to deep water 
and let down his nets for a catch of fish. The response 
was that no fish were to be expected— that they had 
toiled all night without results; but through respect 
to the Master, if he desired it they would let down 
their nets again, without having any expectations 
as fishermen that they would meet with any success. 

The result was a net full of fish, the weight of 
which began to break the meshes of the net. Their 
partners were signalled to come to assist, with the 
final result that both boats were heavily laden with 
fish, so as almost to endanger their safety. When 
Peter noted the miracle performed he fell at Jesus' 
knees, saying, "Depart from me, for I am a sinful 
man, O Lord." He realized that he was in the presence 
of one possessed of more than human wisdom and 
power, and correspondingly he felt afraid. Although 
he and his partners had known Jesus for now over a 
year, he had never before so thoroughly realized the 
wonderful power hidden in Christ. 

A miracle was performed, however we may view 
it: we might suppose the creation of the fish on the 
spot, or the power of the Lord to at will bring a great 
school of fish to that vicinity, or the knowledge of the 
Lord that such a school of fish was in the vicinity. No 
matter which view we take, it would still leave the 
miracle intact; nor should we wish it otherwise, realizing 
that it is on a parity with others of Jesus' mighty 
works. Respecting the fishes of that lake we quote 
from a prominent writer as follows:— 

"The Sea of Galilee was always famed for the 
number and variety of its fish. There are more than 
fifty kinds. The thickness of the shoals of fish in the 
Lake of Gennesaret is almost incredible to any one 
who has not witnessed them. They often cover an 
area of more than an acre; and when the fish move 
slowly forward in a mass, and are rising out of the 
water, they are packed so close together that it appears 
as though a heavy rain were beating down upon 
the surface of the water." 

THE OBJECT OF THE MIRACLE 

It is evident that this miracle was performed for 
the purpose of fully and finally convincing Peter, Andrew, 
James and John respecting the Lord's relationship 
to the Father, and his power of control in respect 
to things temporal as well as things spiritual. The 
lesson evidently had its designed effect, and our Lord 
clinched the matter by then and there inviting the 
four to become his permanent disciples— to become 
fishers of men. This was the opposite course from what 
Peter had suggested— that the Lord depart from them 
because he was perfect and holy and had direct intercourse 
evidently with the heavenly powers, while they 



were poor and weak and sinful, imperfect through the 

R3720 : page 46 

fall. Separation did indeed take place, but it was between 
the disciples and their earthly business, not between 
them and the Lord. "They forsook all and 
followed him." Similarly tests have come to all whom 
the Lord has called throughout this age. 

MANY CALLED, FEW CHOSEN 

There was a great multitude on the shore who 
heard the Lord's teachings, but not to all of them did 
his message come with the same force and to the same 
end. Only a few were specially chosen and called. 
Doubtless there were elementary conditions in the 
hearts of these four that constituted them the ones 
ready and worthy to receive the special message. There 
may have been Israelites indeed in the multitude on 
the shore who were not yet ripe for the special invitation 
of discipleship, just as these same four who now 
forsook all to follow the Lord had been with him more 
or less for about a year, yet had not until now reached 
the place where they were ready to forsake all. 

All down through the Gospel age the Lord's invitations 
have been extended chiefly to those in the 
humbler walks of life— not many great, not many rich, 
not many wise, not many learned, not many noble, 
hath God chosen, but the mean things of the world, 
the things not esteemed— mainly the poor of this world 
rich in faith. (I Cor. 1:26-28; Jas. 2:5.) The Lord's 
dealing is practically the same with all. He does not 
invite them at first to a full consecration, but rather 
gives them leading and instruction along lines of justification, 
and after they have grown in knowledge to 
some degree they have the privilege of forsaking all 
to be his special disciples, to be fishers of men. 

One difficulty with Christians in general of all 
denominations is that this second step of full consecration 
is rarely brought to their attention. Under the 
false teaching that it is a question respecting heaven 
or hell that they must decide, the majority seem to 
feel satisfied that if they are reasonably decent, reasonably 
honest, they will escape eternal torment, and 
are not ambitious beyond this. They thus claim themselves 
to be, and are reckoned by others as disciples 
of Christ, whereas in reality they still belong to the 
multitude who hear with more or less of joy and bear 
witness to the wonderful words proceeding from the 
Lord's mouth, but who fail to attain the position of 
special disciples, not appreciating and not taught that 
to be the Lord's disciples we must "take up our cross 
and follow him." O, how necessary to the saints is 
the Truth! How wonderful the Lord's words, "Sanctify 
them through thy truth, thy Word is truth!" 



Error can never sanctify, and in proportion as it is 
mixed in our minds with the Truth, to that extent is 
the latter diluted and lacking in power. 

FORSAKING ALL TO FOLLOW CHRIST 

The narrative of our lesson would seem to imply 
that these four disciples had acted in a very irrational 
manner, leaving their boats and nets instantly without 
disposing of them or making provision for their care; 
but Mark's account informs us that the boats were 
left in the care of Zebedee, the father of James and 
John, with hired helpers. Nor need we suppose that 
the Lord and these four who became so prominent as 
his apostles started away from that vicinity that same 
hour or even that same day. It may have required 
time to make proper arrangements for the fish, for the 
business interests of the partnership, etc. The same 
is true of us: we have duties in life which it would be 

R3721 : page 46 

wrong to abruptly cast aside and ignore, responsibilities 
to others and a stewardship. The "spirit of a sound 
mind" is to govern the Lord's people in all of their 
affairs, both temporal and spiritual. 

The important thing decided at the moment and 
decided positively and permanently was that they accepted 
the Lord's invitation to enter the Father's service 
with him— fishing on a higher and grander scale, 
for men— gathering them into the Gospel net, with a 
view to their ultimate glorification as New Creatures 
in Christ and participants with him in the glory, honor, 
and immortality of his Kingdom soon to be established. 
Let us each remember the importance of a positive 
decision respecting our consecration to the Lord, our 
acceptance of service under him as our Master and 
Captain. Let us then as wisely as possible arrange 
life's affairs so as to be without carefulness respecting 
earthly things that we may the more readily and more 
completely give all of our time and energy to the most 
important of all works, the service of God, tidings of 
great joy for all people. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

However much we have heard of Jesus, however 
much we have rejoiced in the salvation which he died 
to secure for us, however much we have trusted in the 
merit of his sacrifice, we did not become his disciples 
until we had formally reached the point of giving our 
hearts, our lives, our wills to him— responding to his 
invitation, becoming followers of God as dear children 
under the guidance and instruction of our elder brother, 
Jesus. The opportunity does not come to all of us in 
just the same form that it presented itself to the four 



fishermen of our lesson, and yet there is a similarity. 

With many of us, as the Apostle explains, it is the Lord's 

will that we should abide in the vocation in which we 

were when the message of grace first reached us. (I Cor. 7:20-22.) 

Not all are called to an open, public ministry, 

devoting all of time, talent, effort and interest to the 

Gospel message. The majority of the called the Lord 

evidently intends to instruct as his disciples while they 

are about their ordinary business, the duties and responsibilities 

of life. 

With these, however, it is necessary that there be 
a forsaking of boats and fishing tackle, etc., in the heart 
from the moment that a full consecration is made to 
the Lord. We cannot serve God and Mammon. We 
cannot have two objects in life, both equally prominent 
to our attention. The Lord will not have it so with 
those who are to be his joint-heirs in the Kingdom. 
This class must appreciate the privilege of fellowship 
in his labor, sufferings and hopes of glory to such an 
extent that their hearts will no longer be in the ordinary 
affairs of life, their ambitions will no longer be 
for wealth or name or fame from the world's standpoint. 
All such ambitions and hopes we must "forsake" if we 
would be his disciples. He must be first, joint-heirship 
with him must be our ambition; otherwise our hearts 
would not be in a condition that would be pleasing to 
the Lord or that would not be single for his service; we 
would be of the kind described as double minded, unstable 
in all our works and ways. (Jas. 1:8.) Undoubtedly 

R3721 : page 47 

this is a difficulty with a large number of those 
who have named the name of Christ and professed 
consecration to him and his service. 

"AS DEAR CHILDREN" 

It is high time that we learn that we cannot serve 
God and Mammon, and that we choose as between 
these. If we do not choose the Lord and his service 
and place these first before our hearts' affections, we 
will be counted as placing the others first,— the interests 
of the natural man; and the Lord's appreciation of us 
and the reward he will give us will correspond. He 
has indeed blessings for all the families of the earth, 
but the special blessing presented in the exceeding 
great and precious promises of glory, honor and immortality 
are for those who love him supremely, more than 
they love houses or lands, business or wealth, family 
or kindred or self. 

Our exhortation to all who have forsaken all to 
follow the Lord is that we do not look back, that we 
estimate that we have made the grandest bargain 
imaginable, that we are in the way for obtaining the 
grandest prize imaginable, together with association 



with our Lord in his wonderful work and with the 
divine approval. 

This seems to be the thought of the Apostle when he 
urges us to lay aside every weight and entanglement 
that we may run with patience the race set before us, 
looking unto Jesus, the author of our faith, until he 
shall have become its finisher. Let us as promptly as 
possible, at the beginning of our Christian experience, 
settle once for all the matter of surrendering our wills 
to be followers of the Lamb; let us once for all arrange 
as wisely as possible our temporary affairs and interests 
in accordance with the reasonable demands of others 
respecting the same, and let us then faithfully persevere 
to the end of the race course. 



R3721 : page 47 

AN INTERESTING QUESTION ANSWERED. 
WHY ARE WE NOT SUBJECT TO THE LAW? 



Question.— Please make some further comments on 
the relationship of the Jewish Law Covenant to the Israelites, 
and explain why you assert that we are not subject to 
its provisions. 

Answer.— The Law given by Moses was good in every 
sense of the word, but the Covenant to which it was attached 
was one which was insufficient to meet the necessities 
of mankind, weak through the fall and incompetent to 
keep the perfect Law. The original law given was written 
in man's very nature when he was created perfect, in the 
image of God, and when his conscience was a sufficient 
criterion of judgment as respects the right and wrong of 
any matter. God's Covenant with Adam was one of eternal 
life based on continued obedience, and any infraction 
of that Covenant meant death. God's law to Israel, under 
the Mosaic covenant, implied that all who were thus in 
Moses as the mediator of that covenant, were reckoned as 
lifted out from the remainder of mankind, and as separated 
from the sentence of death upon the race in general 
through Adam. This was to the intent that Israel might 
have a fresh trial. But because of the imperfections of 
their flesh, Israel was unable to keep the Law of their Covenant, 
and hence unable to keep their share of the covenant 
and thus came under a special sentence of death— 
for that Law Covenant, which they thought would be unto 
life, they found worked death. 

The New Covenant differs from the Mosaic Covenant 
specially in its provision that God will be merciful to 
those under it, whereas under the Mosaic Covenant he 
proposed simply to be just. Israel could not gain any 
special blessing under a covenant of justice, but whoever 



comes under the New Covenant of mercy obtains a great 
favor. 

The New Covenant, as we have seen, differs from the 
Mosaic Covenant in placing its subjects under mercy instead 
of under justice. It has also a higher Mediator, one 
who was able to compensate justice and thus to extend mercy 
without infracting the Law. It was also established by 
better sacrifices— by the antitypes of bulls and goats, 
which were the sacrifices which sealed the New Covenant. 
While the Law of the New Covenant is in many respects 
the same in substance as the Law of Moses' Covenant, it 
nevertheless is a higher statement of that Law, and in full 
harmony with all the other higher features of the New 
Covenant. The highest statement of the New Covenant 
is, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, 
mind, strength and being, and thy neighbor as thyself," 
and although this highest statement of the divine Law was 
made known to Israel under Moses, they could not from 
their standpoint comprehend that statement of the Law, 
and a lower statement of the same Law was given them as 
a part of the Law of their Covenant, namely, the Ten 
Commandments. 

Those Ten Commandments have nothing whatever 
to do with the New Covenant, sealed with the precious 
blood of Christ, nor with the spiritual Israel accepted of 
God under that New Covenant. Indeed we may properly 
say that although the Ten Commandments were suitable 
enough to the House of Servants, our heavenly Father 
would not insult any of his children by addressing to them 
the language of the Ten Commandments. When we remember 
that the New Covenant and its Law applies only at 
the present time to the new creatures in Christ Jesus, who 
know that they have passed from death unto life because 
they love the brethren, and who know that they are the children 
of God because they have received his spirit of 
adoption, then we are prepared to see that it would be 
wholly incongruous for the heavenly Father, who has already 
accepted them in the Beloved One, to address to 
these the language of the decalogue. 

How hurt the consecrated people of God might properly 
feel to have the heavenly Father address them, saying, 
"Thou shalt not kill!" They would look up to the 
Father in sorrow, saying, "Dear heavenly Father, we have 
received of your spirit of love and have no longer the 
spirit of hatred and murder." Similarly with all the various 
charges of the decalogue, proper to the House of Servants: 
they would all be insulting to the House of Sons, 
implying that they were not sons and had not received of 
the Father's spirit and were not accepted of him in the 

R3722 : page 47 

Beloved, for Love worketh no ill to his neighbor. 

The fourth commandment is no different from the 
others of the ten. It is on a lower plane than would be 
proper for the House of Sons, and consequently was never 



given to them. It merely commands rest from labor, but 
under the comprehensive law of love to God and man, 
and through the possession of the Father's Spirit, the new 
creatures in Christ Jesus have a higher rest than had the 
natural Israelites. Ours is a rest of faith and trust in God, 
and in Christ our Lord through whom he is working all 
things according to the counsel of his own will. Ever 
since Pentecost this rest of the people of God, as it pertains 
even to the present life, is perpetual, and not merely 
one day out of seven. 



page 49 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVII. FEBRUARY 15, 1906 No. 4 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 51 

Socialists Alarm British 51 

German Kaiser Fears Same Fate as Czar 5 1 

The Federation Idea 52 

Amalgamation of Three Strong Denominations 
in Canada 52 

Turning on the Light 53 

Home Missions and Some Census Figures 53 

About Foundations 54 

How Much of it is True! 54 

Reply to a Christadelphian 55 

The Wheeling One-Day Convention 57 

Capernaum Exalted to Heaven 57 

The Forgiveness of Sin 60 

page 50 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 



continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS are denied special mail rates for 
the present. We hope to fill all orders soon. 



We recommend that daily papers which publish Brother Russell's 
sermons be encouraged by the friends by occasional compliments 
on postal cards or by orders for extra copies for use 
among your friends. 

ORDERING LEATHER-BOUND DAWNS 



We have two editions of DAWN in leather binding, one on the 
same paper as the cloth editions, but with leather covers and 
gold edges, price 60c each, postpaid. The India-paper edition 
(of which we now have Vols. I., II. and III.) is leather bound, 
gold edges, printed on India-paper, extremely thin and light, 
to carry in the pocket. Price postpaid, 68c per volume. 
When desiring the latter, be sure to mention "INDIA DAWN," 
otherwise the first-named will be supplied you as our regular 
leather edition. Remember that the India edition contains 
the same-sized type as the other editions— the difference is 
in the binding and paper. It is only 3/8 in. thick. 

R3730 : page 50 

CHARTS OF THE TABERNACLE. 



We have arranged to supply beautiful Charts of the Tabernacle 
on cloth, carriage prepaid, for two dollars each. Very 
choice, and very cheap for the quality. 



R3722:page51 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



SOCIALISTS ALARM BRITISH 



LONDON, January 17.— The first almost boundless 

enthusiasm, with which official Liberalism 

greeted the results of the elections, is giving 

place to uneasiness, in which the whole of the middle 

classes are beginning to share, at the phenomenal and 

quite unexpected successes of the socialistic labor 

party. The purely labor members already number 

thirty, and there will probably be, for the 

first time in English history, a solid party of sixty 

labor members, whose admitted demands include the 

payment of members, abolition of the House of Lords, 

Irish Home Rule, and nationalization of land, telephones, 

railways, factories, mines, shipping and all other instruments 

of production. This is the proclaimed policy of 

the national administrative council of the Independent 

Labor Party, whose direct nominees these labor candidates 

are. In many of these proposals, the labor party 

has the support of both the Irish Nationalists, numbering 

eighty, and probably one-fourth of the new Liberal 

members, many of whom were elected on distinct labor 

pledges, making altogether a party formidable enough to 

terrorize the ministry and party which includes railway 

directors, chairmen of telephone companies, rich manufacturers 

and other representative capitalists. This is 

why elections are spoken of as more than a mere party 

landslide: they mean a revolution in English politics, the 

end of which no man can see. 

The Times, which has been a thorough supporter of 
Mr. Chamberlain's fiscal policy, says that "while the 
Unionists and Liberals have been disputing about their 
own issues, fiscal reform, popularly controlled education, 
and Chinese labor in South Africa, another vast issue has 
been shaping itself quietly and silently, without observation. 
That issue is whether the working classes, who 
form the bulk of the electorate, are to dictate a policy 
they desire, or go on contented with choosing between 
the policies offered by the traditional parties." They decided 
for the first alternative, they are asserting their 
power. Hence the Times adds, the city of London, by 
the emphatic return of Unionists yesterday, shows that 
financiers and business men realize the greater economic 
dangers ahead, than any of the Chamberlain proposals 
could produce at their worst."— Montreal Star. 

"LOOKING AFTER THE THINGS COMING" 



That the British are greatly stirred over the peaceable 
"Revolution" just started by the Socialists and 
Labor party at the polls is evident. The London 



"Daily Mail" states the matter concisely, thus: 

"Public curiosity is naturally excited as to what 
is the meaning of the return of so many Labor members 
to the new Parliament. So long as Labor and 
Socialist agitators had to confine their oratory and 
efforts to street-corner meetings and market-place 
demonstrations, the 'respectable' portion of the community 
looked upon them with contemptuous indifference. 
But when great industrial constituencies begin 
to send these agitators to Parliament the matter assumes 
a serious aspect. What does it all mean? Is it 
a revolution? Does it portend the overthrow of existing 
institutions? Is the country threatened with ruin 
by the coming of this new power into politics? 

"It certainly means a revolution in the sense that 
the purpose of Labor Representation is to use political 
power in quite a different way and for quite a different 
purpose from its past uses. 

"I am not concerned now to justify the policy and 
the object of the Labor Representation movement. 
We are satisfied of the wisdom of the policy and the 
justice of the object. I want now only to explain the 
policy and the object for the information of those who 
do not understand either. Then they may banish 
their fears or strengthen their defences, just as their 
wisdom or self-interest dictates." 

GERMAN KAISER FEARS SAME FATE AS CZAR 



One German authority says that the German emperor 
has been deeply impressed by the fate which has overtaken 
his royal relative, the czar of Russia. It would 
have been impossible, it is argued, for the Russia revolutionaries 
to have made any headway in Russia if it 
had not been for the unexpected defeat of the Russian 
armies and navies at the hands of the Japanese. A 
shock to the German arms, the destruction of German 
prestige, and the kaiser knows he would be as much at 
the mercy of the revolutionary forces as is the czar today. 
More than he fears France, more than he fears 
England, the kaiser fears the growth of Socialism at 

R3722 : page 52 

home. His increase in the army and the navy is really 
for the purpose of putting down rebellion at home. 
Except in the case of an extremity the kaiser would 
never appeal to a contest at arms to settle a difficulty 
with any of the great powers of earth. It is necessary 
for him to create the impression that the country is on 
the verge of war with great foreign powers in order to 
beat the Socialists, but war is the last thing the kaiser 
wants, and the last thing that he expects. 
This same authority says the kaiser has learned 



other lessons from the Russian trouble which he will 

not be slow to act upon in the case of necessity. For instance, 

among the really first-class powers, next to Russia, 

the German Government has undoubtedly been the 

most autocratic and despotic. The kaiser has seen the 

collapse of an autocratic form of government, the complete 

breakdown of a state managed by the bureaucracy, 

and he is said to have deliberately told some of the elder 

statesmen of Germany that the policy of his government 

in the future must be more and more in the direction of 

a constitutional government. 

OMINOUS SIGNS. 



Should Russia, in course of time and after a glut of 
horrors, become a Socialist or a semi-Socialist state, the revolutionary 
wave would spread, for good or ill, to other 
nations. 

Already we read of Austrians and Hungarians insisting 
upon universal suffrage, and a delegation of no less than 
200,000 workingmen filling the Vienna ringstrasse to impress 
parliament with their earnestness in making the 
demand. 

In Germany, the Socialists, inspired by events in Russia, 
have begun an agitation for the reform of the election 
laws which will give them the representation in the Reichstag, 
possibly a majority of that body, to which they are entitled. 
On Jan. 14 they will distribute 300,000 copies of a 
revolutionary manifesto, and on Jan. 3 1 they plan to hold 
250 public demonstrations. The Kaiser's advisers are urging 
him to employ troops to suppress this menacing agitation. 
—Cleveland (O.) Press. 

VERY SAD IF TRUE. 



The daily press of New York has published the essence 
of an address given by President Faunce before the Baptist 
ministers of New York city. They say he utterly denied the 
doctrine of atonement and rejected it from his belief. The 
Doctor has not denied this version of his address and hence 
we suppose it is true. Is there any wonder that students go 
wrong when college presidents lead the way? Is not Dr. 
Patton right in saying that, with colleges as now constituted, 
there will be no Christianity left at the close of the twentieth 
century? But God can raise up his witness outside of 
the college in the future, just as he has done in the past, and 
he will witness outside of the college in the future just as he 
has done in the past— Watchword and Truth. 

REFORM IN PERSIA, TOO 



"The dominion of the Shah is about the last in the 
world, now that Russia is abandoning autocracy and 
China is considering domestic reforms, where a demand 
for constitutional government would be expected, or, if 
made, would be granted. Persia is an absolute monarchy 
of the Oriental type, resting solely upon force, and the 
slightest whim of the ruler has been considered law. 
Yet the St. Petersburg dispatch, based upon reports by 
caravan, declare that a thousand merchants and mullahs, 
or priests, becoming dissatisfied with the Shah's rule, 
left the capital as a protest and were afterward reconciled 
by Muzafer ed Din's consent to the election of a 
representative body chosen by the merchants, priests and 
landowners to constitute a House of Justice, whose 

R3723 : page 52 

duties will be administrative and legislative." 

THE FEDERATION IDEA 



For religious interest in 1906 a close second to the 
evangelistic campaigns is the federation idea. Presbyterian 
North and Cumberland Presbyterians have just 
agreed in committee to unite, and no doubt is felt that 
their respective general assemblies, meeting in May next, 
will approve the action of these committees. There is 
a stubborn Cumberland minority, made up for the 
most part of the conservatives, with some of the vested 
or salaried interests, but nobody professes to fear any 
such outcome as that of the Wee Frees in Scotland. The 
union of these two bodies will make a denomination of 
nearly 1,500,000 members. Presbyterians South show 
little inclination to come into the union, but there is a 
chance that some of the smaller Presbyterian bodies may 
give up autonomy and join the others. 

The first meeting of the national council of the Combined 
Congregational, Methodist Protestant and United 
Brethren churches is to take place at Dayton, Ohio, on 
February 7. This union differs little from the more inclusive 
plan, as yet called federation, proposed by the 
thirty bodies which met in conference in November, and 
proposed the formation of a federal council similar to, 
but larger than, the council about to meet in Dayton. 
If the Dayton council works out harmoniously the plans 
to come before it, there will be presented the first concrete 
example of a union of divided Protestantism. 

Baptists have come together in a general convention, 
and their federation includes the Baptists of Canada. 
Big plans are in hand for the initial meeting of this convention 
in May, looking to still closer union and to aggressive 
and common work, especially missionary in the 
West. Baptists are reaching out towards the Free Baptists 



and the Disciples of Christ. They have changed 
their point of view markedly during the past ten years, 
particularly the views that relate to "close communion." 
With this change there seems, so Baptist leaders say, to 
be no good reason why immersionists should longer be 
separated. During the year now opening there will be 
further examinations of the doctrinal differences of Disciples 
and Baptists, looking to closer relations, and with 
the possible outcome of actual union in course of time. 
—Globe Democrat. 

AMALGAMATION OF THREE STRONG DENOMINATIONS. 



Toronto.— The central committee composed of representatives 
from the Presbyterian, Methodist and 
Congregational churches throughout Canada have 
agreed upon a code of doctrines that will unify the three 
denominations into one great church which shall be 
known as the "United Church of Canada." In arriving 

R3723 : page 53 

at the terms of doctrine, the revised confession of faith 
of the Presbyterian church was used in conjunction with 
the plan proposed by the Montreal committee and these 
have been so revised and amended as to contain all the 
great essential truths of the creeds of the three churches 
and the joint body have agreed that the Westminster 
confession of faith shall be practically a dead letter in 
Canada. The doctrine of election was the point about 
which the Presbyterian end of the committee were most 
concerned, while the predestination theory was another. 
So far as the Methodist church was concerned, the question 
of entire sanctification was the stickling point. 
These differences were so moulded that all objection by 
the members of the committee was removed. The doctrine 
on Arminianism, which is that a man is not predestined 
to perdition, but makes his own destiny and 
reward, has been adopted in the new church creed. The 
new church is to be acknowledged as "One Holy Catholic" 
as well as of the innumerable company of saints of all 
ages and nations. Every church throughout the world 
professing obedience to Christ is recognized and the 
Lord's supper and baptism are acknowledged to be personal 
obligations as signs and seals of covenant. The 
proper subjects for baptism are declared to be "believers 
and infants." 

These matters will be submitted to the several denominations 
throughout the Dominion and the action of 
these bodies through the courts of the churches will 
reach the central executive next year. The new church 
is to be governed by a supreme body to be known as 
"The General Conference," after the Methodist form. 
The belief is that this is to be a Council after the Congregational 



idea with a chairman. The next body 
nearer the people is to be "The Presbytery." 

Dayton, O., Feb. 9.— The United Church of America 
was launched today, representing the Congregationalists, 
United Brethren, and Protestant Methodists of 
the United States. 

TURNING ON THE LIGHT 



Pointing to our day the Master declared, there is 
nothing hid that shall not be revealed. The fulfilment 
of this is attested on every hand: in the insurance 
scandals of our land; in the Belgian cruelties in Africa— 
the maiming and killing of the natives to increase the 
wealth of the rubber monopoly and others, in the 
practical slavery of the diamond-mine laborers of 
Rhodesia, etc. Now we have a horrible report of the 
doings of the "religious" "orthodox," "benevolent" 
Dutch Government in its colony in India. 

It is one of the Deputies (Congressmen) who is there 
used to turn on the light. We quote the Denver Post- 
Van Deventer, the new Liberal deputy, continues 
his disclosures of Dutch atrocities in Dutch India. He 
says the queen authorized the formation of a special corps 
of uniformed murderers, known as the "Marechausee" 
regiment, whose motto is: "No pardon for the natives, 
and no prisoners." This regiment is commanded by 
European officers and consists of the most murderous 
blacks "in her majesty's colonies." 

When sent on an expedition into the interior, they 
make it a point to bring back a portion of the body of at 
least one murdered enemy; some of these troopers own 
hundreds of such trophies. The troops, consisting of 
300 men only, have the following record of murders committed 
on various expeditions: First expedition, 318 
slain "enemies;" second, 612; third, 921; fourth, 1,815; 
fifth, 2,085; sixth, 2,853; seventh, 4,126. 

The increase in the killings is due to the fact that 
murderous blacks gradually learned the trick of turning 
their Mausers into dum-dum bullets by filing off the 
points of the cartridges. 

"And what causes these expeditions, commanded 
and sanctioned by her most gracious majesty?" demanded 
the deputy. 

"They are undertaken to frighten the native chiefs 
into placing at the rich planters' disposal cheap labor, 
thousands and again thousands of Malay coolies, that 
must work for a pittance to swell the coffers of the monopolists 
and allow the native rulers to wallow in whiskey 
and white women."— Bulletin. 



"The love of money is the root of all evil," says the 



Book. We see it exemplified everywhere. All these 
revelations are awakening the world to better ideas of 
Justice. But what about the Church, whose nominal 
representatives, financial and political princes are thus 
exposed? It is no worse perhaps, but merely exposed. 
But there is a true Church of "saints," though only "the 
Lord knoweth them that are His." 

"ETERNAL TORMENTS" WILL REMAIN 



The St. Louis Presbytery answered in the negative 
an overture from the Milwaukee (Wis.) presbytery suggesting 
the omission of the words, "be cast into eternal 
torments," from the creed. The overture stated that 
the phrase was not Scriptural and urged that the words, 
"everlasting destruction" were sufficient in the creed. 

Evidently the "sweet morsel" of the dark ages is yet 
too valuable an asset to be discarded. The blasphemy of 
the divine character and word must continue, because 
it may be helpful to revivalists in country districts. 

HOME MISSIONS AND SOME CENSUS FIGURES 



BY REV. S. F. TENNEY, IN "CHRISTIAN OBSERVER.' 

The last United States Census shows that the 
twenty counties comprised in the Presbytery of Eastern 
Texas have an aggregate area of 17,548 square miles, 
—a territory more than seventeen times as large as 
Rhode Island, more than eight times as large as Delaware, 
nearly twice as large as Maryland, more than 
twice as large as Massachusetts, more than half as 
large as Maine, half as large as Indiana, nearly half as 
large as Tennessee, and more than half as large as South 
Carolina. 

The population of these twenty counties in 1900 
was 287,631, and is much larger now. The gain in 
population in these counties during the ten years (from 
1890 to 1900) was more than forty per cent.— some of 
the counties doubling their population and some 
more than doubling. Within the past few years 
these counties have developed wonderfully in 
rice farming, in the saw-mill business, in the 
production of oil, in fruit-raising and truck farming, in 
the construction of a number of lines of important 
railroads. The town of Sour Lake, a few years ago, 
was an insignificant village away from any railroad. 
Now it has railroad connection, and will perhaps have 
several railroads soon, and is a city of over three thousand 
inhabitants. A Presbyterian Church has been organized 

R3724 : page 54 



there. Batson's Prairie, until recently, was 

only a country neighborhood, unknown to the world. 

Now it is estimated to have a population of about 
two thousand, and is a great oil producing centre. 
Saratoga, another oil-producing centre, is not far from 
Sour Lake and Batson's Prairie. In Houston county 
where in 1871 I preached in a log school house in the 
midst of a pine forest, now stands the young city of 
Kennard and one of the largest saw-mills in the world. 

ABOUT FOUNDATIONS 



BY REV. J. R. JACOBS, IN "CHRISTIAN OBSERVER.' 

One of the handsomest structures in San Marco, 
Texas, is a church recently erected. But already its 
walls are badly seamed and fissured and a collapse 
seems not remote. The recognized cause of this lies 
in inadequate foundations. Is not like disaster threatening 
our Church's work? 

The cry for ministers for vacant pulpits comes 
from all sides. But we fail to find them; that is, enough 
of them. We cannot find them; no adequate supply 
exists. If one church obtain it is often but by the robbery, 
or at least the deprivation, of another 

The contrast in this matter between conditions 
some thirty years ago and now, is startling. Take the 
years 1876 and now nearly 1906. In this thirty years 
our membership has grown approximately 120 per cent, 
our churches 72 per cent., our ministers in number only 
50 per cent., and candidates and licentiates only 38 
per cent. Then we had one minister to every one and 
four-fifths churches, now we have but one to every 2, 
even counting as active all aged, sick and infirm. Then 
we had preparing one candidate or licentiate to every 
six and four-fifths churches; now we have one only to 
every eight and one-half churches. The figures tell the 
tale 

HOW MUCH OF IT IS TRUE! 



BY REV. H. B. PRATT, IN "CHRISTIAN OBSERVER.' 

One of our religious weeklies has recently published 
a communication from beyond the Sea, entitled 
"Egyptian Civilization before 4000 years B.C.," on 
which, with humble confession of my own ignorance of 
such matters, I beg leave to ask the maturer judgment 
of the Editors of the Observer, or that of some one of 
its many well qualified readers. We are used to reading 
in the secular press statements of the kind there made 



in reference to the antiquity of the ancient civilization, 
which violently impugn the truth of Bible History; 
but when they appear in a religious journal, it seems to 
me the proper thing to do to challenge them, and ask 
what truth there really is in them. Like the rest of the 
School, the writer makes his statements with a degree 
of confidence which puts to shame the diffidence of 
many who profess to believe and even to teach the 
Bible. "There was at least (he says in reference to 
recent alleged Egyptian discoveries) before the world 
evidence of the close of the period previously considered 
prehistoric, showing the development of the arts, writing 
and civilization of Egypt, and the composition of a race 
which since has maintained its character during 6000 
years. The question was, Where was all this civilization 
of 5000 years B.C. developed?" 

With equal confidence Prof. Hilprecht is reported 
to speak of buildings and other remains of the ancient 
civilization of Assyria and Babylon which go back 
6,000 or 7,000, and if my memory does not mislead me, 
8,000 years before Christ. Now does even a remote 
degree of certainty attach to these ancient dates? Another 
writer placidly assures his readers that modern 
discoveries in Egypt compel us to recast our chronology 
in such a way as will locate Abraham "in modern rather 
than in ancient times;" or words to that effect. Now 
how much of all this is "gold," and how much is simply 
"brass?" We live in a day when, for many of the purposes 
of real or pretended scholarship and science, 
"brass is more valuable than gold,"— as many of our 
"Higher Critics" have taught us. 

On the Cincinnati Southern Railway, the "High 
Bridge" passes, like a spider's web, over the Kentucky 
River, at a height of some 250 or 300 feet above the 
stream, on a single span of perhaps 1,200 feet from bank 
to bank. At first the trains passed slowly over the 
yawning abyss; but at the time I was there they told 
me that after making the terminals perfectly straight, 
so as to put the trains in exact alignment before they 
reached the bridge, it was found to be safest to put on 
all possible steam and go flying over the point of danger 
at the rate of 40 miles an hour. Now does that illustrate 
animus and modus operandi of our Higher Critics 
and their foster brothers, the archeologists of the same 
School?— most bold, where least secure! 

The written history of the Bible dates back to the 
times of Moses; which I am old-fashioned enough still 
to place at about 1,500 years before Christ; and we 
have by divine revelation and by the pen of Moses (or 
of scribes who wrote under his inspection and superintendence), 
the authentic history of Abraham and Lot, 
which it will not hurt us still to place at about 1900 
B.C. Now then, is it a fact, or is it fiction, that the 
monuments and written records of Egypt and Babylon, 
by any fair and reliable interpretation (for so far as I 
can see the translations vary very widely), carry us 



back 2000, 3000 or even 4000 years before Abraham 

was born? Is consecutive written history good for anything? 

or is it only clay tablets and hyeroglyphics 

(which our savants have only recently begun to decipher), 

with paintings and monumental inscriptions 

(made by unknown hands, and which Prof. A. H. 

Sayce avers have often been tampered with), and disconnected 

papyrus rolls, and the like, that are to be 

relied on? 

We lay the written word of God to pledge, with 
Jesus Christ our Lord as sponsor for the reliability of 
the record (John 5:45,46), that (all systems of chronology 
apart) in the days of Abraham and Lot, "that 
goodly land" which Jehovah gave as an heritage to 
Abraham "his friend"— "the glory of all lands," as 
Ezekiel fondly called it, even in the days of its decadence 
and his own captivity, was so sparsely peopled 
that God bade him, with his immense encampment, or 
encampments, to "walk through the length of it, and 
the breadth of it," and survey it all, the land which his 
newly-found God had given to him,— as in fact he did 
with perfect freedom, without incommoding anybody; 
so sparsely peopled, that when the worldly-minded Lot, 
whose substance also was so great that their respective 
encampments could not, or would not, live in peace together 
(and therefore he preferred the society and fellowship 

R3724 : page 55 

of debased pagans to the altar of his godly 
uncle, in whom all the families of the earth were to be 
blessed), Abraham could generously bid him to lift up 
his eyes from the top of the mountain-range back of 
Bethel and view the whole land, and choose what part 
he liked best, saying: "If thou will take to the left hand 
I will take to the right; or if thou take the right hand, 
I will take the left" (Gen. 13:9); so sparsely peopled, 
that one hundred years later, Abimelech, king of the 
war-like Philistines of that day, could with some show 
of reason, if not of truth, say to Isaac: "Go from us, 
for thou art much mightier than we!"— Gen. 26:16. 

Now, this is written history, inspired written history; 
and is it believable by Christian men, to whom 
God has given the spirit of "little children," to believe 
unquestioningly whatever He tells them, that this 
goodly land, emptied and drowned out by the waters 
of Noah's flood, "a land flowing with milk and honey," 
though lying at the very door of Egypt, was still thus 
empty of inhabitants for a period of 2,000, 3,000 or 
4,000 years after Egypt had become great in art, letters, 
riches, civilization, population and power. I freely confess 
that I am not well posted in the recently discovered 
and as yet but partially deciphered facts of ancient 
Egyptian history, and in this regard may be esteemed 
as far behind the times; and therefore I ask of those 
who have a better right to know, how much of all these 



supposed discoveries and these dates are reliable and true? 

For my own part, I have more confidence in Moses 
and the Prophets than in all the monuments of Egypt, 
read and unread. It is easier for me to believe that 
these men are mistaken, that "much learning has made 
them mad," turned their heads, or that prejudice 
against inspired Scripture has warped their judgment, 
than to believe that the Bible record is untrue. I have 
far more confidence in the facts of Scripture history 
than in all the supposed "findings" of infidel or skeptical 
Egyptologists. I believe the Bible as it reads, and 
had rather pass for a fool all my days and be accounted 
wise in the day of judgment, than be accounted the 
wisest man in or out of Germany now and pass for a 
fool then! 



R3724 : page 55 

REPLY TO A CHRISTADELPHIAN. 

MELBOURNE, December 21, 1905. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Having had occasion several times of late to write 
to Christadelphian enquirers, I am sending herewith an 
extract from the latest, and copy of reply to it. If 
something on this subject could appear in ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER might prove interesting, and would at 
least save writing it in a letter. 

With much love in the Lord, 

Yours faithfully, in Him, E. C. HENNINGES. 



WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY: 

Dear Sirs:— We are exhorted to "try the spirits, 
whether they be of God," and this test I have carried 
out with your paper and its teaching, and have found it 
wanting in the necessary speaking according to the law 
and the testimony (Isaiah 8:20), so can only conclude 
that there is no light in it. You are right and scriptural 
in your contentions that man has not an immortal soul, 
and "the dead know not anything;" but contending 
that all will be raised, you teach a thing pleasing to the 
"flesh," no doubt, but not in accord with truth. 

R3725 : page 55 

When quoting I Cor. 15:22, consider that altho 
we are all in Adam by descent, a way is prescribed 
whereby we may come into Christ, or put on Christ; 
hence all are not in Christ. Altho what Paul writes to 
Timothy about Christ dying for all is also true, the 
death will not benefit those who do not come into Christ 
in the way laid down. Can you in the light of your 



teaching explain the following, which show that, at any 
rate, some will not be raised, thus upsetting your pleasant 
theory?— Isaiah 26:13,14; Jeremiah 51:39,57; Proverbs 21:16; 
Psalm 49:12,20. And Ephesians 4:17,18 shows 
that ignorance alienates from God. 

The Bible is the source of all wisdom, and is the 
basis of all that is true, so I hope that you will carefully 
examine the above, and will be pleased to receive a 
reply, if you deem this worthy of one. 

Yours sincerely, TASMANIA. 

REPLY 

Dear Sir:— We are very sorry that the explanations 
of the Word given in the columns of ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER have not appealed to you more strongly than 
they seem to have done. Yet we are glad that you have 
not condemned it without having looked at it at least 
a little. Possibly you would have found more to commend, 
had you looked further. 

Experience shows that in teaching the raising of all 
(both just and unjust), we are not giving out something 
that is pleasing to the "flesh." The "flesh" prefers to 
believe that it has a soul that lives while the body is 
dead, which of course makes the resurrection unnecessary, 
so that this doctrine is no more acceptable now 
than it was in the days of the apostles, who preached 
Jesus and the resurrection. 

So far as you have expressed yourself on I Cor. 15:22, 
we are quite in harmony, for we also believe that no one 
will be made alive, except he have come into Christ in the 
ways of faith and obedience appointed thereto. The 
difference between us in this connection would be more 
in that we understand the Scriptures to teach that all 
will have an opportunity to come into Christ, and that 
none will be destroyed in the Second Death without 
having had this opportunity, and that if some have 
died on account of Adamic death before the "day" appointed 
in God's Plan for the bringing of the blessing to 
all the families of the earth by the Seed of Abraham 
(Christ and his joint-heirs), and without the enlightenment 
that God purposes to give to every man (John 1:9; 
I Tim. 2:4), such will be waked up out of their 
sleep, will be enlightened, and will be confronted with 
the responsibility of choosing either to obey the Great 
Prophet and live, or to disobey Him and perish; whereas 
your idea seems to be that those who have died in ignorance 
of the "Only Name," as most of our race have done, 
will never hear about him and his love for them, which 
would be contrary to the above Scriptures and many 
others, and would be a very great pity, as well. 

If we understand your idea correctly, it would represent 
the Lord as having given a price sufficient to 
redeem the whole race, from Adam onward, yet getting 
an opportunity to bless only about one in a hundred of 
all those for whom he gave a sufficient price. (I John 2:2.) 



You would not be very well pleased with the result 

R3725 : page 56 

of a transaction which would return you 1 pound for 

every 100 pounds; is it any more reasonable to suppose 

that the Redeemer of the world should be satisfied with 

the opportunity to bless only one soul, when by the investment 

of his entire capital (Himself— I Tim. 2:6) he 

purchased with a price the right to bless a hundred? 

Would not such an outcome of the Great Transaction be 

a reflection on the Justice of the Almighty, to whom the 

price was paid? Could the first portion of Isaiah 53:11 

in such a case be said to be accomplished? 

We are quite prepared to believe that some now 
dead will never be raised, namely, those who have wilfully 
sinned against the sufficient enlightenment of the 
truth. (Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26-31.) And in so far as these 
conditions are met by those described in the references 
you cite from Isaiah, Jeremiah, Proverbs and Psalms, 
we are bound to believe that they belong to the class that 
will not be raised. But there were not many in Old Testament 
times (if there was one) that could fulfil the conditions 
mentioned in Hebrews, and even since Pentecost 
the greater part of the world has been left in so much 
darkness that for them to have come under these conditions 
has been impossible. A certain amount of enlightenment 
is necessary, and this has been withheld 
from the world as a whole. 

Verse 14 of Psalm 49 seems to show that it is necessary 
to seek some interpretation of verse 19 that will not 
cause the inspired writer to be saying that they shall 
never be brought back from the dead; for how could the 
upright have dominion over non-existent persons? Does 
not the Psalmist rather seem to be saying that those who 
persist in the foolish ways of the world shall be allowed to 
go on so, without being enlightened concerning a better 
way? They shall never see light before death overtakes 
them; but who can say that they will not see a very 
great light when the upright shall have dominion over 
them in the morning? You will see that this is harmonious 
with all the rest of the Psalm, and with other 
Scriptures already mentioned; and should it not be the 
aim of every Bible student so to interpret the Word that 
all the parts harmonize, and no plain statement need be 
ignored? 

Proverbs 21:16 seems to express exactly the sentiment 
elaborated in Hebrews. Observe that this is telling 
about the man who wanders out of the way of understanding. 
It refers, therefore to one who has been 
enlightened; and whatever it may say about him, it 
teaches nothing concerning those who have never been 
in the way of understanding, which has been the condition 
of most of the race. 

In Jeremiah 51:39,57, the word "perpetual" is 
translated from the Hebrew word "olam." Now, I 



doubt not that you have often explained to those not so 
far enlightened that this Hebrew word does not in itself 
mean "endless," and quite likely you have cited references 
supporting this assertion. Yet you insist on applying 
an extreme definition of it in the case of these 
sleepers. Why do you do this? 

The word "olam" seems rather to signify "lasting" 
or "enduring," and the length of the duration must be 
determined by the context, or by other Scriptures. That 
it comes short of meaning "endless," is readily seen by 
reference to the Scriptures, and it is instructive to place 
in parallel columns some texts which describe certain 
things as "olam," with other texts which tell of the doing 
away of the same. 

"OLAM" "OLAM" ENDED. 

Exodus 29:9. Hebrews 7:12. 

Here the Aaronic priesthood Here the Aaronic priesthood 

is "olam." is supplanted by the 

Melchisedec order. 
Jeremiah 25:9. Jeremiah 32:15. 

Here the seventy years Here the "olam" desolation 

of desolation are "olam." is ended. 
Jeremiah 51:39,57. Isaiah 25:7; Ezekiel 37:12-14 

The with 16:53,55,61-63; Jeremiah 48:47; 

"olam" 49:6,39; Psalm 86:9; 

sleepers. Phil. 2:10; Acts 3:24. 

"Olam" sleepers awake. 

The "perpetual" sleep of the Babylonian desolators 
of Palestine has not been interrupted as 
yet, but it is to be, for "he will destroy in 
this mountain the face of the covering cast 
over all people, and the vail that is spread over all 
nations." That is to say, "He will swallow up death 
in victory." They have slept long; but they shall be 
waked up in due time, and with the Assyrians, Egyptians 
and Israelites (Isaiah 19:24,25), with the Moabites, 
Ammonites and Elamites (Jeremiah 48:47; 49:6,39), 
with the Samaritans and with the Sodomites (Ezekiel 16:53,55) 
and all the nations whom God has made, shall 
come and worship (Psalm 86:9), and with all the families 
of the earth shall receive the blessing through the promised 
"Seed," which is the Christ. (Galatians 3:8,16,29.) 
Yea, at the name of Jesus every individual knee 
shall bow, whether it be on the earth or under the earth; 
and surely those under the earth will need to hear his 
voice and come forth, and will need instruction before 
they can acknowledge the Lord Jesus, and confess to the 
glory of God the Father that he is the Lord. Surely, 
there is nothing in Jeremiah 51:39,57 that conflicts with 
the grand testimony of all God's holy prophets, Jeremiah 
included, concerning the "Times of Restitution of All 
Things." 

The "lords" in Isaiah 26:13,14 we understand to 
mean the various nations and systems that have oppressed 



Israel. Some of these are dead, and the remainder 

will die, and as institutions they shall not rise; 

but this in no way antagonizes the thought that the individuals 

shall be brought back from death. How else 

R3726 : page 56 

shall this passage be understood in harmony with the 
Scriptures above cited? 

Without doubt, ignorance has alienated and does 
alienate (as we are told in Ephesians 4:17,18) men from 
the life of God; but when, under the Kingdom, the knowledge 
of the Lord shall cover the earth, all will learn to 
know God, and many, we trust, will gladly obey him, 
and will no longer be alienated, but will become members 
of his family. Indeed, the same Apostle assures us 
that the whole creation is groaning and travailing in 
pain, waiting for the manifestation of the sons of God, 
and shall then be delivered from the bondage of corruption 
into the glorious liberty of the children of God."— 
Romans 8:21. 

We hope, dear sir, that you will look further into 
the publications recommended, and particularly that 
you will carefully and prayerfully study the volume 
entitled, "The Divine Plan of the Ages." It will be a 
pleasure to lend it to you, if considerations of the small 
price stand in your way. 

Yours in the Redeemer's service, 

E. C. HENNINGES. 



R3726 : page 57 

THE WHEELING ONE -DAY CONVENTION 

The gathering at Wheeling, W.Va., on Sunday, February 
11, was a most interesting one, and will long 
be remembered by many of the dear friends. About 
200 attended the Convention from outside points, apparently 
much to the joy of the little class at Wheeling. Their loving 
interest was heartily reciprocated by the Wheeling 
friends, who entertained the entire company at dinner. The 
morning session opened at 10 o'clock, and for an hour we 
heard splendid testimonies from various quarters, giving 
thanks to God for the light now shining upon the pathway 
of his people and expressing determination to press onward in 
the good way, and hope and faith and joy in respect to the precious 
promise of the crown of glory at the end of life's journey. 

Promptly at 1 1 o'clock Brother Russell addressed the 
meeting, taking as the text of his discourse the word of the 
Lord to the Prophet Isaiah (29:13), "Their fear toward me 
is taught by the precepts of men." Many of you have the 
report of the discourse through the daily press. For the 
benefit of others we would remark that he showed the proper 
fear in contrast with that which is improper— the fear of the 



Lord, the beginning of wisdom, in contrast with the fears inspired 

by superstition, which are the beginning of folly and 

trouble. Proceeding, he showed how perfect love casts out 

fear from the hearts of the Lord's people, and that the receiving 

of the love and the dispelling of the fear are proportionate 

and gradual, so that those who have most fully received 

of the grace of God have most fully lost the fear of man that 

bringeth a snare and the superstitious fears which cause 

so much torment in the world, but that proportionately 

they still have the reverence of the Lord and more 

than ever realize the meaning of the Apostle's words, 

"Let us fear lest a promise being left us of entering into his 

rest any of us should seem to come short of it."— Heb. 4:1. 

The afternoon meeting was in the fine new "Court 
Theatre." The dear friends had been both wise and energetic 
in the matter of advertising: cards for the windows, 
posters for the street cars and small cards for distribution 
amongst the friends, combined with liberal newspaper advertising, 
made the meeting very widely known. As a result 
the Opera House, seating 1500, was crowded, and about 400 
stood throughout the service and probably five or six hundred 
were unable to gain admittance, the doors of the theatre 
being locked by the management for fear of accident. The 
topic was our cure for infidelity— "To Hell and Back." The 
large audience gave excellent attention and we have every reason 
to hope that at least some of the number had hearing ears 
of the heart as well as of the head. The gathering apparently 
represented the most intelligent people of the city and was 
probably two-thirds men. Some one suggested that all the 
churches of Wheeling at all their services on Sunday had 
not as many men present. 

It is for us to proclaim the good tidings to those who 
manifest any disposition to hear: we know not, however, 
in which it will prosper. It is far from our thought that the 
Truth will ever become popular with the world during this 
Gospel age. We can, however, rejoice that the opportunity 
for hearing, the opportunity for getting rid of some of the 
smoke and confusion of the "dark ages" is reaching out 
amongst intelligent people in every direction. The testimony 
is being given them, whether they accept or reject it, showing 
the divine justice, wisdom, love and power, that the 
Bible is the foundation for this conception of the divine character, 
and that the fallacies of superstition came from the 
"dark ages" and not from God's Book. 



R3726 : page 57 

CAPERNAUM EXALTED TO HEAVEN. 
-MARK l:21-34.-FEBRUARY 18.- 
Golden Text:— "He healed many of their sick." 
OUR Lord declared of Capernaum that having been exalted 



to heaven it should be brought down to hell. 
(Matt. 1 1:23.) Our lesson tells us how it was exalted 
to heaven— that great mercies and blessings and privileges 
were accorded to its people early in our Lord's ministry 
of healing. Nevertheless few there accepted him as Messiah, 
and, as he predicted, the city was brought down to hell- 
not to a place of burning or torture, but to hades, a grave 
condition, a death condition. The city so completely disappeared 
that its location is not definitely known now. A 
certain pile of stones is credited with being its former site. 

Capernaum was on the Lake of Galilee, near the scene 
of the miraculous draught of fishes noted in our previous 
lesson. On the next Sabbath day, Jesus, accompanied by 
the four fishermen who had left all to become his disciples, 
entered into the synagogue at Capernaum. Jewish synagogues 
were very liberally governed, and afforded an opportunity 
for nearly any one of reverent manner to present his 
views respecting the Law and the prophets. Our Lord availed 
himself of the opportunity and taught the people, who 
were astonished at his doctrine, his teachings. They were 
accustomed to hearing the scribes and Pharisees haggle over 
the Scriptures, guessing and confusing their meaning and 
generally mystifying them, but Jesus taught as a master who 
thoroughly understood his subject— "as one having 
authority." 

True, our Lord had come down from heaven and had 
knowledge of things of which others were ignorant; but it 
was not respecting these that he taught, we may be sure from 
his remark to Nicodemus, "If I have told you earthly things 
and ye believe not, how could you believe if I told you of 
heavenly things?" On the contrary, our Lord's discourses 
were along the lines of divine revelation— the Law and the 
Prophets, and the fulfilment of these. This is clearly indicated 
by his declaration, "I speak not from myself; but the 
Father which sent me he hath given me a commandment 
what I should say and what I should speak." (John 12:49.) 
Again he said, "My teaching is not mine, but his that sent 
me."— John 7:16. 

We pause here to remark that the teachings of all the 
Lord's representatives should be along this same line— not 
human speculations and philosophies, but the Word of God— 

R3726 : page 58 

"He that hath a dream let him tell a dream, but he that 
hath my Word let him speak my Word." (Jer. 23:28.) "To 
the Law and to the testimony: if they speak not according 
to this Word it is because they have no light in them." 
(Isa. 8:20.) "Teach the Word, be instant in season," and 
even when inconvenient to yourself. (2 Tim. 4:2.) "The 
Word of God is powerful and sharper than a two-edged 
sword." (Heb. 4:12.) "Sanctify them through thy Truth, 
thy Word is Truth." (John 17:17.) They took knowledge 
of them that they had been with Jesus," and learned of him. 
(Acts 4:13.) Thus it is that those who are faithful and loyal 
to the Lord and the word of his testimony speak not vaguely 



and indefinitely to the world, but declare the message of 
God, the "good tidings of great joy which shall be unto all 
people," "in due time." 

"I KNOW THEE WHO THOU ART" 

Whilst Jesus was speaking, or probably at the conclusion 
of his discourse, the congregation in the synagogue was 
startled by the words, "Let us alone; what have we to do 
with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to destroy 
us? I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God." 
The speaker was a demoniac; today he would be called a 
crazy man, and would be confined in an asylum. We would 

R3727 : page 58 

not say that all insanity is demonism— that all insane 

persons are possessed of evil spirits, as in the case 

under review. Quite evidently there are cases in which the 

brain is diseased, but we believe that fully one-half or more 

of all those who are dealt with as insane are cases of demoniacal 

possession— "obsession." 

As we have shown in other writings, the evil spirits or 
demons who thus obsess humanity were once angels— "those 
angels which kept not their first estate" (Jude 1:6), but who 
in the days of Noah fell from divine favor through sin, and 
have since been under chains of darkness pending the judgment 
of the great day, the Millennial day, when the Christ 
—Jesus and the Church in glory— shall not only grant a trial 
or judgment to man but also to those fallen angels. (1 Cor. 6:3.) 
Meantime their endeavors to communicate with humanity, 
and to obtain control over them through the submission 
of their wills, seems to be incessant. Throughout the Scriptures, 
both in the Old and New Testaments, all who reverence 
God are warned against having anything whatever to do 
with mediums, seances and every form of spirit communications 
as being of these demons— Satanic. It is our duty to 
reiterate this, because these influences are more active today 
than ever before, and because the Scriptures show that they 
will be increasingly active and powerful in the near future 
as a part of the great trial coming upon all Christendom in 
this our day. We learn that in Australia Spiritism is much 
more advanced and more powerful than in either Europe or 
America, but it is making rapid strides everywhere. 

The demon of our lesson seems to have had the thought 
that at the coming of Messiah all evil was to be abolished 
and destroyed. One account says, "Art thou come to destroy 
us before the time?" as though the demons had some information 
or premonition that the time for the manifestation of 
power through Messiah was still future. Another Scripture 
represents an evil spirit as crying out, "Art thou come to 
torment us?" The word for torment in that case signifies 
hasten, punish. We may be sure the inspired writers up to 
that time had not indicated the nature of the punishment 
that would be inflicted upon the fallen angels, and that the 
latter merely surmised that it would be their destruction. 



The Apostle Peter seems to imply that when the fallen 
spirits witnessed our Lord's death as the sin offering, and 
his resurrection with divine power, they realized a love of 
God and a power of God on behalf of humanity that they 
had not previously appreciated, and the thought of God's 
mercy to come in due time to men gave ground to some of 
them for hoping also that in due time the repentant ones of 
their number might be the recipients of a share in divine 
mercy through Christ. And this indeed we know is a part 
of the divine program— for not only fallen men but also 
fallen angels are to be judged or tried at his appearing and 
kingdom.— 1 Cor. 6:3. 

Our Lord commanded the demon to leave the man— to 
give up his hold upon his mind and body. The demon was 
powerless to resist the authority vested in Jesus, but was not 
hindered from causing the man considerable torture in going 
from him. Luke says (4:35) the demon threw the man 
down in the midst of the crowd— thus and in every way the 
malignity of these evil spirits is manifested. There are no 
such obsessions or possessions by holy spirits. God recognizes 
the individuality of each member of the race and does 
not intrude upon it, nor do the holiest angels thus intrude. 
God through his holy Spirit operates not as do the demons, 
to the overthrow of reason and the subjugation of the will, 
but on the contrary operates only in accord with reason and 
the will. The fully consecrated believer in Jesus may receive 
of the holy Spirit, and this more and more abundantly 
as he comes into glorious touch and relationship to the Lord 
in thought and word and conduct. But any neglect of the 
divine teachings or principles in the exercise of self-will in 
opposition to the recognized will of God, is sure to that extent 
to quench the spirit of holiness, the spirit of a sound 
mind, the Spirit of God, which is in no wise forced upon us, 
but must be entertained, must be held on to, must be desired 
if it would be retained and increased. 

AMAZED AT THE TEACHING 

No doubt in our Lord's teachings he had explained the 
cause of sin and sorrow and pain and death— that these 
were the results of original disobedience, the curse, and that 
in God's due time and way this curse would be lifted from 
the world, evil spirits would no longer have power and authority 
to deceive and infest, and sickness and pain and death 
would all be wiped out in the glorious morning of blessing 
which God has promised through the Messiah. These astounding 
teachings, so much more clear and distinct than 
anything they had ever heard from their scribes, and so full 
of inspiration and hope, when backed by the demonstrations 
of the Lord's power over the evil spirits, caused all the 
people astonishment. They sufficiently realized that the one 
who had been teaching upon their seashore was a great 
teacher, a great prophet, if not the Messiah himself. 

Although more than a year had elapsed since Jesus 
began his ministry, although the miracle of Cana of Galilee 
was in the past, and although he had taught to a considerable 



extent in that region, "The Kingdom of heaven is at 

R3727 : page 59 

hand," yet this seems to have been the first illustration of 
our Lord's miraculous power over disease and evil spirits. 
Otherwise the people of that city who had heard Jesus' 
teaching would not have been so astonished. We may be 
sure that the four fishermen who had left all to be his disciples 
were less surprised than the others, because of their 
knowledge of the increase of the wine at Cana, and their 
knowledge also of the miraculous draught of fishes a few 
days previous to this casting out of the demon. 

Leaving the synagogue, Jesus and the four disciples 
went to Peter's home, where his mother-in-law lay sick of a 
fever. They entreated Jesus on her behalf (Luke 4:38), 
and he healed her. Evidently the casting out of the demon 
suggested to the minds of the disciples the power of our 
Lord to heal diseases, otherwise they would have entreated 
the Lord to heal the woman before going into the synagogue. 
Our Lord took the woman by the hand and raised her up, 
and immediately the fever left her. Other than this she was 
not weak and enervated, as fever patients usually are when 
the fever is stopped. On the contrary, she had her wonted 
strength, and was able at once to minister to the guests of 
the home, to serve them with dinner, etc. 

"HIMSELF TOOK OUR INFIRMITIES" 

At even, at sunset, not only because it was the close of 
the day, but because according to the Jewish custom the 
Sabbath ending at sunset made it in the eyes of the people 
the more proper time, they brought to Jesus the sick and 
those possessed with devils that he might relieve them. 
He did this, expending in the service his own vitality, we 
may be sure. This much is not only intimated by the 
Apostle's declaration that himself bore our infirmities and 
carried our sorrows, but it is directly stated in connection 
with one of his healings that "Virtue [vitality, power, 
strength] went out of him and healed them all." (Matt. 8:17; 
Luke 6:19.) Thus our Lord fulfilled his covenant of consecration 
and began to lay down his life for others. The using 
of strength for the assisting of others continued to the end 
of his ministry, when through non-resistance, submission to 
the Father's will, he permitted himself to be crucified for 
sinners, the just for the unjust, that he might redeem us with 
his blood, his sacrificed life. 

The account says, "He suffered not the devils to speak 
because they knew him." How evident it is, not only from 
this statement but also from the case in which Paul rebuked 
the damsel who cried, "These are the servants of the Most 
High God, which show unto us the way of eternal life" — 
how evident it is that the Lord does not desire the testimony 
of devils respecting himself or his plan. The same is true 
of all the unregenerate. The Word of the Lord is to such, 
"What hast thou to do to take my word into thy mouth, seeing 



thou hatest instruction and casteth my words behind thee." 

(Psa. 50:17.) It is the special privilege of those who are 

the Lord's consecrated ones to be his ambassadors, his mouthpieces 

—it is a special honor conferred upon such; hence 

the declaration again, "None of the wicked shall understand, 

but the wise shall understand."— Dan. 12:10. 

Only those wise toward God and seeking to live in harmony 
with his will may be expected to have clear discernment 
of the true plan of God; all others will be confused 
and in more or less of darkness. It is in harmony with this 
that the prophet declares respecting the entire body of 
Christ, the Anointed, "The Spirit of the Lord God is upon 
me because he hath anointed me to preach the good tidings." 
None are to be considered teachers of God's message except 
they have the anointing, and all who have the anointing, to 
the extent that they possess it, are privileged to be representatives 
and mouthpieces of the Lord according to their 
opportunities and willingness under the reasonable limitations 
of the Word. 

R3728 : page 59 

The next morning the multitudes, enthused with the 
thought that they had a great teacher and healer in their 
midst, sought Jesus again, but he had departed early into a 
wilderness place, saying that he must preach the gospel in 
other cities also— he must be about his Father's business, he 
must attend to the necessities and interests of the entire 
flock. Evidently our Lord's intention was to merely give 
such evidences of divine favor as would convince all who 
were Israelites indeed respecting his true character and work 
as the Father's representative, as the Messiah. Hence he 
would leave after giving these miraculous tokens— leave, 
that those who were not in a proper condition of heart might 
forget, might lose their interest, might cool their ardor, while 
only the Israelites indeed, waiting for the consolation of God 
promised through the Law and the prophets, would continue 
to watch and hope and wait and pray for the Kingdom he 
had announced. 

So it is in every case: the Lord is seeking only the 
elect class, those who worship him in spirit and in truth; 
he seeks not the multitude, their time is not yet. In due 
time all the blind eyes shall be opened and all the deaf ears 
shall be unstopped, and the knowledge of the Lord shall be 
granted to every member of the race, but now it is only for 
the special class whom the Lord is seeking to be members of 
the Bride, the Lamb's wife. 

HE HEALED MANY 

While our Lord undoubtedly healed many diseased ones 
during the two years and a quarter following this lesson, 
we have no thought that he healed all the sick of Palestine. 
His mission was not to heal the sick but to preach the gospel. 
The healing of the sick was merely incidental, to attract 
the attention, to assist the faith, to point him out as the 



finger of God. For instance, we remember the cure of the 
impotent man at the pool of Bethesda, where there were 
many sick folk, and he alone of them all was healed 
(John 5:1-9.) The account would seem to imply that many 
if not all the sick at Capernaum were healed, but it was a 
little city, and, besides, it was granted, we are told, wonderful 
blessings and privileges and opportunities and favors 
above other cities— it was exalted up to heaven in point of 
privileges, blessings and opportunities, and this largely 
through so general a healing of its sick and devil-possessed 
ones. 

"THESE SIGNS SHALL FOLLOW" 

Many in studying this lesson will doubtless call to mind 
the arguments of some who claim that all of the Lord's 
people who truly trust him should heal each other through 
prayer and should never be sick. Many who thus argue 
quote these words, "These signs shall follow them that believe: 

R3728 : page 60 

in my name shall they cast out devils, they shall speak 
with new tongues, they shall take up serpents, and if they 
drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them; they shall lay 
hands on the sick and they shall recover."— Mark 16:17,18. 

These dear friends should note two things: (1) That 
these words, and indeed all of the sixteenth chapter of Mark 
from the ninth verse to its close, are not found in the 
old manuscripts of the Bible, and are recognized as being 
additions to what Mark wrote, and hence wholly without inspired 
authority. All scholars know this, and many who 
quote these words we would suppose are intelligent enough 
to have this knowledge. Why then do they quote them as 
Scripture when they know they are not Scripture? 

(2) These words are not true of the Lord's followers, 
and those who quote them as applicable show that they do 
not believe them. They will not take up serpents, they fear 
to drink deadly things, they cannot cast out devils, nor can 
they all heal the sick by laying on their hands. 

Our Lord's miracles not only served as an instruction 
to the people but also typified or illustrated the power which 
he ultimately will use on a higher and grander scale in the 
blessing of all the families of the earth. He did not use his 
power, so far as the record shows, upon any of his followers, 
his disciples. Their call implied that they would follow in 
his steps, and instead of seeking restitution and recovery of 
physical health they would seek to lay down their lives for 
their brethren in the service of the Truth. Whoever has got 
the idea that the Lord's followers are called to get physical 
health and freedom from trials and difficulties, aches, pains 
and sorrows, has gotten the wrong thought. True, godly living 
and a heart at peace with the Lord are very conducive to 
physical health, but it is also true that to be instant in 
season and out of season in the service of the King will 
mean a considerable amount of wear and tear, physically, 



and imply a measure of physical discomfort at times, and 
this injury in one way or another should be considered as a 
part of our sacrifice, a part of the "all things" of our experience 
which God is able to overrule to our profit. 

Very many indeed of the Lord's people have received 
most wonderful blessings at his hands under the chastening 
rod of affliction, sickness. Thus an evil thing, an element 
of the curse, has in many instances been overruled for good 
to those who loved the Lord and were properly exercised by 
their experiences. True, there is no sickness in heaven, and 
there will be no sickness on earth after the Millennial Age 
shall have fully rolled away the curse and brought in restitution 
and perfection to those who will accept them on God's 
terms of obedience and shall have destroyed all other 
members of the human race. But that time has not 
yet come; we are still walking not by sight but by 
faith; we still have the weaknesses, mental, moral and 
physical, which came to us as our share of the general 
fall. The Lord may grant us special immunities or special 
refreshment according to his wisdom, according to his knowledge 
of the necessity of the work he would have us do, but 
it is not for us to attempt to withdraw our sacrifice by asking 
for earthly favors and immunities. Rather we are to ask 
for the spiritual blessings, realizing that the Father is more 
willing to give the holy Spirit to his children than are 
earthly parents to give earthly good things to theirs. 

The giving to us of the holy Spirit will generally imply 
lessons in patience, meekness and in love development 
through sufferings and trials, moral or physical. The obedient 
child of God, developed through the knowledge of the 
Word and the possession of its spirit, will delight to acknowledge 
the Lord's wisdom and to trust him for such 
blessings of a temporal kind as may seem to him best. 
Our special advantages are of a spiritual kind, which did 
not begin at Capernaum or at all during our Lord's ministry, 
but on the contrary began at Pentecost after he had 
ascended on high and received of the Father his reward and 
the authority to endue his followers with the spirit of 
begetting to the new nature. 

Let us not seek for the loaves and fishes and physical 
healing, for after all these things do the Gentiles seek; but 
let us seek the spiritual health, strength and vigor, and all 
temporal things shall be added unto us according to divine 
wisdom and love. 



R3728 : page 60 

THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS. 
--MARK 2:1-12.-FEBRUARY 25.- 
Golden Text:— "The Son of man has power on earth to forgive sins. 
IT was but a short time after the incidents of our last 



lesson and our Lord's subsequent preaching to other 
cities of Galilee that he returned to Capernaum, which 
was now his home city, for Matthew informs us that leaving 
Nazareth he came and dwelt in Capernaum. (Matt. 4:13.) 
The people heard that he was at home, and a crowd assembled 
at the house. The houses of the middle classes of 
that time are understood to have been usually of one room 
only, in size about 20 x 40 feet, with a flat roof formed by 
heavy timbers about two feet apart, on which were placed 
slabs of either wood or stone, the whole being covered with 
earth or sod closely rolled. The roof was usually accessible 
by an outside stairway and was often used as a summer 
sleeping place. 

To the crowd of his fellow-citizens— who had but recently 
awakened to the fact that Jesus was a great prophet, 
endued with miraculous powers— the Lord was discoursing, 
doubtless respecting the Kingdom of God long promised, 
and which he proclaimed to be nigh, even at the door, if 
the people were willing to receive the message and its blessing. 
At this juncture four men, bearing on a litter a young 
man paralyzed and utterly helpless, approached the house 
with a view to having the sick one healed. His helpless 
condition probably hindered the ailing one from applying 
to Jesus on the day when so many of the sick at Capernaum 
were cured. Now he had found friends and helpers and 
had come within sound of the Master's voice, yet was unable 
to gain access to his presence because of the crowd 
who were unwilling to make way for him. 

But the faith which had brought him thus far insisted 

R3729 : page 61 

that some way of presenting his case before Jesus would be 
found. Finally he was carried to the roof of the house the 
earthy covering was dug away from a portion, the slab lifted, 
and by improvised ropes he was let down into the very 
presence of Jesus. He must have had a strong faith not 
only in the Lord's power to heal but also in his gentleness 
and goodness, that so far from resenting the rude intrusion 
he would have patience and realize his deep necessity. 

And so it was: instead of finding fault, threatening 
them with arrest, accusing them of rudeness, etc., our Lord 
was so pleased with the faith manifested that he overlooked 
the intrusion entirely and greeted his uninvited guest most 
graciously, saying, "Son, thy sins are forgiven thee." Perhaps 
the young man was thinking less of his sins and their 
forgiveness than of his hope for recovery, but in any event our 
Lord put the most important thing foremost. He was primarily 
the sin-bearer and teacher, his work of healing being 
a secondary one at the time, a mere exercise, so as to emphasize 
the lessons given. 

WISE AND UNWISE ALERTNESS 

The people present were alert to notice everything that 
Jesus did and said, and amongst them were some of the learned, 



the Scribes, who were well informed respecting the Law and 
looked up to as authorities by the masses. These with the 
others had been attracted by the wonderful miracles and 
teachings of Jesus and they were watching his words and 
deeds. Here they thought they had found a flaw— that 
Jesus was arrogating to himself a power and authority which 
could belong to God alone. Indeed we may suppose that it 
was partly to start this very line of reasoning that our Lord 
expressed himself as he did. Then, reading their hearts, he 
answered their queries, saying, "Which is the easier for you 
to believe, that I am able to forgive sins or that I could heal 
this man of the result of his sins? But to prove my power 
to forgive the sin I will perform the cure, and its performance 
will testify that I have not blasphemed; that I have 
not arrogated to myself authority which is not properly in 
my control; that I am not misrepresenting the Father when 
I declare that I am his special agent and representative." 
Then Jesus said to the paralyzed man, "Arise, take up thy 
couch and go to thy home!" 

When the man did arise and carried forth his stretcher 
on which he had lain the people were amazed and glorified 
God, saying, "We never saw anything of the like before." 
Luke adds that they said, "We have seen strange things 
today." They had heard the Messiah explain about his 
Kingdom and declare his power to forgive sins and demonstrate 
that power by a miracle. How could they help but 
wish that the Kingdom of God might immediately be established, 
that divine favor might reach the whole world and 
increase in restitution blessings until there should be no 
more sickness, no more pain, no more dying, no more crying, 
no more sin, no more death. However, a particular 
work must be accomplished before the Kingdom could be 
set up and begin its restitution work: first the elect of God, 
a little flock, the Bride of Christ, must be selected. Palestine 
and the favored nation did not supply a sufficient number 
to fulfil the divine arrangement, and hence after the 
selection of all the Israelites indeed the favor of God turned 
from natural Israel to the Gentiles, to gather out of them a 
sufficient number to complete the very elect. 

Our hope, our confidence is that this election is very 
nearly accomplished; that soon the second coming of Christ 
will bring forth his Church in the first resurrection to glory, 
honor and immortality and joint-heirship with him in the 
Kingdom, and that subsequently the restitution blessings 
of the Kingdom will go forth to the natural seed of Abraham, 
yea, unto all the families of the earth. 

Sin and its forgiveness may be considered the essence 
of this lesson: to this subject, therefore, we turn our attention. 

Not only is sin generally common to the world of mankind, 
as the Scriptures abundantly declare and explain, 
but a consciousness of sin is general. The world in general 
recognizes what the Bible emphasizes, namely, that all unrighteousness 
is sin, all imperfection is sin. The Jews under 
the Law, realizing their inability to keep its requirements, 
would be bound in all honesty to admit that they were sinners, 
transgressors of its requirements. Christians, recognizing 



God's law on a still higher plane, realize still more fully 

their own blemishes and shortcomings of the perfect law 

which says, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with 

all thy soul, with all thy mind, with all thy strength, 

and thy neighbor as thyself. But those who have not the 

Jewish Law nor the Christian law and instruction have nevertheless 

a sufficiency of conscience, a sufficiency of the 

original law written in man's constitution, though largely 

obliterated through the six thousand years of the fall: by 

this they realize that they have shortcomings, and, 

as the Apostle points out, they confess that they are 

sinners against their ideals of righteousness in that they 

sometimes attempt to excuse their conduct while at other 

times they clearly and plainly acknowledge wrong-doing. 

The remarkable thing is that our consciousness of sin 
increases with our education in the school of Christ— increases 
in proportion as we cease to do evil and learn to do 
well. Accordingly, the most advanced saint has a clearer 
discernment of and a greater repugnance for sin than has 
the most degraded sinner. Thus it is, too, with God, who 
hates sin and cannot look upon it with allowance. He has 
placed his ban, his sentence, his edict against it, and declares 

R3729 : page 62 

that it shall be utterly rooted out, and that all intelligently 
and wilfully in sympathy with it must be considered 
as part of it and be destroyed with it. 

The more we see of sin, the more we realize its contaminating 
character and destructive tendencies, the more 
we appreciate the divine justice which on account of sin 
condemns sin in humanity. (Rom. 8:3.) The more advanced 
our conceptions of righteousness, truth, holiness, 
purity, the more we are enabled to appreciate the divine 
view of sin and to say of the Lord and his sentence against 
sin and sinners, "True and righteous are thy judgments, O 
Lord."-Rev. 15:3. 

THE OPERATION OF DIVINE MERCY 

But the more we come to appreciate divine justice and 
the righteousness of the sentence of death against our race, 
the more also we come to appreciate the love and mercy of 
God toward us, and to rejoice that he was not willing that 
any should perish, and hence made provision wide enough, 
high enough, deep enough, that all might turn unto him 
and live— have everlasting life. This provision of mercy 
cannot ignore the sin nor can it permit the sinner to ignore 
it. It is necessary that the redeemed should know, should 
appreciate, their fallen condition, the justice of their sentence 
of death, and that their recovery is wholly a matter of 
divine mercy. Unless they learn this lesson they could never 
appreciate the divine arrangements and the only terms upon 
which God could grant them everlasting life— terms of acceptance 
of God's grace and forgiveness and their obedience 
to him and his principles of righteousness. 



"NONE OTHER NAME GIVEN" 

It is to this end that the heavenly Father arranged his 
plan for the recovery of our race as he reveals it in his 
Word— a plan by which he extends mercy to all, yet requires 
all to accept that mercy through Jesus, "through faith 
in his blood," or not at all. (Rom. 3:25.) This insures that 
every one coming to the Father must admit that he is a sinner, 
must admit that he cannot meet the penalty of his own 
sin and live, must admit that his salvation is purely of divine 
mercy through Christ; and it insures that the terms and 
conditions which Jesus the Redeemer will establish as the 
Mediator between God and sinners must be thoroughly understood 
and accepted and complied with. He proposes to 
help back to perfection and to full fellowship with the 
Father all who sincerely repent of sin and will use their 
best endeavors under his guidance, instruction and assistance 
to return to God. To such and to such alone will perfection 
be granted. Such alone will attain the everlasting life 
through the assistance as well as through the redemption of 
him who bought us with his precious blood. 

SINS BLOTTED OUT. 

It is well that we mark a wide distinction between the 
blotting out of sin, which the Scriptures assure us will be 
accomplished at the second coming of Christ, and the forgiveness 
of sins which may be enjoyed now by all who will 
exercise the necessary faith and obedience. The blotting 
out of sins at the second advent of Christ will be applied 
first of all to the Church: not a trace of sin in any sense or 
degree will remain upon these from the time that they share 
in the glorious blessings of the first resurrection. In the 
present time they are actually imperfect, blemished, marked 
and marred by sin, and continually need the covering of the 
robe of Christ's righteousness so freely granted to them; but 
with the resurrection change all the blemishes of sin will 
be gone. As described by the Apostle, that which was sown 
in weakness will be raised in power, that sown in dishonor 
will be raised in glory, that which was sown a natural body 
will be raised a spiritual body. No longer will they need 
imputed righteousness, but each will individually be absolutely 
perfect, absolutely righteous.— 1 Cor. 15:42-44. 

The blotting out of the world's sins will not be thus 
instantaneous, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, but 
will progress throughout the Millennial age gradually. As 

R3730 : page 62 

each individual recognizes sin and falls in line with the 
rules of the Kingdom he will find himself growing stronger 
as a reward for his endeavors in the ways of righteousness, 
the highway of holiness. Day by day, year by year, he will 
increase in mental, moral and physical development, or failing 
so to do will, after the abundant opportunities of that 



time, be cut off in the Second Death as unworthy of any 

further opportunities for gaining life eternal through the 

Redeemer's Kingdom. Those who will may avail themselves 

of the privileges of that time and have their sins entirely 

blotted out— reach absolute perfection of mind and 

body by the close of the Millennial age, and then be tested 

as to their heart loyalty to the principles of righteousness 

as shown in Revelation 20:10. That final test will be general 

to the human family: it will correspond to the trial 

given to Adam in Eden, except that these will have had experience 

with sin and the fall, and with the recovery and 

with the reign of righteousness. They will, therefore, all 

be in a proper attitude to enable them to pass the examination 

satisfactorily, and any failure so to do will demonstrate 

that the heart had not come, under all the favorable conditions, 

into that harmony with God which would be indispensable 

to eternal life. Such the Scriptures show us will 

be destroyed with Satan as those who have some elements 

at least of his disposition. 

FORGIVENESS OF SINS. 

In our lesson the Scribes are represented as reasoning 
that the only one who could forgive a sin is the one against 
whom the transgression is committed. If A commit a transgression 
against B it is not in the power of C to forgive it. 
B alone has the right to feel offended and he alone can forgive. 
The Scribes were reasoning along correct lines: while 
we do as individuals transgress the rights and liberties 
of each other at times and thus sin against one another 
and need to have one another's forgiveness, yet all sin is 
primarily against God, whose law of righteousness is infringed. 
All unrighteousness is sin— against God, against 
his laws. He alone sets the standard of right and wrong 
by which his creatures are to be measured or judged and 
he is the Judge. How, then, 

COULD JESUS FORGIVE SINS? 

We answer that our Creator had so fixed the matter of 
sin and its penalty that Jesus was the only one who could 
forgive sins— or the heavenly Father through him. The 

R3730 : page 63 

divine arrangement was so fixed that the Father had even 
put out of his own hands the power to forgive sins, because 
he had fixed a positive, absolute, unchangeable penalty 
against sin in the case of Adam and his posterity. He could 
have done differently: he could have dealt with mankind as 
he dealt with the angels that fell, and merely put them under 
some kind of restraints without imposing directly the 
death sentence. But once the death penalty had been imposed, 
nothing could alter or annul it. God himself could 
not change his unchangeable laws. 
But that unchangeable sentence against mankind was 



made by the Creator with full knowledge of how he could, 
and in due time, would negative or nullify the sentence, not 
by withdrawing it but by meeting its requirements through 
a Redeemer. Thus it was that in the divine plan our Lord 
Jesus was the Lamb slain before the foundation of the 
world. In other words God had in mind the plan of redemption 
before he imposed the death sentence which made necessary 
that redemption. 

DIVINE FAVOR EARLY MANIFESTED. 

It may be urged that God manifested his favor to Abraham 
and others before our Lord Jesus came into the world and 
presented man's ransom price. We reply that this is so, that 
divine favor was manifested, but that its manifestation was 
based upon the divine intention that in due time the ransom 
for sinners would be paid. But even then the favor granted 
was not the blotting out of sins. No! that could not have 
been done prior to the ransom, and is to be done by God 
through the Redeemer glorified. All the ancient worthies 
could possibly have was such measure of divine favor as 
their faith in God would justify, and the only favors which 
God could grant to them would be such as his intentions 
through the Redeemer would make reasonable. 

SIN UNDER MOSES' LAW. 

Under the Law Covenant God arranged with the nation 
of Israel a certain kind and degree of forgiveness and reconciliation 
through Moses, the mediator of that Covenant. Under 
these arrangements the sin offerings year by year made 
a picture, a type, an illustration of the coming blessings 
under the New Covenant and its Mediator, the Christ. Israel 
as a nation enjoyed God's favor to a limited extent through 
faith, as did the patriarchs, but neither did they have a blotting 
out of sins. On the contrary, the Apostle points out that 
it is evident that Israel's sacrifices and sin offerings never 
really took away sin, but were merely typical of better sacrifices 
through which sin will actually be cancelled and ultimately 
blotted out.-Heb. 10:1-4; Acts 3:19. 

THE MEASURE OF JESUS' FORGIVENESS. 

If the heavenly Father were bound by his own law and 
could not blot out sins without the payment of the ransom 
price, could our Lord Jesus do so? Had he greater power in 
this respect than the Father? We answer, No ! His words 
to the paralyzed man in this lesson did not refer to a blotting 
out of man's sins, but merely to such a forgiveness of 
sins as the Father had already extended to Abraham and 
others in the past. When the Lord had uttered the words, 
"Thy sins be forgiven thee," the man still lay helpless, his 
sins not blotted out though forgiven; he was still a picture, 
an illustration of the terrible effects of sin. And our Lord's 
later words, "Arise, take up thy bed and walk," although in 
the nature of restitution, were not a blotting out of the man's 



sins. To have blotted out his sins completely would have 
meant the lifting of him completely out of all the imperfections 
of the fall up to the full perfection of a perfect man 
mentally, morally and physically. Jesus did not do this for 
him; he merely healed him of a measure of his special 
difficulty. 

Besides, in these words our Lord did not refer to original 
sin and its death penalty. He was speaking of sins in 
the plural, the man's own sins additional to his share in 
father Adam's sin and father Adam's penalty. The man was 
a Jew, under the Mosaic Covenant. His share in original sin, 
in common with that of all Jews, was atoned for every year, 
and on the basis of this atonement he as a Jew had a standing 
with the Lord, and the Lord's engagement with that 
people was that under their Covenant they should be free 
from sickness, etc., so long as they were obedient to the 
Lord. To every Jew, therefore, sickness meant, implied, 
personal guilt, personal transgression, because the Lord had 
so covenanted with them, as he had not done with other 
peoples and nations. 

OUR LORD ALREADY SACRIFICED. 

But even as respects Adamic sin and its penalty our 
Lord would have had the right to have spoken peace and 
forgiveness and to have given an assurance of an ultimate 
blotting out of sins, because although he had not yet finished 
the work which he came to do, although he had not yet finished 
the ransom sacrifice, he had begun it. At his baptism he 
had consecrated his life, had laid down his life, presented it to 
the Father in sacrifice, and the Father had in a measure accepted 
it and had signified his acceptance of the contract 
by giving to our Lord the holy Spirit, the first-fruits of the 
glorious blessing which he received at his resurrection. 

It was by virtue of his already having made this sacrifice, 
which he fully intended to carry out to the very end, 
that our Lord was authorized in saying to his believers, "He 
that hath the Son hath life, he that hath not the Son shall 
not see life." "He that believeth on me hath everlasting life, 
and I will raise him up at the last day" (John 3:36; 6:54) 
—that is, he who believes in me and becomes my true, faithful 
follower may reckon that he has already begotten in him 
the new life, and that I will assist him and carry him 
through, so that in the very dawning of the Millennial morning 
he may have a share in the first resurrection and thus 
obtain the eternal life under its perfect conditions. 

The entire operation of this Gospel age so far as the 
Church is concerned is one of faith— "We walk by faith not 
by sight." By faith we realize our sins forgiven, by faith we 
look into the future and believe that in the first resurrection 
we shall share our Master's glory, honor and immortality. 
And by faith we are satisfied and rest in hope— yea, actually, 
we shall be satisfied when we awake in his likeness.— 
Psalm 17:15. 



page 65 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVII. MARCH 1, 1906 No. 5 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 67 

Christian Tenets the Jews May Adopt 67 

Spontaneous Generation of Life 68 

Foreign Missions and the Second Coming of 

Christ 69 

Berean Bible Study for March 70 

Blessedness Superior to Happiness 70 

Mourners Blessed and Comforted 71 

Blessed are the Meek 72 

Blessed are the Pure in Heart 73 

Blessed the Persecuted 74 

The Salt of the Earth 75 

"Ho, Prodigal Return!" (Poem) 76 

Lessons on Self-Control 76 

An Eye for an Eye 77 

page 66 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



"IN DUE TIME."-GONE 



Our stock of this year's motto cards is exhausted; but we 
have placed another order and hope to announce plenty more 
and to fill all back orders in a few months. 

VOLUNTEER AMMUNITION. 



Organize your Volunteers for 1906 at once, as we hope to 
be filling orders by April. 

WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 



These are substantially made of stiff cloth boards, and can 
hold two years' issues of the WATCH TOWER. They prevent 
soiling and loss. Price, postpaid, 50c. 

CHARTS OF THE TABERNACLE. 



We have arranged to supply beautiful Charts of the Tabernacle 
on cloth, carriage prepaid, for two dollars each. Very 
choice, and very cheap for the quality. 

WE AGAIN HAVE THE EATON-RUSSELL DEBATES IN 
GOOD SUPPLY 



The six debates published by "Gazette" as one number for 
one cent each postpaid, any quantity. 



R3731 : page 67 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
CHRISTIAN TENETS THE JEWS MAY ADOPT. 



TO find a celebrated and influential Jew advising 
his race to "follow the letter of the Law in 
the spirit of the Gospel" is a decidedly interesting 
feature of the religious situation. Mr. Claude G. 



Montefiore, president of the Anglo-Jewish Association, 

founder of The Jewish Quarterly Review and a man of 

light and leading in British Jewry, gives his fellows 

this counsel in the current number of The Hibbert 

Journal (London). Before giving this advice, he takes 

occasion to remark to the Christian readers of his article 

that some of the doctrines which they imagine to be 

distinctively Christian were, and are, Jewish. The conception 

of the fatherhood of God and of His loving-kindness, 

for example, has been paraded as Christian, 

"whereas to the rabbinic, medieval, and modern Jew 

it was, and is, the ABC of his religion." Similarly, 

the doctrines "that reconcilement with one's neighbor 

must precede reconcilement with God, or that the 

best alms are those given in secret, or that impure 

thoughts are evil as well as impure deeds, or that there 

is peculiar joy in heaven over the repentant— these 

doctrines and several others are not only rabbinic commonplaces, 

but familiar Jewish maxims." 

The common Jewish objections to Christianity are 
that some of its teaching is "unpractical and overstrained," 
that the ideal is so high as to be "incapable 
of realization," that "if some maxims were literally 
obeyed, there would be a subversion of law and order, 
and universal confusion," that "the tendency of the 
teaching is to make a man take a too selfish interest 
in the saving of his own soul," and that it "points toward 
an ascetic morality." 

In one divergence of doctrine between the rabbinic 
religion and that of the synoptic Gospels, however, 
Mr. Montefiore seems to incline toward the latter. 
He says: 

"The rabbinic religion followed the prevailing doctrine 
of the Old Testament in holding that, on the 
whole, the right principle of human conduct, and the 
great principle of divine conduct, was that of proportionate 
requital, or tit for tat. I do not mean to say 
that other principles, such as that of the divine forgiveness, 
did not frequently cross the principle of tit for 
tat, but still it seems true to say that tit for tat occupies 
a very large place in Jewish ethics and religion, a 
larger place than the facts of life or our highest ethical 
and religious conceptions can fully justify and approve. 
Now the teaching of the synoptic Gospels seems to 
traverse that doctrine in many different ways. As between 
man and man we have, for instance, the teaching, 
'If ye love them which love you, what thank have 
ye?' and the reception of the prodigal son, and as between 
God and man the teaching seems more emphatic 
still. Not only that the sun rises on the evil as well 
as the good, but also, in the parable of the vineyard, 
I will give unto this last even as unto thee.'.... 

"Perhaps one reason, tho not the deepest, why the 
doctrine of tit for tat is less thought of in the Gospels, 
is their rather pronounced antagonism to earthly good 
fortune, their strong sympathy with, or even partiality 



for, the weak, the miserable, and the poor. The only 
treasures of any value are the treasures to be attained 
in heaven. The treasures of earth are transitory from 
a double reason— the individual dies, and the old order 
is rapidly nearing its close. The same thoughts meet us 
not infrequently in the rabbinic literature, but we note 
in the Gospels a kind of passionate glorification of 
renunciation and adversity as marks of true discipleship, 
and as the one sure passport to heaven. This note goes 
beyond— how far rightly is another question— the rabbinic 
'chastisements of love.' The soul is all. 'Adversity 
is the blessing of the New Testament.' With incomparable 
eloquence and power the Gospels disclose to 
us one aspect of the ultimate truth, one facet of reality, 
to which we can never again be blind, even tho we 
realize that it is by no means the complete reality, by 
no means the only truth through which we must work 
and live, the truth, I mean, which Professor Bradley, 
with such splendid insight, has lately shown us to be 
exhibited by King Lear, that 'the judgment of this 
world is a lie; [that] its goods which we covet corrupt 
us; [that] its ills, which wreck our bodies, set our souls 
free'; 'the conviction that our whole attitude in asking 
or expecting that goodness should be prosperous is 
wrong; that, if only we could see things as they are 

R3731 : page 68 

we should see that the outward is nothing, and the 
inward is all.'" 

And of the Christian doctrine of self-renunciation 
to save others he writes: 

"The renunciation, the self-denial, and that daily 
carrying of the cross, whereby Luke, as Wellhausen 
notes, changes mere martyrdom into a general way of 
life, are not in the Gospels urged and intended solely 
to save one's own soul, but also to save others. The 
endurance, the self-sacrifice, are not to be merely passive, 
but active. They are to be helpful and redemptive; 
through loving service and sympathy to awaken 
in the sinner the dormant capacity of righteousness 
and love. 

"Lowly, active service for the benefit of the humblest 
is an essential feature of the synoptic religion. 
'He who would be great among you, let him be your 
servant.' 'It is not the will of my Father that one of 
these little ones should perish.' The teaching of the 
synoptics in this matter seems to cluster round those 
three great sayings: 'The Son of man came not to be 
ministered unto, but to minister;' I came not to call 
the righteous, but sinners;' 'The Son of man came to 
seek and to save that which was lost' 

"And here, once more, we seem to be cognizant of 
fresh and original teaching, which has produced fruit 
to be ever reckoned among the distinctive glories of 
Christianity. It has two aspects: first, the yearning 



and eager activity to save and to redeem; secondly, 
the special attitude of the Master toward sinners and 
toward sin. The rabbis and the rabbinic religion are 
keen on repentance, which in their eyes is second only 
to the law; but we do not, I think, find the same passionate 
eagerness to cause repentance, to save the lost, 
to redeem the sinner. The refusal to allow that any 
human soul is not capable of emancipation from the 
bondage of sin, the labor of pity and love among the 
outcast and the fallen, go back to the synoptic Gospels 
and their Hero. They were hardly known before his 
time. And the redemptive method which he inaugurated 
was new likewise. It was the method of pity and 
love. There is no paltering with sin; it is not made less 
odious; but instead of mere threats and condemnations, 
the chance is given for hope, admiration, and 
love to work their wonders within the sinner's soul. 
The sinner is afforded the opportunity for doing good 
instead of evil, and his kindly services are encouraged 
and praised. Jesus seems to have had a special insight 
into the nature of certain kinds of sin, and into the 
redeemable capacity of certain kinds of sinners. He 
perceived that there was a certain untainted humility 
of soul which some sins in some sinners had not yet 
destroyed, just as he also believed and realized that 
there was a certain cold, formal, negative virtue which 
was practically equivalent to sin, and far less capable 
of reformation. Overzealous scrupulosity, and the pride 
which, dwelling with smug satisfaction upon its own 
excellence, draws away the skirt from any contact 
with impurity, were specially repugnant to him. Whether 
with this sin and with its sinners he showed adequate 
patience may perhaps be doubted, but it does seem to 
me that his denunciation of formalism and pride, his 
contrasted pictures of the lowly publican and the 
scrupulous pharisee, were new and permanent contributions 
to morality and religion. As the Jewish 
reader meets them in the synoptic Gospels, he recognizes 
this new contribution; and if he is adequately 
open-minded, he does it homage and is grateful." 

SPONTANEOUS GENERATION OF LIFE. 



We see much in the public prints respecting the 
efforts of chemists and biologists to produce life, and 
several "professors" have announced their success in 
so doing. What are the facts? 

For centuries scientific minds— skeptical respecting 
the teachings of the Bible that God is the author of 
life, the Creator of all things— have been examining 
nature to see how life has its start. At first it seemed 
that new bugs, worms and insects were from time to 
time created independently. For instance, many have 
noticed that an old, water-soaked wooden pail would 



be lifted and an enormous roach found beneath it— too 
large to have crawled under, and perhaps of a kind 
not previously seen in that quarter. 

Further research demonstrated that there are in 
the earth, the air and the water, microbes far too small 
to be seen by the naked eye, which, under favorable 
conditions, would produce larger living creatures of one 
kind or another, according to the environments and 
conditions. 

Then came the suggestion that all the larger forms 
of being were mere evolutions from lower to higher. 
With this thought the learned of this world have been 
wrestling for the past fifty years, shaking the foundations 
of faith in the Bible for millions. For if the Bible 
be true this theory is false as respects man's origin. 
Instead of further evolution being our salvation the 
Bible points us to our fall, to the redemption accomplished 
for the world by the Son of God, and to the 
coming deliverance of the groaning creation from sin 
and its death penalty. Only those who trust the Bible 

R3732 : page 68 

record are safe from the blighting influence of this 
evolution error. 

STILL ON THE WRONG PATH 

Still pursuing the wrong trail, our wise men of 
to-day conclude that although they cannot gainsay that 
our entire race sprang from one pair, and although the 
highest type of monkey still leaves an impossible chasm 
between it and mankind, even in his most depraved 
condition, nevertheless they may yet find the "missing 
link" by which the first human pair, supposedly very 
inferior and degraded, could have been produced. 
Alas ! how much more men will labor to establish an 
error than to corroborate a truth. 

Without waiting to find the "missing link," others 
of the "learned," who know not God, have started at 
the other end of the line, to prove that God had nothing 
to do with creation. Rather their claim is that Nature 
is God. And although they know her not except in 
his works, they ascribe all power and skill to Nature. 
The endeavor now is to prove that Nature is God- 
that the very lowest form of life, protoplasm, is Nature's 
oldest child, from which sprang, gradually, by evolution, 
every creature, including man, who they claim 
is progressing rapidly without a fall, without a Redeemer, 
and without need of any heavenly aid, to 
perfection. 

DR. LITTLEFIELD'S FINDINGS (?) 

Dr. C. Littlefield now steps before the world announcing 
that he by experiments has actually produced 



R3732 : page 69 

living organisms where there was no life of any 
kind previously. He asserts that he was very careful 
in these experiments and surely excluded every lurking 
microbe. If true, if it can be corroborated by others, 
it will be assumed as proof that there is no Creator, 
no God, except Nature. Ah! says one of old, "The 
fool hath said in his heart, There is no God." 

If it be true that a low form of life can be produced 
chemically, it proves nothing. What is Nature but the 
creature of our all-wise God? The divine power placed 
all the conditions of Nature and fixed her limitations 
as we behold in the various animal species. The Bible 
record is that God commanded the sea first to bring 
forth, and produced the conditions necessary to its 
teeming life. But the same Bible with explicitness declares 
the special creation of mankind in the Creator's 
likeness, and not in the image of a baboon. 

THE CLAIM IS DISPUTED 

Fortunately for the truth, when one "professor" 
seeks to shine another seems ambitious to shine by extinguishing 
him. So here we have from the Scientific 
American Professor C. E. Tingley's repudiation of 
Professor Littlefield's claims, with logical reasons for 
supposing that the experiments were not reliable. We 
quote: 

"It is a far cry from a simple protoplasmic cell to 
that of a highly organized insect such as that just 
described, in fact almost as far as it is from lifeless 
crystals to living matter. Oppositely, the higher critics 
will have none of it, basing their conclusions on 
practically the same grounds that Professor Tyndall 
took in relation to Dr. C. Henry Bastian's experiments 
nearly thirty-five years ago. This scientist, it would 
seem, was eminently qualified to investigate the origin 
of life, for he was recognized as an authority on biology 
and the pathology of the nervous system, and he was 
a strong advocate of the doctrine of spontaneous generation 
of life. In one of his many papers he pointed 
out the results he had obtained in creating life artificially, 
and he declared that 'observation and experiment 
unmistakably testified that living matter is constantly 
being formed de novo and in accordance with 
the same laws and tendencies which determine all the 
more simple chemical combinations.' Professor Tyndall 
took up the matter and carefully tested Dr. Bastian's 
experiments, but took precautions, which the 
latter had neglected, to prevent the ingress of life during 
the processes of sealing the vessels, and though he 
varied the experiment in many ways no germs of life 
manifested themselves, so that Tyndall felt impelled to 
thus testify: 'I affirm that no shred of trustworthy 



evidence exists to prove that life in our day has ever 
appeared independent of antecedent life.' 

"The moral of Tyndall's statement is obvious; the 
value of Dr. Littlefield's or any one else's experiments 
in the artificial generation of life lies absolutely and 
solely on excluding every trace of pre-existing life and 
thus preventing contamination which must otherwise 
surely follow during the progress of the tests. Carelessness 
in this respect has led biologists, even those who believe 
in the hypothesis of abiogenesis, to cry down every 
attempt made looking toward the artificial production 
of life. At various times Spencer, Huxley, Darwin, and 
Pasteur were firmly convinced that they had found the 
secret of life, but repeated experiments wherein antecedent 
life was more rigorously excluded than before 
proved their efforts futile. 

"Evidently error of a similar nature has crept into 
the tests of Dr. Littlefield, and this is not said without 
due consideration, for the present writer has performed 
the experiment as above written, not one but many 
times, and in every instance the result was not successful 
beyond the mere crystallization of the chlorides. 

"It is true that more recent reports state that the 
development took place under sealed glasses thoroughly 
sterilized before beginning and sealed from the air when 
placed on the shelf, but it is obvious that there was 
every chance for pre-existing life to slip in, and so what 
would otherwise have been regarded as a wonderful 
achievement in science has not been taken very seriously 
by men skilled in either chemistry or biology." 



R3732 : page 69 

FOREIGN MISSIONS AND THE SECOND COMING OF CHRIST. 

THE following is a digest of an address given upon Foreign 
Missions at the recent session of the Friendship Association, 
by R. E. Neighbour, pastor First Baptist Church, 
Americus, Ga." 

"Brethren, hearken unto me: Simeon hath rehearsed 
unto me how first God visited the Gentiles, to take out of 
them a people for his name. And to this agree the words of 
the prophet; as it is written: After these things I will return, 
and I will build again the tabernacle of David, which is 
fallen; and I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will 
set it up; that the residue of men may seek the Lord, and all 
the Gentiles, upon whom my name is called, sayeth the Lord, 
who maketh these things known of old." 

From these four verses, quoted from Acts 15:13-18, R.V., 
we learn: 

First. God will at first visit the Gentiles, to take out of 
them a people for his name. 

Second. After these things, Christ will return. 

Third. The tabernacle of David will then be rebuilt. 



Fourth. The residue of men, and all the Gentiles, will 
seek after the Lord. 

Here we find God, the holy Spirit, unfolding the plan 
of this age. The work of the Church, then, is what? 

To take out of the Gentiles, or nations, a people for 
his name. It is impossible to read into these words that we 
are to "take the world for Christ." This is an "elect" age. 
The Church, God's "ecclesia," are a people "called out" 
from among the nations. 

The Church is a minority, and will remain so during its 
whole existence. The work of the Church can never be 
marked "a failure," as long as it is doing the work that God 
ordained. Because the Church does not "convert the world," 
it cannot, therefore, be deducted that the Church is making 
the world worse. 

But what is the great inspiration of Foreign Missions? 
Surely, without a doubt, it is the Second Coming of Christ 
in pre-Millennial glory. And why? Because, as soon as the 
Church arouses herself and, empowered by the Spirit, gathers 

R3732 : page 70 

out of the Gentiles the certain number of God's elect, then 
he will come and establish himself on David's throne, after 
which the residue of men may seek the Lord. 

The thought in the missionary's heart, then, should not 
be "India for Christ," or "Africa for Christ," or "the World for 
Christ," but the bringing to God from the east and from the 
west, from the north and from the south, a people for his 
name. The great inspiration of a Christian worker is, "After 
this, I will return." 

Does not the truly saved yearn for the appearing of the 
Lord? Is not the very height of his glory to see him coming 
in his majesty? Then, what is the better way? To stop trying 
to win men to him, and sit down and merely pray, inasmuch 
as the coming of the Lord will bring salvation to all 
men? 

By no means. To be sure, we must pray for the coming 
of the Lord, but we must also work for it. 

If the taking of the "world for Christ" is the missionary's 
motive, he must despair. Nineteen centuries of this era 
of grace have already passed, and yet there are more heathen 
today than there were in the days of Paul. The earth is 
filled with new and strange doctrines. Whereas, if the veneer 
were removed, we would find sin and lust just as heinous as 
in the long ago. 

This is a man-glorying age. Wonderful achievements 
and startling progression are seen on every side, yet with all 
our learning, riches and advance of civilization, there is not 
a country, a city, nor even a hamlet, where Jesus truly reigns. 

R3733 : page 70 

No, brethren, the wheat and the tares must grow together 
to the end of this age. The mustard seed has grown 
into a great tree, but the birds of the air (representing the 



wicked one and his children) roost in the branches thereof. 

The meal, to be sure, is good, but the leaven (sin) is contaminating 

the whole loaf. The drag-net which holds the 

evil as well as the good will not be separated until the consummation 

of the age. 

Dear brethren, keep clearly before your mind that the 
work of the Church is to call out a people for his name; 
that the inspiration of this work is the glory of hastening the 
coming of our Lord, and that the coming of the Lord will 
bring to the Church her reward. 

How the activities of the Church ought to be quickened. 
How her gifts should be increased. How her hand should 
be reached out in every direction until God from above shall 
say, The work of the Church is done, the witness to the uttermost 
part of the earth has been borne, the elect from the 
foundation of the world have been brought in, and the day 
of her reward is at hand!— Christian Index. 



R3733 : page 70 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY FOR MARCH. 

-FOR EXPLANATION SEE PREFACE OF WATCH TOWER 
BIBLES AND WATCH TOWER, MARCH 1, 1905.- 

STUDIES IN PRAYER 

21. What is the cost of selfish prayers? Z. '02-250 (1st 
col. par. 1 to 3). 

22. What is meant by "vain repetitions" in prayer? Z. '98-28 
(2nd col. par. 2). 

23. How may we be "instant in prayer"? Z. '97-265 
(2nd col. par. 2 to 4); Z. '93-215 (2nd col. par. 2). 

24. What does it mean to "pray without ceasing"? 
Z/03-25 (1st col. par. 2, 3); Z.'04-l 18 (1st col. 
par. 1). 

25. How should we understand, "Ye shall ask what ye 
will, and it shall be done unto you"? Jno. 15:7. 
Z/96-149, 150; Z/04-234 (1st col. par. 3, and 2nd 

col. par. 1); Z/05-124 (2nd col. par. 1, 2); F.679, 
par. 1, to 680, par. 2; Z/05-343 (1st col. par. 3). 

26. What relative privileges in prayer have justified and 
consecrated persons? F.681, par. 3, to 684, par. 1. 

27. What privileges of prayer do the children of consecrated 
parents enjoy? F.531, par. 1, to 532, par. 2, 

and 684, par. 2. 

28. How should we look out for the interests of each 
other through prayer? Z. '03-218 (1st col. par. 1); 
Z.'95-170(2ndcol. par. 2). 

29. What is the relation between faith and prayer? Jas. 1:6; 
Mark 1 1:24; Z/96-162 (1st col. par. 3, to 2nd 

col. par. 2); F.691, par. 2; Z/05-345 (1st col. par. 2) 
(and 2nd col.) 

30. What is the relation between prayer and thanksgiving? 



Z.'03-8 (1st col. par. 2, 3); Z/04-24 (1st 
col. par. 1); Z. '01-271 (1st col. par. 3). 



R3733 : page 70 

BLESSEDNESS SUPERIOR TO HAPPINESS. 

--MATTHEW 5:1-16.-MARCH 4.- 

Golden Text:— "Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.' 

HAPPINESS describes the joyful moods which come to 

mankind from time to time, but blessedness relates 

to that permanent joy and comfort which are the 

result of the attunement of character to harmony with the 

divine. The people of the world may at times be happy, and 

at other times downcast, mournful and troubled; but to those 

who become followers of the Lord Jesus, and who as pupils 

in the school of Christ are taught of him, there is a peace 

of God which passes all understanding ruling in their hearts, 

bringing comfort and rest even under most adverse outward 

conditions. The lesson we are now considering describes to 

us the condition of heart necessary to the possession of the 

peace of God. In proportion as we get before our mental 

eyes the true conception and then strive to attain that ideal, 

in the same proportion will be the degree or progress of blessedness 

which will come into our hearts and lives to rule 

there and to keep us in the love of God. 

Our Lord and his disciples were on an elevated plane 
of the mountain side, and crowds of people were coming to 
hear the message of the great Teacher respecting the Kingdom 
so long anticipated and which he declared was nigh. 
His miracles had attested his divine authority as a Teacher, 

R3733 : page 71 

and this drew the people to him "who spake as never man 
spake." (John 7:46.) Seeing the gathering multitudes Jesus 
went up the mountain onto a little mound, where he 
could the better be seen and heard by all. After the manner 
of olden times he sat down while making his address, the 
people also sitting down. The customs of the times favored 
this— loose, flowing robes, sandals easily removed, and the 
people accustomed to sitting with their limbs folded under 
them in what is sometimes styled "tailor fashion." 

The teaching was addressed primarily to those nearest 
to the Lord, namely, his special disciples, the multitude interestedly 
watching for any items in the address that would 
specially enlighten them. It must have seemed strange to all 
the hearers that our Lord did not talk more about the Kingdom 
itself, explaining when and how it would be established, 
etc. But he knew that he must first suffer for the redemption 
of the world before the Kingdom could come and the 
divine will be done on earth as it is done in heaven. He 



knew, too, that the first work in preparing for the establishment 

of the Kingdom would be the gathering of the Church 

class, the elect, to be his Bride and joint-heir in the Kingdom. 

His discourse, therefore, was so directed as to divide the 

hearers into two classes— some would be disappointed because 

they were interested more in the glories and honors and dignities 

of the Kingdom hoped for than in the condition of 

heart necessary to a place in it. These probably went their 

way saying that doubtless Jesus was a great Teacher to those 

who liked his kind of philosophy, but to them it was a very 

dry and unsatisfactory portion. 

Others, though disappointed in the character of the teaching, 
found something in it which satisfied their longings as 
nothing else could do— found in it nourishment, comfort, upbuilding 
qualities. The same is true today: some hear the 
good tidings of great joy with interest merely in those features 
which relate to restitution. They are glad to know 
that there is no eternal torment in the divine plan, but that, 
on the contrary, times of refreshing are coming to the world, 
and times of restitution of all things spoken by the mouth of 
all the holy prophets since the world began. (Acts 3:19-21.) 
But aside from this, all discussion respecting consecration to 
the Lord and terms of discipleship, all descriptions of characteristic 
conditions that would fit them for the Kingdom, are 
wearisome to them, distasteful. Thus does the Truth always 
separate. 

"THE POOR IN SPIRIT" 

The message of this great Teacher differed from all 
others, and was especially attractive to the humble, the 
lowly. Whereas others would have said, Blessed are the 
rich, the learned, the prominent, the rulers, this great Teacher 
reversed the matter, saying, "Blessed are the poor in spirit" 
—blessed are those who are not self-conceited, who do not 
think very highly of themselves, who appreciate their own 
littleness and imperfection. Astounding! How are such 
blessed? Surely the world thinks little of those who do not 
think much of themselves! Surely they will make less 
progress in the world! Ah, yes! But, says the Master, their 
blessedness consists in the fact that they are of the Kingdom 
—of those from whom the Kingdom of heaven class will be 
selected. 

Self-confidence, self-esteem, may win for its possessor a 
high and honorable place in the present time, but is disesteemed 
of the Lord; and those who have such a spirit will 
be the less prepared for the tests and conditions which the 
Lord will impose in selecting the heirs of the Kingdom, the 
joint-heirs with Christ. Yes, indeed!— there is a favor and 
blessedness associated with being little in one's own estimation: 
it preserves from many a false step into which egotism 
would lead. All who are seeking to follow the instructions 
of the great Teacher, who naturally are poor in spirit, humble-minded, 
deficient in self-esteem, have much advantage every 
way over others as respects this particular element of character. 
And those who are not naturally humble should take 



heed to the Master's instruction, and humble themselves under 

the mighty hand of God, that they may be exalted in due 

time. (1 Pet. 5:6.) The Lord's followers, then, should continually 

R3734:page71 

practise humility and be especially on guard against 
pride, self-conceit, etc.; they should know on the great 
Teacher's authority through the Apostle that God resisteth the 
proud and shows his favor to the humble, the poor in spirit, 
to such an extent that only the humble will share with the 
Lord in the inheritance of the Kingdom.— 1 Pet. 5:5; Jas. 4:6. 

MOURNERS BLESSED AND COMFORTED 

Again it seems strange, contrary to the usual thought, 
to say "Blessed are they that mourn." The general thought 
is that those who mourn are to be specially commiserated. 
What principle lies behind the Master's assurance that there 
is a blessedness connected with mourning? We reply that we 
cannot suppose that there is mourning in heaven— we must 
suppose that there is happiness, blessedness there. Hence 
the blessedness of mourning must in some way relate to our 
present imperfect, sinful conditions and surroundings. Sin is 
in the world, and death, the wages of sin, is being paid out 
to the entire human family, carrying into every home more 
or less disappointment, sorrow, trouble. Where these are appreciated 
rightly there must surely be mourning. The world 
is sick and dying; with its twenty thousand million dead and 
sixteen hundred million dying in sorrow and pain and disappointment, 
he who is "merry" must surely be correspondingly 
irrational. Who but a foolish person could be merry 
in the shadow of such a charnel-house! Those who are merry 
under such conditions give evidence of so wrong a condition 
of heart and mind that we may know that they will require 
rigid disciplinary instructions (such as will be accorded to 
the majority of mankind during the Millennium) in order to 
bring them to their proper senses. 

On the contrary, those who do mourn because of a realization 
of their own imperfections, their own fallen condition, 
and who to any extent mourn in sympathy with the poor, 
groaning creation, these have corresponding advantages because 
of their saner condition of mind; they will be the more 
ready for the heavenly message, telling of the glorious blessing 
that is to come through redemption in Jesus and through 
his Kingdom, which, as the rising of the Sun of Righteousness, 
shall bring in health, healing, life and comfort to all 
the families of the earth. Blessed are these mourners now, 
because they are in that much more favorable condition to 
hear the voice of him who speaketh from heaven— speaking 
peace through Jesus Christ our Lord. They shall be comforted. 
Their comfort shall not wait either until the new 

R3734 : page 72 

dispensation of the Kingdom shall be fully inaugurated and 



bring in the blessings of restitution: their comforting will 
begin at once, for their mourning will bring a readiness of 
mind to hearken for the Lord's favor. So to these he will 
be pleased to make known something of the riches of his 
grace and lovingkindness through Jesus. They will have 
therefore the best opportunity for attaining the peace of God 
which passeth all understanding through the holy Spirit in 
this present time, and also in the dispensation to come. 

Sorrow may be associated with sin and imperfection. 
It is proper that we should realize our fallen condition and 
be sorry for it, but this sorrow may be healed at once through 
the knowledge of the great redemption sacrifice and through 
our acceptance of a share in the merit of the same. But 
there is another sorrow or mourning which is not because of 
sin but because of sympathy. Our Lord, who was separate 
from sinners, had this spirit of mourning. It was this mourning 
in sympathy that led to his tears at the tomb of Lazarus, 
and the same that led to his being called "the man of sorrows 
and acquainted with grief."— Isa. 53:3. 

In our imperfect fallen condition, even after our hearts 
are fully consecrated to the Lord and imbued with his Spirit, 
it will not be possible for us to enter so fully into sympathy 
with others as did our dear Master; but we are to cultivate 
this spirit of sympathy, which is a part of the spirit of love, 
and the more we grow in grace and in character-likeness to 
the great Teacher the more we will have of the spirit of 
sympathy, the more sorrow and mourning will appeal to us. 
On the other hand, however, the more we receive of this same 
holy Spirit proportionately we will have the greater peace, 
the greater joy in the Lord and the greater rejoicing, because 
of what we will be increasingly permitted to discern in the 
unfolding of the great plan of salvation under which all who 
mourn in Zion shall be comforted. So, then, the most advanced 
Christians, who have the deepest and most holy joy, 
should be the ones who at the same time would have the 
deepest sympathy with mourning and sorrow. Who has not 
already noticed this, that as our Lord and Teacher is the 
exemplar of perfection, so those who most nearly imitate him 
are usually such as have had deep experiences in the school 
of sorrow and mourning, and in whose hearts and characters 
deep spiritual lessons and characteristics have been 
engraved? 

The word comfort does not contain the thought of relief, 
but rather that of strengthen together, or added strength. 
In other words, the Lord does not propose to take from us 
that noble quality of sympathy which we receive in the school 
of experience, but he does propose for all those who become 
his true followers that they shall be comforted or strengthened 
together, that he will give them a blessing of strength 
to endure, which will compensate their mourning and spirit 
of heaviness. He gives this through the promises of his 
Word and the glorious hopes which he sets before us, and he 
gives it also through the living epistles of the dear members 
of the household of faith. Note how the Apostle calls this 
to our attention in 2 Corinthians 1:4, where many times over 
he repeats the thought of our comforting one another with 



the comfort wherewith the Lord has already comforted us. Oh, 
what a privilege we enjoy, not only of being comforted by 
the Lord through his Word, but of being used of him as channels 
for comforting or strengthening or upholding one another 
during this mourning time, when some, more than others, have 
in themselves weaknesses and frailties to cause mourning to 
themselves and to others. Blessed are those who, being 
comforted themselves, shall be used of the Lord in the comforting 
of the other members of his body. 

"BLESSED ARE THE MEEK" 

The poor in spirit or humble minded, who do not think 
highly of themselves, are unquestionably the same as the 
meek, the gentle. The Century Dictionary defines the 
word meek as "self-controlled and gentle; not easily provoked 
or irritated; forbearing under injury or annoyance." Webster 
defines meekness as "submission to the divine will; patience 
and gentleness from moral and religious motives." As we 
look about us in the world and note the meek of the earth 
we do not see them more prosperous than others, and our 
Lord's words that such shall inherit the earth would astonish 
us and seem quite untrue if we did not understand that 
he referred to blessings beyond the present life. Surely the 
millionaires of earth, that own the larger portion of it and its 
riches, valleys and slopes, are very rarely to be counted as 
the meek. And so we see that the Master did not say, 
Blessed are the meek, for they do inherit the earth, but "they 
shall inherit the earth." 

When, Lord? 

Answer: When God's Kingdom shall come and his will 
be done on earth as it is done in heaven— then the meek 
shall inherit the earth. So, then, if we perceive that the rude, 
the unjust, the self-assertive, are grasping the bounties of 
earth in the present time, and if we find ourselves rather 
crowded out because of meekness, let us remember our 
Lord's Word that we are especially blessed, and let us cultivate 
this quality of meekness more and more, and let us not 
think to exchange it for a spirit of arrogance and self-assertion 
and vindictiveness, to grasp earthly fame and name and 
riches. Let us rather be content to cultivate this spirit 
which the Lord assures us he approves, and let us wait for the 
time when this class shall inherit the earth. We perceive 
that the inheritance will be with a view to giving it to the 
human family under the terms and conditions instituted during 
the Millennial age. Then the meek of the restitution 
class will inherit the earth; they will be given the advantage 
everyway, and eventually all who are not meek will be 
utterly destroyed from amongst the people in the Second 
Death. 

The meek ones of the Lord's followers even now in a 
measure receive the fulfilment of this promise, as the Apostle 
declared, "All things are yours, for ye are Christ's and Christ 
is God's." (1 Cor. 3:22,23.) These have more enjoyment of 
the earth now than have others; while others are grasping 
these are enjoying. As the Apostle declares, "God hath given 



us all things richly to enjoy." (1 Tim. 6:17.) Freed from the 
grasping spirit, we can pass through the streets and observe 
the rich displays of the shop windows without covetousness, 
without wishing that we had the various works of art and 
beauty under our special care and control. We can feast 
our eyes upon them and be without the care of them at a 
time when all of our talents are consecrated to the Lord and 
his service, and when we have more important things to do 
than caring for earthly trinkets called works of art. 

R3735 : page 73 

BLESSED THE HUNGRY AND THIRSTY 

Our Lord refers to two of the most potent influences known 
amongst men. To what activity will not hunger and thirst 
spur us? Similarly there is in some a heart-hunger and 
thirst for that which is right, that which is true. The majority 
of people evidently do not have much of this hunger of the 
soul: natural eating and natural drinking are their special 
attractions. But all are not so, and there is a special blessing 
for those who have the soul-hunger to which our Lord 
refers. "They shall be filled"— they shall be satisfied. 

Nothing in this promise implies a miraculous filling or 
satisfying: the thought connected with the illustration rather 
is that, hungering and thirsting, they will make use of their 
time, knowledge and opportunities for seeking the bread of 
eternal life, which satisfies, and the water of life, which truly 
refreshes; and that in proportion as these are sought and 
found and used will be the blessing. We have the Lord's 
guarantee of the blessing for all who are in the attitude of 
mind to seek and to use the spiritual refreshments he 
provides. 

Righteousness here applies to right in every matter- 
Truth. God is the great standard of righteousness, and he 
communicates it through his Word, his exceeding great and 
precious promises delivered to us through Jesus and his 
apostles. The majority of the world, careful for the meat 
that perishes, think little of the Truth and get little of it; 
the few hungering and thirsting for it are filled, refreshed, 
sanctified by it, and in word and in deed and in thought 
are being fitted and prepared for still further blessings in 
God's due time— participation with the Redeemer in the 
Kingdom and a share with him in the work of blessing and 
uplifting mankind. 

"BLESSED ARE THE MERCIFUL" 

Mercy is akin to love, and in proportion as the fall has 
effaced love from any heart in that proportion mercy will be 
lacking. Of course we cannot always judge by the outward 
appearance, as there are outward forms and expressions of 
love without the heart. So sometimes mercy is extended 
without the real spirit of mercy prompting it. Sometimes it 
is to be seen through the recognition of a principle without a 
sympathy with that principle. The true Christian learns in 



the school of Christ not only of his imperfections and his 
need of divine mercy, but having found that mercy and having 
entered the school of Christ it becomes one of the most 
important lessons he can learn to extend similar mercy 
toward others. The Apostle declares that "Mercy rejoices 
against Judgment"— against the execution of justice. (Jas. 2:13.) 
Strange as it may appear, those who have most need 
of mercy for themselves appear usually to be the ones 
least ready to accord mercy to the failures of others. 

Contrariwise, those who grow most in the spirit of the 
Lord grow proportionately merciful and compassionate. Some 
of the Lord's people have more to overcome in this 
direction than have others, and may therefore show less 
development in proportion to their efforts; but the thought 
should be continually before the minds of all that it is very 
unbecoming for those who themselves have need of divine 
mercy to be sticklers in the last degree in their requirements 
of justice for others, in their refusal to exercise mercy toward 
others. Not only so, but this lesson which our Lord so 
frequently emphasized he intensified when he said, You do 
not from the heart forgive those who trespass against you, 
neither will your heavenly Father forgive your trespasses. 
He thus teaches us that our mercy must be more than formal, 
more than an outward forgiveness and reconciliation— it must 
be from the heart, sincere. In proportion, therefore, as we 
each realize our need of divine mercy through Jesus, in that 
same proportion let us be very merciful to others— especially 
toward the brethren and all who in any sense or degree demonstrate 
their desire for righteousness. 

"BLESSED ARE THE PURE IN HEART" 

The word pure is very comprehensive— without adulteration, 
sincere, unsullied. No member of the human family 
is by nature in this condition. On the contrary, the Scriptures 
assure us that the heart of the natural man is exceedingly 
deceitful and desperately wicked. (Jer. 17:9.) The heart 
in this text and in general conversation is used not as the name 
of one of the organs of the human system, but as indicating 
the inner mind, will, intention of the person. As originally 
created man was the image of God, and hence was then pure 
in heart, sincere, honest, truthful, perfect-intentioned; but, 
by reason of disobedience, sin and selfishness have been 
developed in the human heart and will, and the God-like 
qualities originally there have been to a considerable degree 
obliterated. Hence it is that those who become the Lord's 
people are said to have a new heart, a new will, new ambitions, 
new desires. Where the conversion from sin to 
righteousness is thorough it is truthfully said, "Old things 
have passed away, all things have become new."— 2 Cor. 5:17. 

To accomplish so radical a change of will, of intention, 
requires a powerful influence. It may be of fear and it may 
be of love, but we are assured that the results of fear are 
imperfect, and that only love produces the lasting, perfect, 
acceptable conditions. Fear may have to do with the beginning 
of a change of heart, but it certainly cannot carry the 



conversion to completion, for, as the Scriptures declare, 
"Fear hath torment," and the peace of God cannot rule in 
the heart that is subject to such distress. (1 John 4:18.) 
Hence the Scriptures set before us the heart conversion which 
results from the knowledge of God and love for him, saying, 
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart," and 
again assuring us that "perfect love casteth out fear."— Mark 12:30; 
1 John 4:18. 

Our Lord's words intimate that there may be various 
degrees of impurity of heart, and so we find it: there are 
some who at heart are really black, devilish; others are drab 
or gray or speckled. But the Lord singles out the kind of 
heart that would be acceptable to the Father— the pure in 
heart. We are all witnesses that we could not claim purity 
of heart, of intention, of motive, of desire for very many of 
our friends and neighbors of Christendom, and that so far as 
we know in the heathen world the proportion would be still 
fewer. Yet the intimation of our text is that only such as 
attain to heart purity can hope ever to see God, to enjoy 
this evidence of his love. 

But lest some should be discouraged through supposing 
that purity of heart means absolute perfection of thought and 
word and deed, we hasten to correct that thought and to 
point out that the intention is not always supported by the 
words and conduct. To will right, to will perfectly, to be 

R3735 : page 74 

pure in heart, is quite possible, yea, quite necessary to all 
who would have divine approval; yet how to perform all that 
they will is sometimes beyond the ability of the Lord's most 
earnest followers. The new will, the new heart, must act and 
speak through the medium of the old body, whose affections 
are continually in opposition and must be battled against. 
Hence so long as we are in the flesh, so long as we are 
obliged to reason, speak and act through the imperfect 
medium of our fallen flesh, that long will we have need of the 
merit of Christ to continually cover its blemishes; that thus 
the new will, the new heart and not the flesh, may be judged 
of the Lord and tested as to its worthiness or unworthiness 
of the eternal life and blessings which he has proffered us. 

How precious the thought, then, that we may attain to 
absolute purity of intention, of love, etc., toward all mankind 
as well as toward the Lord, and that God will thus accept us 
in his Beloved One, not counting to us the unintentional 
weaknesses and blemishes which we realize and which others 
realize perhaps still more than we. How blessed the thought 
that such will see God, that such have the clearest views 
of God's character and plan now, that such shall see him 
shortly when changed in the resurrection, when they shall 
have awakened in the likeness of their dear Redeemer. 

BLESSED THE PEACEMAKERS 

Never was there a time when this statement of our Lord 
deserved more consideration than at present. We live at a 



time when envy and strife are in evidence on every hand, 
amongst all classes, amongst nations, in politics, in business, 
in homes and families, in nominal churches and amongst the 
fully consecrated of the true Church. The tendency toward 
strife is evidently somewhat associated with the strenuous 
times in which we live; but all the more those who are true 
members of the body of Christ are to remember the Scriptural 
injunction, "Follow peace with all men;" and again, "Be at 
peace amongst yourselves." (Heb. 12:14; 1 Thess. 5:13.) Some 
of the best people in the world have the organ of combativeness 
large, but proportionately they need to have love to control it, 
so that they shall combat only those things which are evil 
and injurious, so that they shall think generously, kindly, 
lovingly of all who take a different view of matters; and 
while standing always firm for principle, they should take 
note of the fact that principle enters into remarkably few of 
their conflicts, contentions, etc. 

Each of the Lord's children should be learning day by 
day to cultivate the fruits and graces of the holy Spirit, 
amongst which prominently are patience, long-suffering, 

R3736 : page 74 

brotherly kindness, love. These things dwelling in us and 
abounding we shall be more and more pleasing to the Lord 
and able to assist others in the same direction— to be peacemakers. 
For who can properly be a peacemaker who is not 
himself at heart a peace lover? 

There seems to be in the majority of humanity a contentious 
streak, which not only leads the possessor to be quarrelsome 
and contentious, irritable and irritating to others, but 
additionally this trait seems in many to be inclined to stir up 
disturbances in others, when the first principle of decency- 
minding one's own business— would be favorable to peace. 
As the Lord's people more and more come to realize the 
selfishness and quarrelsomeness which the whole world has 
inherited through sin and depravity, and how this is all 
opposed to the Spirit of the Lord and of meekness, gentleness, 
patience, long-suffering, love, they should not only strive to 
develop peace in their own hearts and lives but to be peacemakers 
amongst men. 

"Blessed are the peace-makers, for they shall be called 
the children of God." Yes, truly, the peace lovers, peace 
promoters, manifest that in this particular at least they are 
the possessors of the holy Spirit— the Spirit of God. Let us 
not only merit this title, sons of God, now amongst men who, 
seeing our good works and peaceable dispositions, will glorify 
our Father in heaven on this behalf, but let us by the continued 
cultivation of this same quality of love, under the 
guidance of the great Redeemer, merit the distinction of being 
sons of God on a higher plane in the Kingdom. 

BLESSED THE PERSECUTED 

Not all the persecuted, but merely the persecuted for 
righteousness' sake. Many bring upon themselves persecutions 



for foolishness' sake and for being busybodies in other 
men's affairs. Let us heed the Apostle's word along this 
line and avoid persecutions or sufferings for evil doing of any 
kind; but, as again it is declared, if any man suffer as a 
Christian let him glorify God on this behalf. (1 Pet. 4:16.) 
It is well, too, that we preserve in this matter as in all others 
the spirit of a sound mind. There are, for instance, some 
that evidently imagine themselves persecuted when really 
they are very kindly treated, and are the victims of their own 
morbid imaginations. The Lord's people should be so filled 
with the spirit of thankfulness and gratitude and appreciation 
that they would be in no danger of erring in this matter. 
They should be so generous in their thoughts of the motives 
and intentions of their friends and neighbors that they would 
be in no danger of misapprehending them and feeling persecuted 
by those who are really their well-wishers. 

As perfect love casts out fear, so also it casts out these 
false impressions of evil doing or intention toward us. The 
benevolent heart, full of love for others, will rather prefer to 
suppose that slights are unintentional oversights, or to put 
some other similar good construction upon the conduct of 
their friends, only yielding to an appreciation of persecution 
when its intention is unmistakable. Even then it should think 
generously of the persecutor, realize his share in the fall and 
be disposed to pray for those who despitefully use them and 
persecute them. Blessed are such ones who thus hold to 
righteousness and the spirit of love toward their enemies and 
persecutors, and who may be sure, therefore, that they are 
being persecuted for their fidelity to truth and righteousness 
and not for personal idiosyncrasies and peculiarities. Blessed 
are they, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. The Lord is 
looking for those who are so faithful to the principles of 
righteousness that they will exercise it toward their enemies 
even when being persecuted by them and on its account. 
If the Kingdom of heaven is for such it is assuredly but a 
little flock. Let us strive the more diligently to be of that 
little flock— to make our calling and election sure. 

REVILED FOR CHRIST'S SAKE 

The Lord's people are not to revile each other or anybody 
under any circumstances, but are to remember that they 
are pupils, followers of him who when reviled reviled not 

R3736 : page 75 

again. Whatever evil others may say or insinuate about us 
we must be faithful to our Teacher and not return evil for 
evil, reviling for reviling, nor insinuation for insinuation, but 
contrariwise must speak evil of no man and be pleased to 
notice and to mention any good qualities which even our 
enemies may possess. 

Our Lord's words, however, warrant us in expecting 
that those who will be faithful to him will share his experiences 
of being evil spoken of. With his words before our 
minds we should not be surprised at false charges and false 



insinuations made against his true followers, and that in 
proportion to their prominence as his servants and followers. 
The expression, "all manner of evil," is very comprehensive, 
while "for his sake," is worthy of notice. It does not 
imply that those who strike with the fist or weapon or 
tongue and who shoot out arrows, even bitter words, will say, 
We do this to you for Christ's sake and because you are one 
of his. We have never heard of any one persecuted in that 
manner along those lines, and this cannot therefore be what 
the Lord meant. 

What he did mean evidently is that his followers, like 
himself, honorable, moderate, possessing the spirit of a sound 
mind, truthful, honest, virtuous, would naturally be highly 
esteemed amongst the Scribes and Pharisees, the nominally 
good; they would have a high place, were it not for their 
fidelity to the Lord and to his Word. Because of loyalty to 
truths contradictory of popular errors, because of their faithfulness 
to the Word of the Lord, they are unpopular, and, 
like the Master, are hated by those prominent in Churchianity. 
These conditions bring a double test: 

(1) They test the adherents of Churchianity along the 
lines of the Golden Rule, and when they speak evil through 
malice, through hatred, through strife, through opposition, 
they are judging themselves, condemning themselves under 
the Golden Rule, for well they know that they would not 
wish others thus to speak evil of them;— either through 
malice or a concocted lie or through hearsay. 

(2) It becomes a test also to the faithful ones— Are they 
willing to endure these persecutions and oppositions cheerfully 
as a part of the cost of being the Lord's disciples? If 

under the pressure they yield and revile in return, and 
slander and backbite, they are proving themselves unworthy 
of a place in the Kingdom. If on the other hand they receive 
these lessons and experiences with patience and long-suffering, 
these serve to develop in them more and more of the 
character-likeness of their Redeemer and tend the more to fit 
and prepare them for a share with him in his glorious Kingdom. 
Our Lord's assurance is that those who are thus tested 
and who stand such a test will have the greater reward in 
heaven, and reminds them that similar persecutions from the 
Lord's professed people came to all the holy prophets of the 
past. 

THE SALT OF THE EARTH 

The declarations, "Ye are the salt of the earth," and 
"the light of the world," may be very properly applied to 
such of the Lord's followers as give heed to his teachings 
and cultivate the blessed states he has described foregoing. 
All such blessed ones in proportion as they have attained 
such conditions are indeed the salt of the earth and the light 
of the world. As salt is useful in arresting decomposition, 
so the influence of these, though they be few in the world, 
is preservative. Looking back along the aisles of history, 
we can see that a good influence extended from the Law 
Covenant God made with Israel. 



As the Jews scattered more or less amongst other nationalities 
they carried with them more or less clear conceptions 
of the divine standards as represented in the Law, and these 
wherever they went had a preservative and corrective influence 
amongst men. But it was Jesus and his higher Law of 
Love, exemplified in his own life and in the lives of his 
apostles and all his followers, who became the real salt of 
the earth, in a period when without it we know not what 
might have been the result. As it is not only the spot upon 
which the candle or lamp rests that is enlightened by it, 
but as the rays extend out in every direction, so is the influence 
extending from every true Christian. It touches not 
merely his own person or home but to some extent radiates 
throughout his vicinity. Similarly it is not merely the spot 
that is touched by the lump of salt that is preserved, but 
the influence of that lump spreads over a considerable space 
round about it, and all with preservative influence. 

At the time of our Lord's first advent the world was in 
a condition in which it would probably have hastened to 
degeneracy and corruption, but the introduction of the body 
of Christ and the beneficial influence extending from each 
member of that body were potent for the arrest of the demoralizing 
tendency of the times. The light which shone 
out from Jesus, the Light of the world, and from his followers, 
had undoubtedly a beneficial effect upon the then center 
of the civilized world. That influence is still manifest 
in so-called Christendom. And even today, although the 
truly consecrated believers in the great Redeemer are confessedly 
very few in number, yet the general influence, the 
saltiness from the teachings of the Savior, exercise a wide 
influence throughout Christendom. Without this, doubtless, 
corruption and a complete collapse would have come long 
ago. In spite of it we see very corrupting and corrupt influences 
at work in every direction and the wider our horizon, 

R3737 : page 75 

the more general our information, the more this fact will be 
appreciated. 

Before very long we expect that all of the overcoming 
members of the body of Christ will be changed, glorified, 
and the body completed on the other side the vail will be 
without members on this side. The lights will have 
gone and the darkness will hold fuller sway than ever; the 
salt will be gone and the corruption will take hold swiftly, 
and the result will be the great time of trouble such as was 
not since there was a nation. 

Meantime we are to let our lights shine and thus to 
glorify the Father, whether men heed or forbear to heed; 
we are to exercise our salt or preservative influence, our 
influence for righteousness and truth, whether men hear or 
forbear, though we clearly see that it is not God's purpose to 
enlighten the world through the Church in its present humble 
position. The matter will test us and prove whether or 
not we are worthy to be members of the glorified body of 
Christ, which shortly shall shine forth as the Sun in the 



glory of the Father, and enlighten the whole world in a manner 
with which our little lamps of the present time will in 
no sense compare. 

R3737 : page 76 

HO, PRODIGAL RETURN! 

"Return, return! thy Father's voice is pleading, 

Tho' far astray, I bid thee turn again! 
Thy robe is rent, thy tender feet are bleeding, 

Thy heart is faint and sick with famine pain: 
Return, my child: a welcome here awaits thee: 

No longer in the distant country rove; 
Resist the cruel tempter that belates thee, 

And keeps thee from my dwelling and my love. 

"Return, return! Thy Father's loving-kindness 

Thou long hast scorned, and done his grace despite; 
Yet in his touch is healing for thy blindness, 

And he can turn thy darkness into light. 
Return in all thy rags of sin's defilement; 

Return with all thy want and sore distress; 
Thy Father's voice bespeaks his reconcilement: 

Flee to thy Savior, and thy guilt confess. 

"Return, return! Thy substance hath been wasted— 

Thou hast not aught to bring but thy poor heart; 
Yet art thou longing for the bread once tasted, 

And for his paths of peace, and faith's good part? 
Return, for why shouldst thou delay the pardon 

Thy Father's great compassion waits to grant! 
Arise and go, before thy doubts shall harden 

The homesick yearnings of the penitent. 

"Return, return! Leave thou the swine and famine 

And seek again the plenty of thy home! 
Why dost thou toil among the husks of mammon, 

When to his rest the Father bids thee come? 
Return thou to his arms, his kiss, his blessing, 

Accept the robe, the sandals, and the ring, 
After thy sinfulness and guilt confessing, 

By Jesus found, lost treasure of the King! 

"Return, return! The angel-hosts bend o'er thee— 

They wait to bear the tidings' joyful sound. 
They have beheld the Savior dying for thee, 

And will rejoice to sing, The lost is found! 
Return, for he will heal all thy backsliding— 

Will love thee freely, and will thus forgive; 
Come, weary soul, rest in his love abiding, 

Thou hast been dead— arise to-day and live!" 



R3737 : page 76 



LESSONS ON SELF-CONTROL. 

--MATTHEW 5:33-48.-MARCH 11.- 

Golden Text:— "Keep the door of my lips."— Psa. 141:3. 

AGAIN we gather at the feet of the great Teacher 

of the school of Christ to hearken for his further 

instructions. In connection with his 

discourse on the beatitudes, which constituted our last 

lesson, the Master proceeded in the words of today's 

lesson. 

Our Lord refers to the traditions of the ancients, 
which evidently had a great control over the people of 
that time. No fault is to be found with having respect 
for the opinions and teachings of those who have gone 
before us in life's pathway, but one of the important 
lessons for every Christian to learn is that the fact that 
a matter is ancient, that it has been long believed, is 
no positive proof of its correctness. The thoughts of 
ancient times are to be weighed and tested, as well as 
those of modern times by the one standard, the divine 
revelation— "If they speak not according to this word 
it is because they have no light in them."— Isa. 8:20. 

The traditional teaching to which our Lord referred 
was not wholly erroneous, just as the traditions of the 
"dark ages" contain some elements of truth. Error 
alone is weak in comparison to error mixed with a little 
truth; hence our great Adversary usually endeavors 
to interweave some measure of truth with all the injurious 
falsehoods which have burdened the world for centuries, 
and still burden us in proportion as we are deceived 
by them. This was true in respect to the 
matter our Lord was discussing: the Law had something 
to say respecting the taking of God's name in 
vain, and tradition had modified the Law and limited 
it to false swearing. Our Lord called attention to the 
error, pointing out that the third commandment had a 
broader and deeper meaning than the tradition implied 
—that it meant that God's name should never be 
used in any irreverent manner, and not merely forbidding 
its use in connection with the violation of an oath 
in the Lord's name. Our Lord extended the thought, 
teaching his followers that they should not continue the 
custom of their day, of proving their assertions by appeals 
to God, to heaven, etc. The same lesson is for 
the followers of Jesus today: others may feel it necessary 
to emphasize their statements by oaths or expletives, 
but the followers of Jesus are to so live, so act, so 
speak, that their words pass for par anywhere and with 
anybody. To this end they must be absolutely truthful, 
so that whoever may hear them may know that their 
yea is yea and their nay is nay. 

"SWEAR NOT AT ALL" 



Oaths and solemn asseverations in the ordinary conversation 
of life imply that the truth of the speaker is 
questionable— that his yea is not always yea, and that 
his nay is not always nay. The tendency is to make 
him less careful in the ordinary statements of his 
conversation which are not thus solemnized; the effect 
is also to make him less reverent toward the Lord or 
the other holy things which he may call upon as witnesses, 
as evidences of his truthfulness. As the word 
of such people becomes common and liable to be broken, 
so their oaths would soon also become common 
and liable to be broken— such matters go on from bad 
to worse usually. On the contrary, where the word is 
held sacred the avenues of sin and error and falsehood 
are measurably stopped. 

Nothing in this injunction can properly be understood 
to apply to the taking of an oath in a court of law. 
Such oaths, commanded by the law of the State, are necessary, 
because all have not the high standard of truth 
desired. But even in the courts of law in many States 
it is permitted that an affirmation may be made instead 
of an oath if any so prefer. To one of the Lord's people 
an affirmation must mean exactly the same as an 
oath; he would not affirm what he would not be willing 
to swear to. He recognizes that, as a follower of 
the Lord and one of his representatives, his yea or his 
nay must be as truthfully kept as his oath would be. 

Whatsoever is more than yea or nay cometh from 
evil— the revised version says "of the Evil One." Indirectly 
all of our evil tendencies come from the Evil One, 

R3738 : page 77 

for was it not by his lie in Eden that the fall from perfection 
and the divine image brought us all into our 
present evil, imperfect condition, exposing us to error 
through our own weaknesses and imperfections and 
the weakness of our neighbors? While our Lord's 
injunction is good for all who have ears to hear it, it is 
especially appropriate to the little flock who have applied 
themselves to hearken to all of his commands, 
and to be taught of him, and, to whatever extent is 
necessary, to suffer with him in following the course 
of righteousness. Truly all such should be models of 
truthfulness and uprightness, and thus be burning and 
shining lights, glorifying our Father in heaven in their 
homes and in the communities where they live. 

AN EYE FOR AN EYE 

Another of the teachings of the ancients was that 
absolute justice should be rendered, an eye for an eye 
and a tooth for a tooth. Some features of the Law did indeed 
imply this. If one caused an injury to another intentionally 
he should be maimed himself correspondingly. 



This strict requiting of justice prevailed, not only 
amongst the Jews, but also amongst the Romans 
and the Greeks. It may be said to have been 
a juster law in some respects than those which 
now prevail, which indirectly favor the rich: for 
instance, the penalty today for injury to another might 
either be a fine of so much money or an imprisonment 
of so long a time. In either case the rich would have 
the advantage in that they could spare the money, and 
the loss of time would not be so disastrous to them as 
to the poor. However, there were disadvantages in a 
juster system of an eye for an eye and a tooth for a 
tooth: it cultivated a feudal spirit, and led to anger, 
malice, hatred, envy, strife, murder, works of the flesh 
and of the devil. Seeing what the strictest interpretation 
of justice would imply, let us see what the great 
Teacher would present as the preferable course of 
action. 

Hear his words, "I say unto you, resist not evil 
[do not retaliate, rendering evil for evil], but whosoever 
shall smite you on the right cheek turn to him the 
other also." This is an astounding proposition— who 
can obey it? Even if we modify it all that language 
will permit, it is still apparently beyond reach of any 
fallen human being— it teaches the ideal requirements 
of the divine law of perfect love. When seeking for an 
interpretation of the expression, Resist not the evil 
doer, but turn the other cheek, we must look to our 
Lord and the apostles as examples. We find, for instance, 
that our Redeemer was smitten upon the cheek, 
and that while he did not literally turn the other he did 
not attempt to smite back, to retaliate even in word. 
In this indirect sense he did turn the other cheek. 
And this should mark our course. Our Redeemer did 
expostulate with his smiters in kindly terms, however, 
and we may properly follow his example, and consider 
it in full agreement with his instruction in this lesson. 

We may remember him again when evilly entreated 
and taken to the brow of the hill to be cast headlong: 
he did not use his superior power to do injury to his 
opponents, but passed through their midst, evidently 
either directly or indirectly exercising over them a restraining 
influence, because his time for death had not 
yet come. So, too, we may use any moral influence we 
may possess to escape from the power of our enemies, 
and be assured that we will have the divine care and 
protection until our lessons and experiences are completed 
—until our time shall come to pass beyond the 
vail. Similarly the Apostle, learning of the threats of 
the Jews against his life, did not make threats against 
them nor pray evil upon their heads; but he did use 
such steps as were at his command to thwart their evil 
designs, sending word to the governor and invoking 
the power of the civil authority; and on another occasion 
he defended himself by appealing to the people.— 
John 18:22,23; Acts 23:1-5,17. 



The lesson for us is that we may use all lawful and 
legal means in our self-defense, and may even wisely 
run away from dangers and persecutors, as the Lord 
directed and the apostles exemplified. (2 Cor. 11:33; 
Matt. 10:23.) But we are not authorized to retaliate. 
Difficult as this proper course may appear, it undoubtedly 
will be found to be the best one. Remember our 
Lord's words, "They that take to the sword shall perish 
with the sword," and again the Apostle's words to the 
Church is, "If ye bite and devour one another, take heed 
that ye be not consumed one of another." (Matt. 26:52; 
Gal. 5:15.) The lesson evidently is,— 

"FOLLOW PEACE WITH ALL MEN" 

"If any man sue thee at the law and take away thy 
coat, let him have thy cloak also." The revisers translated 
this to mean that if any one is disposed to go to 
law with you and take away your coat you should settle 
with him, even though it deprive you of both coat and 
cloak. This lesson of submission, of non-resistance, 
is surely a very difficult one to thoroughly learn. We 
cannot doubt that many would take advantage of such 
a disposition, and that as a result he would have the 
bad end of many a bargain. However, this would not 
prove the Lord's counsel unwise even as respects the 
present life. The lesson upon ourselves would certainly 
be valuable as respects the development of the Master's 
graces, and how can we tell that the example 
would not be very potent upon those who might fraudulently, 
violently take advantage of our obedience to 
the great Teacher. 

We know, too, that the Lord would be quite able 
to compensate us for anything we might suffer in way 
of loss in obedience to his directions, to whatever extent 
he might see would be to our advantage. We 
should never forget the two occasions on which the 
Lord told the disciples to cast in their nets after they 
had toiled all night and had caught nothing, and how 
on both occasions miraculous draughts of fishes were 
caught. He who is for us is more powerful than all 
they that be against us, and undoubtedly loyalty to 
him and obedience to his Word will prove eventually 
the better part. Let us remember also the proverb 

R3738 : page 78 

which says, "There is that scattereth and yet increaseth; 
and there is that withholdeth more than is meet, 
but it tendeth to poverty." (Prov. 1 1:24.) It is not 
always those who fight most strenuously for their rights 
that fare the best even amongst the children of the 
world. 

"GO WITH HIM TWAIN" 



The next injunction is not generally understood: 
it does not mean that we should be turned aside from 
the duties and affairs of life at anybody's bidding. In 
olden times certain magistrates, governors, etc., had 
the authority of law to press the service of the people 
for governmental work. For instance, note how Simon 
the Cyrenian was compelled to bear the cross for Jesus 
a certain distance. The word compel in our lesson is 
from the same Greek word, and refers to a similar legal 
compulsion; "commandeered" would be the modern 
way of referring to such a matter. Our Lord's injunction 
is that his followers should be so broad-minded, so liberal, 
so generous, that they would not only obey the legal 
commands but be ready to go farther— to do more than 
had been required. 

In thus doing heartily, joyfully and agreeably all 
and more than would be commanded they would be 
exemplifying the generous spirit which represents our 
Lord and his teachings. By such breadth of sentiment 
they would be known as Jesus' disciples, who had 
learned of him. Indeed we may say that the whole 
trend of the teachings of the Lord and the apostles is 
in line with this, and opposed to stinginess and narrowness 
and selfishness— in accord with generosity, 
full measure, pressed down, heaped up and running 
over. The Christian measure would be nothing short, 
though it might be a little more. A Christian measure 
of anything must be full, never skimp. This is an element 
of the higher law, the law of love, and its spirit 
of generosity in our hearts. 

In similar strain the great Teacher enjoins that we 
shall give and lend to those requesting. We cannot 
suppose that he meant that a parent should give a 
razor to the child which cries for it; we cannot suppose 
that the Lord meant that our loans or gifts would be 
such as would be injurious to the recipients. Love 
must be the basis of our conduct, as it is the very essence 
of the Master's law. We cannot think either that 
he meant that we should neglect the interests of our 
own homes and families in giving to others or loaning 
to them. We are bound to suppose that our Lord in 
this, as in all things, wished his followers to be wise 
as serpents and harmless as doves. What he wished 
to enjoin evidently was that spirit or disposition which 
would have pleasure in loaning or giving to the needy, 
and which is so circumstanced as to be able to comply 
with such requests and would be glad to do so, using 
the proper discretion and judgment, as to time, place 
and persons. In other words, the spirit of Christ is a 
benevolent spirit and not a mean or stingy one, and all 
the Lord's people, more or less selfish, need to learn 
this. There are few perhaps who would be in any danger 
of injuring themselves or others immediately dependent 
upon them by any acts of benevolence. 

"LOVE THY NEIGHBOR" 



Love for the neighbor was a feature of the Law, and 
in enjoining this the traditions of the elders were quite 
right; but they added to it that an enemy should be 
hated, whereas the Law said nothing of the kind, but 
on the contrary enjoined that if an enemy's ox or ass 
or property of any kind were seen going astray or about 
to be injured they should be protected and assisted and 
held for the owner, even though he were an enemy, 
and even though at a considerable cost of time and 
trouble. Our Lord thus pointed out the real meaning 
of the Law, making it the more honorable, saying, "I 
say unto you, Love your enemies, and pray for them 
that persecute you; that ye may be sons of your Father 
which is in heaven." (The rendering of v. 44 here given 
occurs in the revised version, and is in harmony with 
the oldest Greek MS., which omits a part of this verse.) 

If we are sons of God we must have his Spirit, his 
disposition. To whatever extent we lack this disposition 
to love and desire good to our enemies as well as 
to our neighbors we lack evidence of relationship to our 
Father in heaven and to our elder brother, our Redeemer 
and Teacher. Here again the lesson of benevolence 
comes in— we must be large-hearted, generous. 

R3739 : page 78 

How can we cultivate this necessary quality, especially 

if our natural dispositions are mean and selfish, very 

much fallen from the divine likeness in this respect? 

We reply that the entire course of instruction in the 

school of Christ is in this direction. To make us compassionate 

and sympathetic with others, we are shown 

our own littleness and weakness in the Lord's sight; 

to teach us how to be generous and forgiving to others, 

we have the illustration of God's mercy and grace and 

forgiveness toward us; to impress the matter upon us 

we are assured that our forgiveness and standing with 

the Lord can only be maintained by our cultivating this 

spirit and manifesting it toward our debtors and 

enemies. 

We are to be generous with those who transgress 
against our rights and interests, our enemies. This does 
not mean that the Lord recognizes or treats his enemies 
with the same degree of blessing that he grants to his 
friends and his children, nor does it mean that we are 
to love our enemies in exactly the same sense that we 
love our bosom friends and companions. The Lord 
gives special blessing to those who are especially his, 
and we also may properly give more of our love and 
favor to those who are in accord with us. The lesson 
here again is large heartedness and generosity. 

"LOVE THEM THAT LOVE YOU" 

Our Lord points out that in merely reciprocating 



the love of others we would come far short of the standard 
he sets us, and of the lesson we must learn if we 
would be his joint-heirs and companions in the glory, 
honor and immortality of the Kingdom. Publicans and 
sinners even love those who love them— he must be a 
very mean man who will return evil for good and hate 

R3739 : page 79 

those who love him. Even though such a standard 
were recognized in the world, of loving those who love 
us, it would not be appropriate to the Lord's followers; 
they must rise to a higher plane if they would be his 
disciples. 

Similarly our greeting, our salutations, the civilities 
of life are to be extended not merely to our brethren 
either after the flesh or after the Spirit. We are to have 
kind intentions toward all, and to enjoy the privilege 
of extending these, expressing them, and thus comforting 
and refreshing all with whom we come in contact. 
Generosity again is the thought— breadth of character 
and nobility of conduct. 

PERFECT AS FATHER IN HEAVEN 

The last verse of our lesson caps the climax of all 
instruction, telling us that the copy which we are to consider 
and follow is that of our heavenly Father— we are 
to be perfect as he is perfect. Ah, yes! It would have 
been impossible for the great Teacher to have set us any 
other pattern or example or standard than the perfect 
one. And yet he knew that none of his disciples would 
ever be able in the present life and under present conditions 
of sin and death working in our mortal bodies 
to come up to this standard— to follow this copy. What 
then did he mean? We answer that he there set before 
us the perfect copy, with instruction that, in proportion 
as we love him and desire to have his approval, we 
should endeavor to pattern after the heavenly Father's 
character. 

The fact that this endeavor would not bring perfect 
results could only redound in blessings upon us, by 
bringing us to a realization of our own imperfections 
and of our need of the covering of our dear Redeemer's 
robe of righteousness, until the time shall come when 
in the first resurrection change we shall be made like 
him, see him as he is, share his glory, and be able to 
perfectly reflect, as he does, the heavenly Father's perfection. 
Meantime all of our shortcomings that are unintentional 
are graciously covered from the Father's 
sight with the merit of our Redeemer, who stands as 
our pledge or guaranty that our endeavors to follow the 
copy are sincere, of the heart. The Lord will judge us 
worthy or unworthy of the resurrection— not according 
to the flesh, but— according to the endeavors of our 
hearts as New Creatures. 



THE OLD COPY-BOOK 

Years ago it was the custom in the public schools 
to furnish the children with ruled copy-books, with 
copper-plate engraved lessons at the top of each page. 
The lesson to the pupil was the copying of those perfect 
characters. Every modest child must certainly 
have felt abashed, timid, when receiving one of those 
lessons, from the realization that it could not produce 
characters that could at all compare with the copy. It 
was, however, explained that it was not expected that the 
child could duplicate the perfect copy, but that following 
the lines of the copy it would become more and 
more expert. How well this illustrates the Master's 
words, "Be ye perfect, even as your Father in heaven is 
perfect," and the way in which he intends that we 
should profit by the instruction. 

Another lesson: It was the duty of the teacher to 
examine the work of the pupil, and surely in a majority 
of cases it was found that the best copy of the original 
was found on the first line, and that the work became 
poorer and poorer toward the end of the page. So it is 
with many in the school of Christ— the great Teacher 
perceives that their first endeavors to copy God-likeness 
at the beginning of their Christian experience was more 
successful than their subsequent attempts. Why? The 
answer is the same in both cases. The child neglected 
to look at the copy and merely looked at its own imperfect 
efforts, and hence the poor results. So with the 
pupils in the school of Christ— their poor results come 
from comparing themselves with themselves, and 
neglecting to keep constantly before their minds the 
perfect copy— "Be ye perfect, even as your Father in 
heaven is perfect." 

As the earthly teacher reproved and corrected the 
pupil, so with much long-suffering and patience the 
Lord reproves and corrects the pupils in the school of 
Christ. Will not this explain many chastisements 
which are necessary for every son whom the Father 
would ultimately receive to home and glory, every one 
of whom must be conformed to the image of his Son, 
who is the express image of the Father's person? Let 
us, then, begin afresh, on a new page as it were, to copy 
the character-likeness of our perfect Father in heaven. 
Let us no longer look at ourselves and our past attainments, 
but, as the Apostle says, "Forgetting the things 
that are behind and pressing on toward the things that 
are before," let us labor with patience to learn the all-important 
lessons connected with our discipleship and 
the gracious hopes set before us in the promises of our 
Father's Word. 

"KEEP THE DOOR OF MY LIPS" 

Our Golden text presents an important thought. 



The Lord's people find the tongue the most difficult 
member to bring into subjection, and therefore may 
well pray, "Keep thou the door of my lips." And if the 
prayer be sincere, from the heart, it will imply that the 
petitioner is doing all in his power in this direction 
himself while seeking the divine aid. And the divine 
aid comes in line with this lesson, and assures us that 
the lips are not at fault, that it is the heart that needs a 
completion of the regenerative work of the holy Spirit, 
for "Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth 
speaketh." The lesson here is that whatever difficulty 
we have through our lips needs correction at the heart. 
We need to get our hearts more in accord with the heart 
of the Almighty— more in tune with the gracious elements 
of the divine character, represented not only in 
justice toward others, but additionally in mercy, love, 
kindness and benevolence towards all. 



page 8 1 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVII. MARCH 15, 1906 No. 6 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 83 

Is the Moral Supremacy of Christendom in 
Danger? 83 

Communism and the Bible 84 

Palestine Opened to Jews 84 

Signs of Depravity in Coming Generation 85 

Rifle Range Under a Church 85 

Spiritism is Aggressive 85 

One-Day Convention Reports 89 

The Chestnut Burr (Poem) 89 

Punishing Fellow-Members 89 

Infallibility and Church Eldership 90 

A Lesson on Temperance 92 

"Take Heed How Ye Hear" 92 

page 82 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 



PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3741 : page 82 

A PLEASING CORRECTION. 



In our issue of Feb. 15th, page 52, notice an article headed 
"VERY SAD IF TRUE," relating to President Faunce of Brown 
University. One of the brethren acquainted with the gentleman 
called his attention to it, and reports to us that the truth 
of the report is emphatically denied. We are glad of this, and 
will be very pleased if the brother will obtain from President 
Faunce a brief statement of his views of the Atonement over 
his own signature; we will be pleased to give it publicity in 
these columns. Our report, it will be noticed, was taken from 
the columns of "Watchword and Truth," a Baptist journal of 
good reputation, and seemingly in close touch with Dr. 
Faunce's opinions. 

COLPORTEUR WORK IS GREAT 



Evidently now is the special time for the promulgation of the 
Good Tidings of the Kingdom. Every avenue seems to be 
opening wider than ever before. The Colporteur work is 
showing remarkably: Much of this is due to some new methods 
very recently adopted. Now every laborer of zealous heart is 
being prospered. Still there is room! If you are free of 
earthly encumbrances or nearly so, and long for this service, 
write to us at once for our "Special Instructions." If you at 
one time tried the work and failed of success, put yourself under 
our present instructions and you will surely succeed. If 
possible send us your photograph: indeed, we now have a large 



photograph cabinet at the Bible House, and will be glad to have 
photos of all WATCH TOWER readers willing to send them. 
Write your name on back of photo. 



R3739 : page 83 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 

IS THE MORAL SUPREMACY OF CHRISTENDOM 
IN DANGER? 



FROM THE "HIBBERT JOURNAL" 

rf has become the plain duty of Christendom to 
realize that her hold on the moral supremacy of 
the world is not so secure as many of us imagine. 
There is room, nay, opportunity, for a rival candidate. 
That the Christian ideal of moral excellence is splendid, 
even unsurpassed, no one doubts. But no less certain, 
no less striking, is the failure of the West to justify 
that ideal, both in national and private life. The 
sense of dissatisfaction which this failure has produced 
has entered deep into the moral consciousness of 
Christians all the world over; and if the impression has 
been deep in the case of those who profess and call 
themselves Christians, it has been yet deeper with the 
multitudes who have turned their backs on the Church. 
I rate this feeling among the greatest of the forces now 
moving the minds of men. Other things may create 
a louder noise, but this works revolutions. The question 
of theological standards is being merged into 
that of the moral, and we are being summoned, as 
never before, to find the correspondence between our 
professions and our lives. Such a state of things exposes 
Christendom to a rival challenge, and marks the 
fitting moment for another claimant to appear on the 
scene. If outside the pale of Christendom there should 
arise the example of a saner, nobler, more rational, 
more joyous, more humane, more self-controlled way 
of life than the West has so far achieved, the minds of 
men are prepared to greet its appearance as no act of 

R3740 : page 83 

presumption, but as a divine fulfilment of the urgent 
needs of mankind. 



If any reader of this paper should conclude from 
what has been said that I regard the rise of Japan as 
the most important event in religious history since the 



call of the Gentiles, he will so far correctly understand 
my drift. 



The contention is that a serious challenge to the 
moral hegemony of Christendom is not, a priori, impossible; 
that such a challenge has actually been offered; 
that Buddhism, represented for the moment by Japan, 
is even now in the field as a claimant for that position 
which the vast majority of Christians regard as the 
indisputable birthright of their own religion. What 
verdict history will finally pass upon this claim no one 
can tell, no one should try to tell. Enough for the 
present that the claim has arisen; that it lacks no element 
of seriousness; that it has been forced on the attention 
of the world in a fact-language which admits 
of no mistake. 

The potentates of Europe will hereafter have reason 
to think twice before shaking their mailed fists in the 
face of the Far East. But not for her guns alone, nor 
the way she handles them, is Japan to be feared. The 
"Yellow Peril" is an ethical phenomenon. Far more 
significant than the efficiency of Japan in arms is the 
advent into the world's history of a people possessed 
of a disciplined will in combination with the highest 
order of intelligence. An observer has declared that 
the greatest brains in all the world are to be found 
at this moment in Japan. But a great brain is no guaranty 
of efficiency; isolated from other gifts, it may 
even become the ruin of its possessor. This, however, 
is not the case with Japan; her purpose and her intelligence 
are one. She has shown herself great not only 
in conceiving her end but in pursuing it. She has poured 
her energies into her ideals. Thus she rises up in possession 
of all that we mean by character; and it is in the 
strength of character rather than in the strength of 
arms that she now challenges the world. 

Praise of Japanese virtue is at this late hour admittedly 
superfluous. But none the less a prudent man 
will not cease to observe the facts, nor grow weary in 
his study of their meaning. He will be quick to notice 
that Japan has impressed Europe by qualities higher 
than those which pertain to martial valor. To very 
many persons— I think to the masses of the people— it 
appears that Japan in her hour of trial has shown a 
degree of calmness, moderation, self-restraint, and dignity 
which are strange to the working moral standards 
of Europe, and beyond what we have been accustomed 
to expect. Her armies and navies have taught the 
world many lessons in the making of war, and she has 
won an equal glory by showing how the people who 

R3740 : page 84 

stay at home should behave themselves while the war 



is being made. By what she has refrained from doing, 
no less than by what she has done, she deserves our 
respect. In no act of that appalling drama has she 
allowed herself to play to the gallery. She has not 
made a spectacle of her fight-for-life; she has encouraged 
no reporters to witness the shedding of heroic 
blood; but as though some terrible operation of surgery 
were in progress, she has repulsed the sightseer and 
locked the door. In all these respects she has not 
copied an example previously given, but set a new 
one to the civilized world. 



It will scarcely be doubted that the impression has 
gone very deep, and that great changes are bound to 
follow in many of our accepted ways of thought. The 
working classes of our own country in particular, never 
prone to rate too highly either the bona-fides of their 
religious instructors or the practical value of the instruction 
given, have undoubtedly found here a new 
reason for distrusting the moral efficacy of the Christian 
religion. And not among the working classes only, but 
everywhere one may observe a growing readiness to 
compare the respective moral harvests of the East and 
the West, with the result that Western society sees with 
cleared vision the scantiness of the domestic crop and 
the general nakedness of the land. A new point has been 
given to the arrows of the sceptic: has he not indeed 
been provided with a new poison for his barbs? The 
astounding divorce between the ethical ideals of Christendom 
and its normal practice, the liberty of interpretation 
with which the first principles of Christian 
morality are misapplied to our social life; the freedom, 
amounting to effrontery, with which one thing is professed 
and the opposite practised; the disgraceful sophisms 
by which the Christian conscience is taught to be 
blind to its own faithlessness— these and many other 
truths of a like nature, once apprehended only by a small 
and neglected company, have during the last three years 
been revealed in their true colors to tens of thousands 
of persons who never thought of them before. Who 
can doubt that the crisis which has so long been in preparation 
for Christianity has been brought appreciably 
nearer by these things— so near, perhaps, as to be even 
now at the doors? 

COMMUNISM AND THE BIBLE. 



"The relation of Christianity to Communism has become 
a question for thoughtful people to consider seriously, 
if they wish to preserve their intellectual candor and self-respect 
in adhering to the religion of Jesus." This statement 
is made by Prof. Henry Van Dyke in his new volume of 



"Essays in Application." The new type of communist, he 
says, is more insidious than the old, because, having "laid 
aside the red cap and put on the white cravat," he "discusses 
the problem of organization of society on ethical and religious 
grounds." The law of private ownership the communist 
denounces as "essentially immoral and irreligious, because 
it protects and rewards a form of selfishness." He 
further claims that the "teachings of the Bible are against 
it, and that the Spirit of Jesus, who was really a great Socialist, 
is altogether in favor of common ownership." Entertaining 
the contention for the sake of its implied conclusion 
the writer states that: 

"If property is theft, according to the teachings of Jesus, 
then the Church itself, like the Temple of old, has become a 
den of thieves. If the animus of the New Testament is distinctly 
communistic, then every honest Christian is bound 
either to give up his faith in the holy Scripture or to obey 
its doctrine, not only to the letter, but in the spirit, and to 
work with those who are seeking to establish a new order of 
society in which private possessions shall be unknown." 

The writer admits two cases possible of citation to prove 
that the Bible has at least a partial leaning toward the communistic 
theory. They are the Hebrew Year of Jubilee, 
"which is used as an argument for the nationalization of the 
land;" and the example of the members of the early Church 
at Jerusalem who "were together and had all things in common; 
and sold their possessions and goods, and parted them 
all, as every man had need." Considering these two cases, 
however, Dr. Van Dyke asserts of the first that, "looking at 
the Year of Jubilee as a possible model for legislation in our 
times, we see that it was simply an iron-clad law of entail, 
more rigid than England has ever known;" and the early 
Church "was a fraternal stock company for mutual aid and 
protection." The Old Testament, he declares, holds out scanty 
encouragement to the advocates of Communism. The Gospels 
seem to contain even less. He writes: 

"There was a man in Bethany named Lazarus, who had 
a house in which he sheltered the Christ whom the community 
had rejected. There was a man named Zaccheus, who 
was rich and who entertained Jesus at his own house. Is 
there any suggestion that the Master disapproved of these 
property owners? There was a man named Joseph of Arimathea, 
who had a garden and a new sepulcher in which he 
made a quiet resting-place for the body of him whom the 
people had despised and crucified. Was he a selfish robber? 

"Christianity never would have found a foothold in the 
world, never would have survived the storms of early persecution, 
had it not been sheltered in its infancy by the rights 
of private property, which are founded in justice, and therefore 
are respected by all lovers of righteousness, Christian or 
heathen. It is difficult to see how the religion of Jesus 
could have sanctioned these rights more emphatically than 
by using them for its own most holy purpose." 

More emphatically still the writer declares his belief in 
the antinomy that exists between the communistic creed and 
the doctrine of the Bible, and especially that assertion which 



declares that Christ was at heart a communist. He says: 

"There is a fundamental and absolute difference between 
the doctrine of the Bible and the doctrine of Communism. 
The Bible tells me that I must deal my bread to the 
hungry; Communism tells the hungry that he may take it for 
himself. The Bible teaches that it is a sin to covet; Communism 
says that it is the new virtue which is to regenerate 
society."— Literary Digest. 

PALESTINE OPENED TO JEWS. 



Our readers are aware that for fourteen years the Sultan 
of Turkey has kept Palestine closed against the Jews. 
None of the Jewish race was allowed to become a resident: 
a limited number were granted visiting privileges of about 30 
days and these were sometimes renewed, but no Jewish settlers 
were accepted. Now, according to the cablegram below from 
the public press, all this is changed and Jews may establish 
themselves in Palestine or elsewhere throughout the Sultan's 

R3741 : page 85 

dominions. No doubt this will mean a great rush of Hebrews 
from Russian persecution to the Holy Land, and just 
at the opportune time— "in due time," as our motto for this 
year has it. We quote the cablegram:— 

SULTAN OPENS PALESTINE TO JEWISH COLONISTS 

Constantinople, March 3.— The Sultan has opened the 
gates of Palestine to the wandering children of Israel, by 
signing an edict permitting them to establish themselves in 
any part of the Ottoman empire. 

As a sign of protest against the cruel treatment of Russia 
toward the Jews, the Sultan ordered the officers at the 
different boundaries of the empire to allow the Jews entrance 
with or without passports. 

The Russian Zionists sent a delegation to Turkey and 
Egypt to prepare everything for a systematic emigration 
from the Czar's empire into the new land of promise. 

SIGNS OF DEPRAVITY IN COMING GENERATION. 



"Paris, France.— Sociologists and criminologists are 
greatly worried at the many signs of depravity in the 
growing-up generation. Crimes among children are increasing 
at an alarming rate, and that not only among the 
children of the slums of the great cities, brought up 
among demoralizing surroundings, but even among the 
children of smaller towns and villages. Since January 
last 15 murders have been committed by children less 
than 16 years of age, one more shocking than the other." 



It would be as unfair to blame all the increased and 
increasing depravity of children upon the modern Sunday 
School, as to blame all the increase of crime and immorality 
amongst the young people of our day to the Epworth 
League, the Baptist Young People's Union and the Young 
People's Society of Christian Endeavor. 

ON WHAT, THEN, SHOULD WE LAY THE BLAME? 

It would seem hard, too, to charge these things to 
the fact that our Methodist friends are boasting that they 
are building more than a Church every day. It would be 
equally unfair to charge the great increase of crime 
throughout Christendom to the efforts of any other denomination 
or to any people who outwardly teach and 
favor good morals. 

Education surely opens the mind to greater opportunities 
for evil doing if the heart be unregenerate and 
wicked. But neither can we blame all on that which, 
rightly used, proves such a blessing to others. 

If we should conclude that none of these influences 
should be faulted, we at least must agree that the dear people 
of God connected with all these who have hoped that 
they would prove world-converting agencies have every 
reason to feel disappointed and to look more closely to 
the Lord's Word to see how he proposes to bring in the 
Millennium. When human hopes, ingenuity and efforts 
frustrated, defeated, result in chaos and anarchy, then 
man's extremity is to be God's opportunity, the Scriptures 
assure us. While therefore doing what we severally 
can to offset evil with good let us trust in the Lord and 
wait patiently for his time and way. 

RIFLE RANGE UNDER A CHURCH. 



The Rifle Club gospel is not confined to the elementary 
school and to secular education. When speaking lately at 
the men's meeting at Bloomsbury, Mr. Silas Hocking produced 
a photograph of a rifle range presented by the Mayor 
of Westminster, and arranged in the vaults under St. Martin's 
Church. "We are getting on," said Mr. Hocking. "We 
have the Gospel of Peace upstairs and the Gospel of War 
downstairs— the Crucifix in the chancel and the guns in the 
vaults below. The Church," he continued, "had surrendered 
to the spirit of the world." Christianity said: "Blessed 
are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children 
of God." The modern spirit said: "Blessed are the warmakers, 
for they shall be called patriots and Big Englanders." 
John Bright said force was no remedy, but pompous 
little people who posed as politicians to-day seemed to think 
it was the only remedy. Conscription was universal serfdom 



in the interests of the autocrats.— Herald of Peace. 



R3741 : page 85 

SPIRITISM IS AGGRESSIVE. 

TWENTY-FIVE years ago we pointed out the Scripture 
evidences that Spiritism would be one of the 
terrible deceptions of the end of this age. Evidences 
to this effect multiply daily. The outlook is so 
terrible that we must warn all within our reach to beware 
of everything connected with the occult— Hypnotism, 
Spiritism, etc. All they ask is INVESTIGATION- 
"they do the rest." The Bible is our only proper point 
of contact with the unknown spirit world, and it warns 
us to have nothing to do with the wicked spirits which 
deceptively personate the dead, who "know not anything." 
-Eccl. 9:5. 

By reason of having followed heathen fallacies and 
neglected the Bible, Christendom is peculiarly in danger 
along this line. Believing that the dead are not dead, 
but more than ever alive, they naturally expect personal 
interest in their affairs, and in the advice which deceptive 
spirits most cunningly offer to mislead them. This 
is one of the "strong delusions" of our day, which only 
the consecrated ones, guided by the divine revelation, 
will be able to resist steadfastly: and even "the very 
elect" would be deceived were it possible;— but God's 
providence makes this impossible. 

SAME METHOD AS IN EVOLUTION THEORY. 

Notice the method by which the Evolution theory 
led on to Higher Criticism infidelity, which now rules 
in one-half the pulpits of Christendom and is rapidly 
grasping the remainder and the rank and file of all the 
cultured. Did not noted scientists carry the torch and 
guide the way? And is it not the same now with 
Spiritism? 

While in Great Britain a prominent Episcopalian 
minister is relating to the public his experiences in 
spirit communication, even to the extent of having 

R3742 : page 86 

parcels transported for miles and delivered in an instant, 
in our own land the Rev. R. Heber Newton, D.D., 
declares that he has had sufficient proof to convince 
him that spirit-communication with the dead is possible 
and probable, and that he favors scientific research on 
the subject. And the Rev. I. K. Funk, D.D., one of the 
most prominent Methodists, declares that he has been 
and still is investigating spirit phenomena. 
Dr. Funk's latest pronouncement on the subject, 



published in the leading newspapers of January 22, is: 

"Dr. Richard Hodgson has kept his promise to the 
Psychical Society. I have had a most remarkable interview 
with him, and talked with him in his spirit form 
last night for ten minutes, as agreed upon before his 
death. I stood face to face with his spirit, and he told 
me all was well with him. No one can any longer 
reasonably doubt that the spirits of the dead communicate 
with the living." 

The account assures us that the interview took 
place very early Sunday morning between midnight and 
one o'clock. We wonder if Rev. Dr. Funk or others of 
the Psychic Society ever sought as persistently for the 
Truth in the Word of God! Yet it is still true, "He 
that seeketh findeth;" and the thing sought is generally 
the thing found. Let us not seek with those who have 
familiar spirits, but to the living God for our counsel. 
-Isa. 8:19. 

We quote from the public prints as follows:— 

'"It is true,' cried the Rev. Mrs. Pepper, exultingly, 
last night. 'The spirit relation with Dr. Hodgson 
has been established. From the dead he has come 
back, not in the material sense, of course, but he has 
actually communicated with us from the beyond as he 
promised. After weeks of trying we have succeeded. 
The world could ask for no greater proof.' 

"The seance at which Dr. Hodgson's spirit is said 
to have come back to earth to make good the promise 
made by him, was held shortly after midnight yesterday 
morning at the home of Mrs. Pepper, at No. 258 
Monroe street, Brooklyn. 

"Only the head of the Spiritualistic Church and Dr. 
Funk were present. For weeks the two had striven to 
enter into conversation with the dead man, but some 
atmospheric disturbance always caused failure. 

"Suddenly, Dr. Funk and Mrs. Pepper declare, the 
longed-for communication was established. It was 
while the minds of both were intensely concentrated on 
the subject. The room in which they were was absolutely 
quiet, and it seemed that the session must meet 
with failure, like the ones previous, when suddenly, 
they declare, Dr. Hodgson's spirit responded to the 
summons. 

'"My soul was filled with rapture,' Dr. Funk declared. 
I realized that I and I alone had been the fortunate 
one to receive Dr. Hodgson's long-promised 
message. It was unfortunate that Mrs. Pepper had to 
leave the room, else she, too, would have talked to him.' 

PSYCHIC STUDENTS INTERESTED 

"No more intensely absorbing problem has ever 
confronted the fraternity of the psychic societies at 
large and caused more curiosity on the part of the lay 
public who have been watching the case than Dr. Hodgson's 
promise to communicate with his fellows from 



the spirit world. 

"Dr. Hodgson was president of the Society for 
Psychic Research, and his promise aroused world-wide 
interest. Dr. Hodgson fell dead while playing baseball 
in Boston, on December 20. Four weeks passed and 
nothing was heard from him. Branches of the Psychic 
Society in various cities of the country were making 
constant effort to enter into spiritual communication 
with Dr. Hodgson. 

"In life Dr. Hodgson made every possible effort to 
communicate with those who had gone before. He approached 
every new manifestation of the supernatural 
with the mind of a skeptic. He would not believe in 
anything unless it could be proved to his own analytical 
mind. 

DEVOTED LIFE TO THIS PROBLEM 

"He dealt Theosophy the hardest blow it ever received 
by denouncing Mme. Blavatsky as a fraud, and 
proving that the so-called supernatural things which 
she performed were the simplest kind of artifices. 
Yet he firmly believed that he had many times communicated 
with the dead, and he devoted his life to the 
proof of the theory that intercourse between the living 
and dead was possible. Many times prior to his death 
Dr. Hodgson openly declared that he would certainly 
put the question to the proof by personally communicating 
with some member of the Psychic Society from 
the world beyond. 

"On Dec. 20, when Dr. Hodgson fell dead, he was 
at the Union Boat Club, apparently in the best of 
health. Heart disease took him off in the twinkling of 
an eye. When four weeks had passed and no word came 
from the mysterious bourne beyond the vail, some of 
the weaker members of the Psychic Societies began to 
doubt that the communication would ever be established. 
The stronger members of the cult declared that 
Dr. Hodgson had not yet got into complete accord with 
the spiritual world because he had not been dead long 
enough to have found the proper 'communicator.' 

"Dr. Hodgson in life usually communicated with 
the dead through Mrs. Leonora Piper, the noted Boston 
medium, who proved unsatisfactory to him occasionally, 
however, because but few of the spirits would 
send messages through her. 

"It had been expected by those who were the most 
intimate with the Boston psychist in life that his first 
manifestation, if ever made, would come through James 
H. Hyslop, former professor of logic, ethics and psychology 
at Columbia University. Prof. Hyslop was 
one of Dr. Hodgson's friends and intimate co-workers 
in the field of psychic research. Both served on the 
committee appointed to determine whether Mrs. Piper, 
America's most famous medium, really communed 
with the dead or was just a clever fraud. Both arrived 



at the same conclusion, that Mrs. Piper was all that 
she claimed to be. Dr. Hodgson and Professor Hyslop 
attended seventeen sittings at which Mrs. Piper demonstrated 
her power, and the report made by them was as 
follows:— 
'"The theory of fraud is not tenable in the case.'" 

THE CUNNING OF THE SCHEME 

Note the cunning of the "lying spirits." (2 Thess. 2:9.) 
They not only get hold of the most prominent 
men possible, but they use them well for world-wide 
advertising. For instance, the seance with Dr. Hodgson 
could as well have taken place the day after he 
died (or the day before, for that matter) as a month 
after, so far as the deceiving spirits were concerned; but 
the delay was to arouse curiosity and deepen interest. 
The delay of a month, the correspondence between the 
prominent people of the Society for Psychical Research, 
the questions, hopes, fears, midnight vigils with mediums, 
now called "sensitives," all whetted expectancy 

R3742 : page 87 

and made the matter ten-fold more notable than it otherwise 

would have been. Even now the message is to 

be held back awhile until the public is anxious for it. 

AUSTRALIA NOT OVERLOOKED 

The demon-spirits seem specially to angle for the 
English-speaking peoples. Thus far-off Australia is having 
its full share of attention, and some of the most pronounced 
manifestations of power yet made anywhere. 
Well-attested accounts are published to the effect that a 
Mr. Stanford, brother to Hon. Leland Stanford (deceased), 
founder of Stanford University, has recently found 
a "sensitive" through whom he was able to secure remarkable 
manifestations of spirit powers. The published 
accounts show that at seances covering several 
nights, and at which various prominent persons were 
present, miracles were performed by the spirits for the 
asking. For illustration, a sea-fish, still alive and wet 
with salt water, was deposited in a closed room by unseen 
spirit hands. Rare ancient coins, etc., of Egypt 
were deposited within a few seconds after the expression 
of the request. A bird on the nest with its young, 
the latter still asleep, was similarly presented, claimed 
to be from India. 

The curios from Egypt and India are claimed to 
have great value; and the newspapers have been kept 
busy telling that Mr. Stanford had offered the collection, 
free, to the College founded by his brother; that 
the President of the University had declined them because 
of the manner in which they were obtained (the 
conduct of the latter has been denominated bigotry); and 



finally the said Chancellor of Stanford University has 
publicly denied that the curios have yet been tendered. 
All this has stirred up talk respecting the occult as 
never before in modern times. Whoever is guiding 
these wicked spirits shows great sagacity and insight 
into human conditions. 

THE LONDON DAILY MAIL'S SAY 

The London "Daily Mail" of January 23 devotes 
nearly a page to this topic, "Are the Dead Really Communicating?" 
—heading it with the likenesses of "Three 
Famous Scientists Who Encourage Psychical Research 
—Sir Oliver Lodge, Dr. A. R. Wallace and Prof. Crookes." 
We give some extracts from the article as follows:— 

MENTAL, MORAL AND PHYSICAL EFFECTS OF SPIRITISM. 
ALL BAD. 

"It is daily becoming more and more evident that of 
all the problems that are at present agitating the public 
mind the one presented by spiritism and by modern 
psychical investigation is having the preeminence. 

"The interest in the subject, although for obvious 
reasons not very apparent in the surface-movements of 
life, is nevertheless a keen and a widespread one and is 
growing in intensity day by day. 

"In view of the unhesitating testimony recently 
given by savants of high standing and of European reputation, 
increasing numbers of skeptically inclined 
persons are reluctantly abandoning their attitude of 
reserve and are beginning to realize the seriousness of 
the subject and its far-reaching issues. 

R3743 : page 87 

"The consequence is that the study of occult subjects 
and the search and craving for phenomena is 
daily growing apace, and that a voracious appetite for 
literature in any way bearing upon these subjects is 
being created. In thousands of families the 'spirit circle' 
is an honored institution, and the reception of messages 
from 'departed friends and relatives' is becoming 
an everyday occurrence. 

"How very deeply these practices and the results 
flowing from them are affecting the mental and moral 
life of the community is only known to those who are 
intimately connected with the movement and who have 
opportunities of looking behind the scenes. And it 
must be admitted that, strange as such a phenomenon 
may appear at first sight, it is one at which we cannot 
be very much surprised. 

"When one bears in mind the natural tendencies 
and cravings of the human heart, the innate desire of 
most men to have some definite answer to the whence 
and whither of human life, the doubts on the other 



hand which recent research has aroused, and the general 
tendency of modern rationalistic thought to destroy 
belief in the supernatural, one can scarcely wonder 
at a universal and growing interest in phenomena 
increasingly believed to be a means by which the age-long 
question of man will be answered, and by which 
the fact of a future life will be established on a sound, 
scientific foundation. 

"Now what, briefly, are the facts of the case at this 
present time? 

SCIENTIFIC OPINION 

"English science, it is well known, has, broadly 
speaking, given its verdict. We have it on the authority 
of men whose veracity cannot be doubted, and 
whose scientific authority no one can reasonably call in 
question— who, moreover, have risked their reputation 
in giving their testimony— 

" 1 . That the much-disputed phenomena occur, 
and that many of them are of an objective and tangible 
character. 

"2. That they are often governed by intelligence 
—that intelligence in many instances extraneous in 
its nature and operations. 

"This testimony is being added to day by day by 
the published writings of eminent foreign scientists, 
and it is being confirmed by thousands of intelligent 
spiritists and of private investigators all the world 
over. The alleged facts,' writes Professor A. R. Wallace, 
'which the scientific world scouted and scoffed at 
as absurd and impossible now, one after another, prove 
to be real facts, and, strange to say, with little or no 
exaggeration, since almost every one of them, though 
implying abnormal power in human beings, or the 
agency of a spirit-world around us, has been strictly 
paralleled in the present day and has been subjected 
to the close scrutiny of the scientific and skeptical with 
little or no modification of their essential nature.' 

"It was, of course, to be expected that testimony of 
such a character, and coming from such unlikely quarters, 
would powerfully affect the public mind, and that 
it would, in the course of time, give rise to questions of 
the gravest possible import. 

ARE THE DEAD COMMUNICATING? 

"The greatest of these questions— and, indeed, the 
one which may be termed the burning question of the 
hour— is the one which has reference to the nature and 
aim of the intelligence which is displaying itself. Is it 
human in character— in other words, are the dead communicating 
and are we by these means receiving demonstrative 
evidence that there is life and a world 
beyond the grave? 

"It is impossible for those who are familiar with 



the subject and with the results of the most recent investigations 

to doubt that science itself is tending in 

the direction of an affirmative answer to this question. 

R3743 : page 88 

If a certain learned reserve still characterizes official 
statements, it is difficult not to read between the lines 
and to see what the ultimate verdict is likely to be. 

"The pronouncements of individual scientists, 
speaking in their private and personal capacity, can 
leave no room for doubt in the matter. And the cry 
which they have sent forth has found an echo in thousands 
of human minds, and has given an impulse to 
the spiritistic movement, the effects of which are but 
too plainly and painfully visible in every sphere of our 
social life. Indeed, so strong are the impressions created 
that the utmost impatience is being exhibited 
toward those who would raise a note of warning and 
who cannot join in the exultant cry of the multitude. 

"Ignorance, prejudice, religious bigotry, and narrow 
mindedness are the epithets applied to persons 
who, while admitting the actuality and intelligence of 
the phenomena, nevertheless deny that it has been 
shown to be that of the dead. 

A DISSENTIENT VOICE 

"And yet it is manifest from the evidence at our disposal 
that there are incontrovertible facts pointing in 
this direction, and that this is an aspect of the subject 
which should awaken in thoughtful minds the most serious 
considerations. I can but briefly indicate what an 
experience of nearly twenty years has taught me, and 
why I cannot share the popular view as to the nature of 
the mysterious phenomena under consideration. 

" 1 . It is certain that the identity of the communicating 
intelligences has not been established. Although 
it is admitted that in practically every instance the entities 
claim to be the spirits of departed men and 
women it is certain that that claim has invariably broken 
down in the presence of real test conditions. The 
most recent psychical research in this direction has 
yielded wholly negative results. Those whose names 
were best known in spiritistic and psychical research 
circles and who have practically spent their lives in the 
search for such evidence, have, after death, been unable 
to furnish it themselves. They have not found it possible 
to supply what may be termed the missing link of 
the spiritistic hypothesis. 

"2. It is a known and admitted characteristic of 
the intelligences that they attempt to personate deceased 
individuals. Indeed, so constantly does this 
characteristic display itself that it constitutes the chief 
difficulty in the way of satisfactory investigations. We 
meet with fraud and trickery on every side and with 



the most heartless deception that the imagination can 

conceive. The most trusted "spirit friends or relations," 

sometimes after years of intercourse, and often on 

their own admission, turn out to be masquerading entities 

who have culled the information needed for the impersonation 

from the passive minds and memories of 

the experimenters, and who by some slip or some unusually 

bold manoeuvre in the end turn the tables 

against themselves. 

THE SPIRIT INTELLIGENCE 

"3. The moral character of the manifesting intelligence 
is invariably of a low order. This fact is 
and must be admitted by all unprejudiced inquirers 
who have an accurate knowledge of the subject and 
who have themselves observed and experimented for a 
sufficient length of time. In numerous instances, of 
course, this moral depravity is not immediately apparent 
—indeed it often remains hidden for years under a 
mass of platitudes and of high-sounding phrases, but 
it almost always discloses itself in the end. I know of 
instances which are appalling in character, and a recent 
publication of mine has placed material in my 
possession strongly confirming and illustrating the 
truth of this statement. A great ecclesiastic sent for 
me not long ago and told me instances which had been 
privately communicated to him and which had caused 
him such alarm that he was anxious to enter upon an 
active crusade against spiritistic practices and 
teachings.... 

SPIRITISM AND LUNACY 

"4. As to the moral effects of these practices a big 
volume might be written, and even then the half would 
not have been told. I have in my possession communications 
from former spiritists which throw a lurid light 
upon the subject, and which suggest the gravest possible 
considerations. As far back as 1877 Dr. L. S. 
Forbes Winslow wrote on 'spiritualistic madness.' 'Ten 
thousand unfortunate people are at the present time 
confined in lunatic asylums on account of having tampered 
with the supernatural. ...I could quote many 
instances where men of the highest ability have, so to 
speak, neglected all and followed the doctrines of spiritualism 
only to end their days in a lunatic asylum.' 
And grave and weighty are the warnings more recently 
given by Professor Barrett, a former president of the 
Society for Psychical Research, and by Dr. Van Eeden, 
a Dutch physician, who has devoted much time and labor 
to the study of psychical phenomena. The latter 
tells us that in this unexplored region lie risks of error 
more serious than in any other department of science, 
and not merely of error, scientific and intellectual, but 
also of moral error. And it is this which seems to him 



'to justify the orthodox religions in condemning the 
evocation of spirits as immoral, as infringing upon secrets 
hidden from man by the Eternal.'... 

"5. The teaching imparted by the intelligences is 
wholly contradictory in character.... There is unanimity 
on one point only and that is as regards the fundamental 

R3744 : page 88 

doctrines of Christian faith. It is as a medium, 
or seer, or human being of exceptional power 
and degree of development, that they seek to present 
Christ, and it is the subversion of faith in him as a 
divine person that the spirit messages ultimately aim 
at. The truth of this statement is fully established by 
the writings of the best of our modern spiritists. From 
personal letters which have reached me it is evident 
that the writer had in each single instance lost his faith 
in Christianity, and was suffering the keenest grief and 
disappointment in consequence. 

AN ENEMY IN THE HOME 

"It is for the reasons thus briefly stated that I cannot 
share the popular view respecting the interpretation 
of the phenomena of spiritism. On the contrary, I 
am thoroughly convinced that a terrible deception 
lurks behind these phenomena and that a grave and 
daily growing peril is menacing society. A dangerous 
and subtle enemy is silently creeping into our homes 
and families, and the astonishing thing is that our 
pastors and teachers are so strangely silent on the subject 
and are doing little or nothing to warn the people. 
I am personally strongly convinced that the policy of 
silence on the subject, so frequently adopted with a 
view to the avoidance of greater peril, is no longer a 
safe and a wise one. 

"In my opinion our safeguard lies in taking every 
opportunity of conveying accurate information, and 
above all things stating all the facts of the case. It is 
the one-sided presentation of the subject and the scientific 
support which is being given to it that are doing 
all the mischief and that are hourly increasing the 
spread of evil. 

"Let it once be clearly and fully known that these 
'dear friends' on the other side of life ruin and desolate 

R3744 : page 89 

homes, that they drive men and women to destruction 
and to the madhouse, that they undermine religious 
faith and confidence, and that in a thousand instances 
they bring about an utter weariness and a detestation 
of the duties of the present life, and thinking men will 
abandon their intercourse with such beings and will 
seek for the interpretation of the problems elsewhere 



than in scientific records." 



R3744 : page 89 

ONE-DAY CONVENTION REPORTS. 
CANTON, O. PITTSBURG, PA. 

THE convention at Canton, O., was a decided success 
so far as human judgment could determine. 
Nearby towns were well represented— as many 
as twenty-three came from Cleveland. The morning 
text was, Mark 9:47,48. Many of you received the daily 
press report of that discourse. The afternoon session 
for the public was well attended. The Opera House 
was crowded— about 1500 persons gave close attention 
for two hours to our discourse on "To Hell and Back." 
The friends at Canton must have advertised extensively, 
for the day was not favorable for a large attendance. 
The friends of the Allegheny Church thought that 
Pittsburg ers should have a chance to hear on the subject. 
They secured Pittsburg Carnegie Hall and advertised 
liberally a meeting for Sunday evening, March 4, 
for the topic, "To Hell and Back." They did nobly, and 
on a stormy night packed the house with a most intelligent 
audience, which gave closest attention and in various 
ways indicated deep interest in what they heard. 
The official count of the attendance was 2,614. A 
number of friends were present from surrounding 
towns. The regular afternoon service was held in 
Bible House Chapel: the discourse of that occasion 
you have in the secular press. 



THE CHESTNUT BURR. 
"IN DUE TIME" 

Behold, these burrs a story tell; 

One closed, the other opened wide: 
And should we heed the story well, 

Great things to us it may betide. 

We note with thorns that each is armed; 

The one its secret will not broach. 
The wise by this are fully warned, 

Forbidding thus a close approach. 

The other opened wide to view, 
Discloses rich, sweet fruit within; 

Yet once 'twas like the first one too, 
And held its secret safe from men. 

What wrought this change? Pray bring to light 



Why one should yield its fruit so fair, 
And one remain unopened quite, 

Absorbing God's pure light and air? 

Ah! There's the key, my brother true; 

For when the Sun completes its task, 
Its kernel then will come to view, 

In God's own time. Who more can ask? 

For God has times and seasons too, 
And all shall be as He has said; 

Tho' this is known to but the few, 

Who to the world are "reckoned" dead. 

Just as the burr so slowly grew, 

Knowing the seasons in their round, 

To God's appointed time was true, 
Its open petals then were found; 

Thus Truth shall yield her fruits to men, 
When ripened in God's own fixed day; 

Her portals firmly closed 'til then, 

Nor yield to aught that men may say. 

Shall we not profit then by this? 

With patience wait 'til He reveals 
His times and purposes to men, 

Withdrawing that which now conceals? 

But we are told in His own word, 
The "wise" alone shall understand. 

Then make us "wise," most gracious Lord, 
To know what cometh from thy hand. 
-A. J. MORRIS. 



R3744 : page 89 

PUNISHING FELLOW -MEMBERS. 

SOME of the dear brethren earnestly striving to conform 
their lives to the divine Word are noticing 
from the reading of MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. VI., 
more clearly than ever before the divine regulations respecting 
methods of procedure as set forth in Matthew 18:15. 
Some of them need to be reminded that it is not necessary 
for them to follow out all the regulations there 
set forth. If they choose to overlook the brother's 
fault it is their privilege; but if they cannot overlook 
the fault, if it continues to injure them, they may not 
speak of the matter to others but must follow the Lord's 
direction there given as the only method by which 
they can seek redress. 

Some inquire respecting the kind of punishment 
to be meted out to those who are contumacious, who 



will neither heed the private cry of the brother against 
impositions nor heed the counsel of two or three brothers 
nor heed the voice of the Church— what punishment 
should be applied to these, we are asked. Our reply 
is that we are not at liberty to punish our brother at 
all. The Lord proposes to do that; and tells us that at 
the present time we are not competent to judge the 
degree of each other's weakness according to the flesh, 
and consequently the degree of each other's responsibility 
as the Lord would justly measure it. It is ours 
to forgive, but not ours to punish; it is our privilege 
to seek to stop the injury which is being done us, but 
we may not execute any penalty on account of things 
of the past. 

The whole lesson of the Lord's direction in Matthew 18:15 
is to the effect that we are to strive thus to 
regain our brother's love, and to stop him from further 
injuring us. If we succeed in so doing in the same 
measure we regain him as our brother, we recover him. 
It is not the thought then that the brother should be 
brought before the Church to be punished, but merely 
that as a last resort he be brought before it for reproof, 
for correction, that he may see the error of his course 

R3745 : page 90 

and acknowledge it and cease to do wrong. The effort 
at every step should be to turn the brother to a right 
course, not to expose him, not to injure him, not to 
punish him, for the Lord has said, "Vengeance is mine; 
I will repay, saith the Lord." 

The very most that the Church could do according 
to this Scripture would be that, after having vainly 
endeavored to get the brother to repent and reform, it 
should withdraw special brotherly fellowship from him 
until such time as he would express a willingness thereafter 
to do right. Then he should be received again. 

Even treating the brother for a time as "a heathen 
man and a publican" would not mean to do him injury, 
to castigate him, to pillory him, to expose him to shame 
or contempt before the world. We are not permitted 
to do any of these things to heathen men or publicans. 
He may merely be treated in the meantime in the kindly, 
courteous way in which it would be proper for us to 
treat any publican or Gentile, withholding the special 
rights or privileges or greetings or voting opportunities 
that belong to the Church as a class separate from the 
world. 



R3745 : page 90 

INFALLIBILITY AND CHURCH ELDERSHIP. 

Question.— Brother Russell: I received not long 



since a letter which set forth that you could not be considered 

infallible, because the writer alleges that you 

have changed your views respecting the propriety of 

the various gatherings of the Lord's people choosing 

from amongst their number Elders for the oversight of 

the Lord's work. The writer of the letter I mention was 

at one time, I believe, an elder in the St. Louis Church, 

but being no longer elected by the congregation he disfellowships 

them as "Babylonish." In the letter I 

mention he purports to give an extract from an old 

WATCH TOWER, which makes it appear that at that time 

you considered the election of Elders unnecessary. He 

then quotes from more recent WATCH TOWERS and from 

MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. VI., your words recommending 

the choosing of Elders and offering suggestions respecting 

the Scriptural qualifications of such. 

My question is, Is this true? Have you changed 
your view on this subject, and if so may I ask, Why? 

Answer.— First of all I hasten to assure you that I 
have never laid claim to infallibility. I do not expect to 
be infallible until by the Lord's grace I shall share a part 
in the First Resurrection; then, that which is perfect 
having come, that which is in part shall be done away; 
we shall see as we are seen and know as we are known. 

We accept the writings by the twelve apostles as 
being so supervised of the Lord as to be free from any 
error. He himself said of the writers, the apostles, 
Whatsoever ye shall bind, enforce, on earth will be that 
which is recognized as bound or enforced in heaven, 
and whatsoever ye shall loose or release from on earth 
shall be loosed or released from in heaven. Hence we 
may regard the presentations of those twelve men, intended 
of the Lord to be his special representatives under 
the holy Spirit's dispensation, as being infallible, true, 
inerrant. But there is no ground for believing that any 
others than the apostles have been so miraculously 
holden by the power of God as were those twelve, or 
that we have any authority in the Word of God for 
considering the words and writings of others as being 
above or beyond testing and proving by the Scriptures. 
This has invariably been our presentation. It has been 
our endeavor to present the Word of God faithfully as 
he has given us to understand it— to our own Master we 
stand or fall. Nevertheless we trust that our course 
has the approval also of such of the Lord's dear people 
as, led by his Spirit, are now walking in the light of 
present truth. 

OUR VIEW IS DIFFERENT 

We do not deny growing in knowledge, and that we 
now see in a slightly different light the will of the Lord 
respecting Elders or leaders in the various little groups 
of his people. Our error in judgment was in expecting 
too much of the dear brethren who, coming early into 
the Truth, became the natural leaders of these little 



companies. The ideal view of them which we fondly 
entertained was, that the knowledge of the Truth would 
have upon them a very humbling effect, causing them to 
appreciate their own insignificance, and that whatever 
they knew and were able to present to others was as 
mouthpieces of God and because used of him. Our 
ideal hopes were that these would in every sense of the 
word be examples to the flock; and that should the 
Lord's providence bring into the little company one or 
more equally competent, or more competent, to present 
the Truth, that the spirit of love would lead them in 
honor to prefer one another, and thus to help and urge 
one another to participation in the service of the Church, 
the body of Christ. 

With this thought in mind we concluded that the 
larger measures of grace and truth now due and appreciated 
by the Lord's consecrated people would make it 
unnecessary for them to follow the course outlined by 
the apostles in the early Church. Our mistake was in 
failing to realize that the arrangements outlined by the 
apostles under divine supervision are superior to anything 
that others could formulate, and that the Church 
as a whole will need to have the regulations instituted 
by the apostles until, by our change in the resurrection, 
we shall all be made complete and perfect and be directly 
in association with the Master. 

Our mistake gradually dawned upon us as we beheld 
amongst dear brethren to some extent the spirit of 
rivalry, and on the part of many a desire to hold the 
leadership of meetings as an office instead of as a service, 
and to exclude and hinder from developing as leaders 
other brethren of equal ability naturally and of equal 
knowledge of the Truth and competency in wielding the 
sword of the Spirit. From various little groups of the 
Lord's people I received kindly worded inquiries as to 
what should be done in the case of a brother who wished 
to lord it over God's heritage— who wished to run the 
Church as though he were infallible and as though the 
brethren generally were of inferior cast. We uniformly 
advised moderation, especially that the offending brother 
should be judged leniently, reminding the friends of the 
Apostle's intimation that prominence in a teaching 
capacity is especially dangerous, and that they should 
in correcting such a brother remember their own weaknesses 
and dangers in the same direction. But with no 
uncertain sound we assured them that in the divine 
order as well as in the rational order the entire congregation 

R3745 : page 91 

of the consecrated was to seek and to determine 
the will of the Lord respecting its leadership, and should 
not permit any man to usurp this function of the Church 
and to decide for it that he was the one and only choice 
of the Lord for the service. 
We advised on the contrary that the very evidence 



of a self-seeking spirit and desire to be greatest was an 
indication of unfitness for the position, and that to continue 
a "heady" one in leadership would not only be injurious 
to the congregation but injurious also to the 
leader, because we have the Scriptural assurance that 
God resisteth the proud, the self-seeking, and showeth 
his favors to the humble. And the Apostle's exhortation 
is, "Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty 
hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time"— when 
the perfection of the new body in harmony with the 
new mind shall have fully taken the place of present 
imperfections of the flesh. 

You have mentioned the St. Louis Church, and I 
recall that the little company there had difficulty on 
the score of leadership— and probably with the very 
writer of the letter you mention. He became offended 
with the whole company because he was not permitted 
to manage all the affairs of the Church. He wrote to 
me insisting that he knew that God had appointed him 
to that position, and intimating that the congregation 
had nothing whatever to do in the matter except to 
support him, and in supporting him to support the Lord 
and the Lord's will. He urged that he should not be 
elected, should not be voted for, but should be accepted 
by the congregation as of divine appointment. 
He wished me to urge this upon the congregation. 

I demurred, and, in as gentle a manner as I could, 
pointed out to him that the voice of the Lord as respects 
our individual conduct is to be sought in our own minds 
through the aid of the Scriptures, and his voice in respect 
to the Church is to be sought through an expression 
of the sentiments of all the consecrated members, each 
seeking to express to the best of his or her ability the 
mind of the Spirit as secured from the Word. 

The brother evidently felt hurt that I did not recognize 
his divine appointment, and now after several years 
the resentment, I presume, is showing itself through the 
letter you refer to, copies of which, I understand, have 
been sent to others as well as to you. 

Such facts and experiences demonstrated to my 
mind not only the wisdom of the apostolic method in 
respect to "Elders in every city" (Titus 1:5) but also the 
necessity for such a course— that otherwise the Lord's 
people would not make the proper progress in knowledge 
and in the graces of the Spirit, nor come to fully appreciate 
the liberty wherewith Christ makes free, and 
the equality as brethren of one cast, one class, one company, 
one body, of all who are trusting in the precious 
blood of Christ and fully devoted to his service. 

I am neither ashamed of the position I first took 
nor of my present position on this question. It does 
not surprise me that I did not grasp the full situation, 
that I did not make due allowance for the ambitions and 
selfishness which still pertain to the flesh of the friends 
even after the begetting of the Spirit and the setting of 
affections on things above and the endeavor to be governed 



by the wisdom from above. 

Without instituting a comparison as between myself 
or any one else at the present time as mouthpieces 
of the Lord and those twelve special mouthpieces so 
marvellously guided of the Lord at the beginning of 

R3746 : page 91 

this dispensation, I venture to call attention to the fact 
that even amongst the chiefest of those times was required 
to realize the mind of the Spirit on various subjects: 
for instance, the Apostle Peter needed a vision 
and subsequent experiences before he could learn the 
lessons that the middle wall of partition between Jews 
and Gentiles had been broken down, so that now under 
the terms of this Gospel dispensation there is neither 
Jew nor Gentile, bond nor free, who have any special 
prominence or preference in respect to the Lord's favors. 
Peter had a vision of one kind to show him the truth 
on that subject; I had a vision of another kind— a lesson 
of experience coming to me from the various little 
congregations of the Lord's people, which drove me 
to the apostolic method and convinced me that it is still 
necessary for the proper development and upbuilding 
and progress of the Church which is the body of Christ. 

PRACTICALLY NO CHANGE 

As I understand you, the brother's letter implies 
that the fact that the little churches choose their own 
leaders instead of the leaders choosing themselves proves 
that we have become sectarian, Babylonish. Well, it 
is difficult to tell how things will appear to those who 
begin to lose the spirit of the truth and who begin to 
go into darkness. As a matter of fact, we never did 
advocate that the Church should recognize a leader 
merely because he said he thought himself divinely appointed. 
Our thought was that the Lord's spirit prevailing 
amongst those possessing the Truth would so 
actuate them all that with one heart and one mind each 
would be glad to yield opportunities and render service 
to the others to the best of his ability, and that thus 
the Lord's will would be accomplished. The whole 
mistake was in expecting too much of fellow servants, 
neglecting to follow the apostolic method of selecting 
the latter by the "stretching forth of the hand," or 
using other means of ascertaining the opinion of the 
consecrated respecting the Lord's mind on the subject. 

NO ORGANIZATION NOW 

Those who declare that we have formed a sect or 
a denomination misrepresent the facts. A sect is a 
split off, and we split off from nothing. Our endeavor 
is to bring all of the people of God into heart-relationship 
and fellowship with the Lord and with each other. 



We accept all as brothers who trust in the precious blood 
as their redemption price and who profess and evidence 
a full consecration to the Lord's service. We bar no 
one from Christian fellowship along these lines, whatever 
may be his theories on outside and less essential 
subjects. 

We are not a denomination either, for we accept no 
name but that of our Lord Jesus Christ. We are Christians, 
no more and no less. We accept all names given 
to the Church in the Scriptures, not even taking one of 
them as a distinctive title as do our friends of the Christian 
denomination. Each individual has his relationship 
to the Lord, and because related to the Lord is related 
to all others similarly related, because the body 
of Christ is one. This, our union with the Lord, is the 
union of the Scriptures, and the only one: and so far as 
we know no other company of the Lord's people take this 

R3746 : page 92 

position in its entirety nor stand upon it fully. By the 
Lord's grace we hope to thus stand until he shall say 
"Well done!" and shall receive us into his glorious 
Kingdom. 

THE TERM "BABYLONISH" 

The word Babylonish, as we have frequently pointed 
out, signifies confusion. Not confusion as respects 
organization, for the various departments of Babylon, 
its various denominations, have very strict organizations 
that permit of no confusion whatever. Babylon's confusion 
is in her doctrines, which are unscriptural, confusing, 
contradictory, many of them erroneous. We 
fear that the brother whose letter you quote from is 
the one who is in danger of getting into a Babylonish 
condition— his ideas are certainly quite confused in respect 
to the question of Elders. In insisting that he and 
other Elders should rule the Church by divine appointment 
and without any human appointment he is getting 
to even a more extreme position than does the Pope of 
Rome, whom we think to be Babylonish enough; for 
even the Pope of Rome does not attain his position 
by a usurpation, but by an election by the 
Cardinals. 



R3746 : page 92 

INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSON REVIEW. 

-MARCH 18.- 

Golden Text:— "And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their 
synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing all 



manner of sickness."— Matt. 4:23. 

R3746 : page 92 

A LESSON ON TEMPERANCE. 

-PROVERBS 23:29-35.-MARCH 25.- 

Golden Text:— "At last it biteth like a 
serpent and stingeth like an adder."— v. 32. 

THE Bible contains numerous cautions against intemperance, 

and declares that no drunkard shall enter 

into the Kingdom of Heaven. It follows that this 

must be a proper portion of the meat in due season. However, 

since probably only a very small minority of the 

"saints" are thus endangered, we need not give the subject 

great prominence in this journal. We do desire, however, to 

let all know that we are in sympathy with temperance in 

respect to intoxicants and "in all things." 

We are in sympathy with the spirit of "total abstinence," 
too, though we cannot subscribe to all that is said 
and done and hoped for by its advocates. All true "saints" 
would surely be glad to forego their own liberty that thereby 
they might promote the general welfare and fulfil the 
advice of the Apostle, that— "We that are strong ought to 
bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves." 
Seeing the terrible injury being done by strong drink 
throughout the civilized world, surely every reader of this 
journal is now and always will be a temperance advocate- 
especially by example— while telling the "good tidings of 
greatjoy." 

Among the many things for which the people of this 
land may well thank God is the temperance sentiment which 
prevails here as nowhere else in "Christendom." (Strange 
to say, "Christendom" is far behind Heathendom on this 
question.) Throughout all Europe the blight of intoxication 
is awfully prevalent. The statistics of Great Britain, France, 
Russia and Germany show conditions very much worse than 
prevail here. 

Germany has long boasted that her people, even the 
children, drink wine and beer freely without injury; but 
changed conditions show changed results now. Mark the 
following report: 

CHILDREN HABITUAL DRUNKARDS 



TEMPERANCE WORKERS IN GERMANY FIND STARTLING CONDITIONS 
PREVAIL. 

Berlin January, 6.— Friends of temperance reform in 
Germany have been collecting some startling statistics regarding 



the habitual use of alcohol by school children in 

the Thuringian States, where their investigations were mainly 

pursued. They found in one class of forty-nine children 

of the average age of seven that thirty-eight of these regularly 

drank wine, forty regularly absorbed schnaps, and all 

of them drank beer. In the higher class of girls, twenty-seven 

out of twenty -eight regularly drank wine, fourteen 

schnaps and all beer. Of these twenty-one admitted that 

they had been more or less intoxicated on the occasion of 

weddings, birthdays, etc. In the town of Ortelsburg, in East 

Prussia, the condition of affairs is very bad. In one school 

fourteen children were found with brandy bottles in their 

pockets, which they had received from their parents. Boys 

nine years of age had to be sent home because they were 

drunk. 



R3746 : page 92 

"TAKE HEED HOW YE HEAR." 
-MATTHEW 7:15-29.-APRIL l.~ 

"Be ye doers of the Word and not hearers only."— Jas. 1:22 

OUR lesson follows the Sermon on the Mount, and was 

evidently intended as a parable, to impress upon the 

minds of the Lord's people the importance of what 

they had heard— the importance of obeying as well as hearing 

the good tidings. It sets forth the good results of careful 

obedience, in contrast with the unsatisfactory results to 

those who would fail to obey. It is evidently not evil surmising 

if we are on the lookout for false teachers, who our 

Lord declared would come amongst his sheep to mislead 

them. Neither can it be evil speaking to call the attention 

of the sheep to such false teachers. The Master and the 

apostles foretold and forewarned against them and so 

should all who are faithfully following the Master's 

example. 

R3747 : page 93 

But we are to distinguish them in the manner which 
our Lord and the apostles clearly indicated: however 
smooth, polished, educated, gentle, they may be on the surface, 
we must get to know them better than by surface indications 
before we may dare trust them as leaders of the 
flock— we must become intimately acquainted with them, 
their motives, ambitions, private life. This our Lord intimates 
by telling us to beware of them if they are ravenous, 
greedy, selfish, even though outwardly they may have a 
sanctimonious air. The Apostle speaks of these, saying that 
"grievous wolves shall enter in among you, not sparing the 
flock": "And through covetousness shall they with feigned 
words make merchandise of you": "even denying the Lord 



that bought them. "--Acts 20:29; 2 Pet. 2:1,3. 

We are to balance the matter, however; and while 
vigilant to detect and resist the wolves in sheep's clothing, 
as well as out of it, we should remember our Lord's teachings 
on the other side of the question— that those who are 
not against us are on our part, and that we should neither 
reprove as wolves nor disown as brethren those whose hearts, 
whose characters, give evidence that they belong to the Lord, 
even though they follow not with us in respect to his service, 
the promulgation of his message, etc. In other words, 
we are to love all and wish God-speed to all loving the 
Lord and manifesting his Spirit, whether they associate with 
us or not. In a word, the divine rule is very broad and 
very narrow at the same time. It is narrow as respects discipleship 
and character: faith in the redeeming blood, consecration 
to the Master, and a manifestation of his Spirit are 
the lines of discipleship— broad within themselves, but narrow 
as compared to the lines of the world. 

"KNOW THEM BY THEIR FRUITS" 

Anticipating our query respecting how we may know the 
true from the false our Lord says, "Ye shall know them by 
their fruits." He illustrates this by suggesting that grapes 
are not to be expected on thorn-bushes nor figs on thistles, 
although it is said that there is a thorn-bush in Palestine 
which grows a fruit somewhat resembling grapes, and a 
kind of thistle with heads shaped like figs. Nevertheless, 
no one was in danger of being deceived thereby, nor should 
any among the Lord's people be in doubt respecting the 
character and the fruitage of the life of those who are the 
followers of Christ. 

The thought is that the Lord's true people are of such 
a kind that the fruit of their lives is nourishing and refreshing 
toward all who have fellowship with them. On the 
other hand there are persons who, thistle-like, are always 
scattering seeds that will cause trouble— false doctrines, 
evil surmisings and errors; and there are some who, like 
thorn-bushes, instead of bearing refreshing fruit, are continually 
reaching out to impede, to irritate, to annoy, to vex, to 
poison, to injure, those with whom they come in contact. 
The intimation clearly is that the Lord's people ought to 
have little difficulty in distinguishing between the false 
teachers who would mislead them and the under-shepherds 
who gladly lay down their lives in the service of the flock. 
The one class are continually mischief makers, underminers, 
destroyers. The other class are helpers, builders, strengtheners, 
peacemakers. 

Not content with giving us a word-picture distinguishing 
between wolves and sheep, between injurious plants and 
fruitful ones, our Lord next institutes another illustration 
still more searching— contrasting a healthy fruit-tree with a 
diseased or evil one, contrasting a healthy Christian with a 
perverted and misguided one. He declares that a sound 
tree brings forth good fruit, but a corrupt or diseased tree 
brings forth undesirable, evil fruit. How we have all witnessed 



this in nature— the sound apples come from good 
apple trees that are in healthy condition. The knotty, 
wormy, unsatisfactory fruit comes from trees that are diseased, 
under-nourished, uncared for, unpruned, attacked by 
worms, etc. 

In this illustration our Lord seems to refer to the fact 
that those who are his disciples, sound and proper enough 
to begin with, might become evil, might lose their spiritual 
strength and fruitfulness— their carefulness. Lack of nourishment 
in the soil would expose a tree to disease, blight. 
So the Christian who would add to his attainment in knowledge 
is liable to decline in spirituality unless he have spiritual 
nourishment of the right kind. As without pruning the 
tree would develop suckers, which would corrupt it and 
ultimately destroy its fruitfulness, so the Christian needs the 
disciplines, the prunings, that he may develop in character 
and the graces of the Spirit. Our heavenly Father is the 
great husbandman and has promised us the proper care, 
yet it is not exactly with us as with the trees; for because 
of our higher endowment, our godlike quality of individuality, 
will, we are dealt with differently. 

To a considerable degree it is for us to determine what 
nourishment we will have. The Lord supplies the good soil 
of Truth, the refreshing showers of grace, and the nourishment 
of precious promises, but it is for each of his people to 
use these and thereby to grow in grace, knowledge and love. 
We cannot, then, blame the Husbandman if we come short, 
and be unfruitful from lack of nourishment. None of his 
good promises can fail; whatever failing there may be must 
be in ourselves. Likewise with the pruning— the Lord will 
send the chastisements, trials, difficulties; but with our independent 
will it is possible for us to pass these by and, failing 
to use them, fail to correct the weaknesses, shortcomings 
and wrong developments of our nature. It is possible with 
us, notwithstanding all the development or pruning we may 
receive, to set our affections on houses, lands, or earthly 
aims, objects or individuals, which, like the suckers in the 
illustration, would draw away our vitality and hinder our 
bearing of acceptable fruit. 

The sound tree cannot bear poor fruit, nor the corrupted or 
decayed tree bring forth good fruit. While each of the Lord's 
people is to examine himself before the mirror of God's Word, 
to ascertain his own character, disposition, likeness or unlikeness 
to divine standards, nevertheless, in this matter of deciding 
about fruit, whether it be good or bad, each of the 
Lord's people is called upon to exercise judgment in regard 
to others as well as to himself— what are the results, the 
fruitage, the token of my own life, and what is the fruitage, 
results, token of my brother, my neighbor. Our Lord's intimation 
is that these tests are specially applicable to those 
who would be leaders of his flock. They should all be examples, 
bearers of good fruit, and these good fruits should be 
looked for as a test of good, sound character— a character 
fully in harmony with the Lord. True, all are imperfect, 

R3747 : page 94 



and with the best of intentions we cannot do all that we 
would, but the weakest of the Lord's brethren must bear 
some fruits that other brethren could discern, and these 
fruits should be accepted by the brethren according to 
the divine standard, viz., not of the flesh but of the spirit, 
the will, the intention. So, then, every true child of God 
should manifest before the brethren and before the world 
honesty, faithfulness of intention, a consecrated heart, mind, 
will, which would seek in all things to do the will of the 
Father in heaven. 

In Palestine, to this day, fruit trees are taxed, and 
hence a tree which will not bear, whose fruitage is poor, 
cannot be tolerated, for it would entail a loss instead of a revenue. 
Similarly, the assurance that the Lord will ultimately 
cast away every unfruitful one— "every branch in the vine that 
beareth not fruit he taketh away"— while every branch that 
beareth fruit is purged, that it may bring forth more fruit, 
is a further lesson along the same line. 

Our Lord used a fig-tree to represent the Jewish nation, 
and pointed out that it was not bringing forth the desired 
fruitage, and that therefore it would be cut down and destroyed. 
The symbolical "fire" which utterly destroyed the 
Jewish nation made an end of their tree. The Jews will 
indeed receive a further blessing at the hand of the Lord, 
but, as he declares through the prophet, it will be "not by 
your Covenant." The blessing to come to Israel and all 
the nations in the future will be the New Covenant. Similarly, 
in the end of this Gospel age, not only will there be 
an individual test of the Lord's people as respects good and 
bad fruit, but Christendom as a whole, as a system, will be 
found unfruitful, unsatisfactory; and when the true saints 
of the Lord shall have been gathered out and glorified, the 
tree, the system as a whole, will go down, in the great time 
of trouble with which this age shall close and the new dispensation 
begin. Christendom will indeed be favored and 
blessed under the New Covenant of the Millennial age, but 
its special privileges and opportunities of the present time 
under the Abrahamic Covenant will be forever gone. 

"I NEVER KNEW YOU" 

Continuing his discourse, our Lord implies eventually a 
great number of nominal followers devoid of his Spirit, not 
bringing forth the fruitage that he desires, not members of 
his called and chosen and faithful class, though outwardly, 
nominally, all of these. Of this class he says there shall be 
many. He points down to our day, saying, "in that day"— 
in the closing of this age, in the testing time, in the time 
when he shall come to make up his jewels and to glorify 
them as his Bride, his members, his associates in the Kingdom. 
Many at that time— in our day— will profess that 
they know the Lord, that they are prophesiers or teachers, 
that they are casting out devils, opposing sin and multitudinous 
forms of evil, and that they are carrying on mighty 
works, benevolent institutions, colleges, seminaries, etc., in 



his name. The Revised Version gives, "by thy name," intimating 

R3748 : page 94 

that the name of Christ is used rather as a charm, to 
conjure by. 

How true is this picture to the conditions of our day! 
How many take the Lord's name in vain, associating it with 
their enterprises, which are often in direct conflict with the 
Master's Word and Spirit. Why do they use his name? 
Simply as a talisman to conjure by, to increase their influence, 
to satisfy their own minds, to make themselves believe 
that in doing their own wills they are working the will of 
God. How true this is in respect to nearly all religious institutions 
of our day! Take the churches, for instance, recognizing 
more or less clearly the divine opposition to their 
sectarian spirit and creeds and methods and organizations— 
they, nevertheless, are not satisfied unless they somehow connect 
the name of Christ with their institutions and 
arrangements. 

But the testing time is near— the Lord will inquire respecting 
the fruit of these systems; he will not be deceived; 
yea, he will expose the bad fruit, that all may see that 
his judgment is just. It will be manifest that neglect 
of his Word has led to degeneracy, decay— that the 
suckers of worldly ambition, pride, wealth, show, etc., 
have been cultivated, notwithstanding all of the trying 
experiences which might have served to prune these. 
It will be shown that many of the prophets of Babylon 
are false prophets, whose teachings have misguided the 
people and, instead of blessing, have done injury, instead of 
enlightening have blinded. It will be manifested that many 
of them are ravening wolves in sheep's clothing, hungry with 
ambition for fame and prominence and honor of men, and 
willing to barter the interests of the flock for their personal 
aggrandizement. It will be shown that much of this conjuring 
in the name of Jesus has been merely a cloak under 
which, deceiving and being deceived, sectarian fruitage, and 
not the love, joy, peace and holy Spirit, have been cultivated. 
The day will declare it, will show it, will manifest it. The 
whole world shall be witness eventually that God's name 
was proven a dishonor, and his Word misrepresented, because 
false teachers were looking every one to gain from his 
own quarter— his own denomination.— Isa. 56:11. 

The Lord never knew the sects— he never recognized 
them, he never authorized them; they are of men, and for 
men, not of the Lord nor for the Lord's glory. Claiming 
that all there is of Christianity is due to themselves, they 
are proud and boastful and realize not that the Lord's true 
cause would have flourished far better without them in the 
simplicity of the early Church, one in redemption through the 
precious blood and in consecration to the Redeemer. The 
gathering out of the Bride class and the leaving of the remainder 
will be saying in effect, "I never knew you, never recognized 
you, never authorized you;" and these unauthorized 
sects will go down in the great time of trouble. We are glad, 



however, that the thousands and millions who have been deceived 

by these false systems will have a glorious opportunity 

during the Millennial age to come to a knowledge of 

the Truth and a right understanding of the character of 

God as revealed in the fulfilment of his gracious plan. 

Thus many who miss the great prize may still have a glorious 

opportunity for the lesser prize or favor of God in restitution, 

etc. 

"DEPART FROM ME, YE THAT WORK INIQUITY" 

We believe that there are active workers in the sectarian 
systems called "Babylon" who will yet be reached by 
the knowledge of the Truth and delivered. Our Lord intimates 
this, saying, "Come out of her, my people." Some of 
his people evidently are in Babylon, and it is our present 

R3748 : page 95 

mission in the name of the Lord to call these out— through 
the presentation of the Present Truth, which will show to all 
who are truly the Lord's where they stand, and their duty. 
Others of the active workers in the iniquitous systems, which 
are counterfeits of the true, misrepresenters of God's message 
and binders and enslavers of the Lord's people, because not 
at heart loyal to him, will not come out of Babylon, and 
therefore will share in the condemnation coming upon her. 
They will go into the great time of trouble, and for a season 
at least be cut off from all fellowship with the Lord. These 
workers of iniquity will have their hands full of the trouble 
which they have helped to bring upon the world of mankind 
by their misrepresentations of the divine character and 
plan. It will be a terrible chastisement, and our hope for 
them is that "when the judgments of the Lord are abroad in 
the earth all the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness." 
-Isa. 26:9. 

ON THE ROCK OR ON THE SAND 

This picture or parable of one house built upon the 
rock and the other house built upon the sand refers not to 
the Church and the world, but to two parties in the Church. 
None are in the parable except "those who hear these sayings 
of mine." The world hears not our Lord's message at 
all. As the Apostle declares, the world is both deaf and 
blind to spiritual things. Those who hearken to and appreciate 
the Lord's sayings represent at least a nominal Church, 
and amongst those of the nominal Church are some who are 
obedient to the Lord's Word while others are disobedient. 
The obedient are built upon the rock, the disobedient upon 
the sand. 

Those who build upon the rock our Lord explains to be 
such as not only hear his message but are obedient thereto 
to the extent of their ability. Let us remember the words to 
which he refers— they are the words or message of the Sermon 
on the Mount, which show the things which are blessed 



of God in contradistinction to the things which would not 
have his approval. Those who do, who strive for, who to 
the best of their ability obey these divine teachings, the message 
from heaven, are laying the foundations which will be 
permanent, which will guarantee them against all the storms, 
difficulties and trials of the present life. 

Those who hear the Master's words and say, "Yea, 
Lord," but who do not put the Master's teachings into practice, 
are not built properly upon the rock of Truth, upon 
Christ. They are building their hope, their faith, their 
trust upon a foundation which will not stand. When the 
adversities of life come upon such their hopes will be undermined, 
their faith will collapse. Thus does the Lord teach 
us that it is not merely to know his will, to be doctrinally 
informed, but that he is looking for such character development 
in us as will bring us into full harmony with his teachings, 
into heart harmony, and, to the extent that we are able, 
to obedience in all the affairs of life. The other, whose 
faith is built upon knowledge without obedience, without 
growth in grace, will not be accepted to the Kingdom, will 
not be members of the Bride class, will not be joint-heirs 
with God's dear Son. 

"THE FIRE OF THAT DAY" 

In this lesson our Lord describes not only the trials 
and tests which come upon all Christians throughout this 
Gospel age, but especially the great test in the close of this 
age— in the "harvest" time. Here his figure is that of rain, 
floods, and winds beating upon the faith structure of his 
professed followers, overthrowing the faith of those not properly 
constructed in accordance with his teachings, but unable 
to harm those founded on the rock of Truth. A mighty 
downpour of Truth throughout Christendom is in progress. 
The great storm is already raging. The various denominations 
are trembling under the shock. Their foundations on 
human tradition, creeds, theories, ignorance, superstition of 
the "dark ages," are realized to be unsatisfactory. Ere long 
the storms of Truth will move the quicksand foundation 
upon which nominal Christendom is built, and her wreck 
will follow. Only the true people of God will be able to 
stand the great storm of "that day"— already beginning. 

This is the same storm and flood mentioned by the 
Lord through the prophet Isaiah— "The hail shall sweep 
away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the 
hiding places. ..when the overflowing scourge shall pass 
through, then shall ye be overthrown by it. From the time 
that it goeth forth it shall take you; for morning by morning 
shall it pass through, by day and by night: and it shall be 
a vexation only to understand the report [the message, the 
Truth]. "-Isa. 28:17-19. 

The same day of trial is pictured under another figure 
by the Apostle Paul when he says, "The fire of that day 
shall try every man's work of what sort it is." He pictures 
true believers built upon the rock, the true foundation, but 
points out to us the necessity of having a proper house, or 



faith, as well as a proper foundation. He pictures one 

faith structure built of wood, hay, stubble, combustible materials, 

which will shortly be destroyed in this day when the 

fire of divine judgment shall test every doctrine and destroy 

every error. He pictures also the proper building constructed 

of gold, silver and precious stones, the divine promises, 

and how these will stand every test. 

The lesson as a whole is, first, that we must be on the 
rock foundation to have either part or lot in the matter— to 
be able to stand any test; second, that of those upon the 
rock, trusting in Christ, loyal to him and his atonement 
work, there will be two classes— the "little flock," faithful 
to the Word and upheld by it and protected, and the "great 
company," not sufficiently diligent and careful respecting 
the divine promises, and who will have a faith structure 
largely composed of error, which will be consumed. Respecting 
this latter class the Apostle declares, "the same shall be 
saved, yet so as by fire." This fitly describes the deliverance 
of the great company, who will "come up through great 
tribulation and wash their robes and make them white in 
the blood of the Lamb."~l Cor. 3:12,15; Rev. 7:14. 

R3749 : page 95 

"DOERS OF THE WORD" 

Our golden text is well chosen— "Be ye doers of the 
Word and not hearers only." To be honored with a knowledge 
of the divine will and plan is a great boon, a great 
blessing; but it brings a great responsibility: "to whom 
much is given of him shall much be required." We who 
have heard the voice of him that speaketh from heaven, 
speaking peace through Jesus Christ; we who, on the strength 
of this message of forgiveness of sins, have been accepted in 
consecration as members of the body of Christ, we have 
greater responsibility than have others. To attain the glorious 
things to which we have been invited we must not merely 
have this honor but must make use of the privilege and 
show our appreciation by obedience to the terms of the Covenant 
—presenting our bodies as living sacrifices to the divine 
service, in faithful obedience to righteousness, and in 
endeavoring to assist others in the same course. 



page 97 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVII. APRIL 1, 1906 No. 7 



CONTENTS. 

"The Passover Must Be Killed" 99 

The Lord's Supper 100 

When the Hour Was Come 101 

"Let Us Keep the Feast" 102 

Berean Bible Study, for April 103 

"In Due Time" (Poem) 103 

"Take Heed Lest Ye Be Devoured" 103 

Sabbath Obligations and Privileges 105 

Propriety of Sunday Observance 106 

The Pharisaical Sabbath 107 

The Resurrection Power in Jesus 108 

Our Lord's Miracles Illustrative 109 

Prophet, Priest and King 110 

A Voice from Over the Sea Ill 

page 98 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



FOR YOUR FRIENDS. 



Some will read a newspaper who will not read a tract. We 
now can supply in any quantity— The Six Eaton-Russell Debates 
together in one issue of the Gazette and "To Hell and 
Back" in another issue, and "The Resurrection of Damnation" 
in a third. 

We can supply these post free at one cent each to any address 
in any quantity. Order at once. 

R3749 : page 98 

OUR NEW HYMN BOOK WITH MUSIC. 



Three hundred and thirty-three of the choicest hymns selected 
from every quarter, with some of the grandest tunes, 
cloth bound, 35c by mail, by freight or express collect, 25c— 
now ready. The same cost price in any quantity. 

page 98 

KEY TO THE BEREAN LESSONS. 



The friends everywhere are growing in their appreciation 
of these studies. Rightly conducted they are entertaining as 
well as profitable. We remind all once more of the meaning 
of the abbreviations used: Z'05 refers to the WATCH TOWER of 
1905, mentioning page, column and paragraph (par.). The first 
six letters of the alphabet refer to the six volumes of Dawn or 
Studies; T for Tabernacle Shadows; H for the hell booklet; 
S for Spiritism pamphlet. 



R3749 : page 99 

"THE PASSOVER MUST BE KILLED." 

-LUKE 22:7- 

THE TERM PASSOVER amongst the Jews was 
frequently applied as the name of a festival 
week, otherwise called the Feast of Passover, beginning 
on the fifteenth day of Nisan. But we must not 
confound this with the frequent references to the Passover 
found in the Scriptures when the word feast is not 
used, which generally referred to the lamb that was 
killed, the Passover. For instance, we read, "Then 



came the day of unleavened bread, when the Passover 
must be killed." Again, our Lord sent disciples to inquire 
of a friend, "Where is the guest-chamber, where 
I may eat the Passover with my disciples?" Again we 
read, "And they made ready the Passover." When our 
Lord sat down with the disciples to eat of the lamb he 
said, "With desire I desired to eat this Passover with 
you before I suffer. For I say unto you I will no more 
eat thereof until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God." 
-Luke 22:7,11,13,15,16. 

While the Jews still apparently think more of the 
Passover week than of the Passover lamb, we, on the 
contrary, and in harmony with the example of our Lord 
and the apostles, have special respect for the lamb, 
which typified the "Lamb of God which taketh away 
the sin of the world," and under whose blood of sprinkling 
we who now believe— namely, the "Church of the 
First-Born"— are passed over or spared in advance of 
the world. 

God's arrangements for the Jews were typical and 
full of valuable lessons for us who belong to antitypical 
or Spiritual Israel. In the type the Lord provided for 
two great religious occasions amongst his people, the 
one at the beginning of the secular year and the other 
at the beginning of the religious year. The religious 
year began in the spring, counting from the first new 
moon after the vernal equinox, approximately April 1st, 
but varying because of the difference between lunar 
and solar time. It was in connection with this, the beginning 
of their religious year, that the Lord appointed 
the Passover— the killing and eating of the Passover 
lamb on the 14th day, to be followed by a Passover 
week of unleavened bread. The civil year with the Jews 
began six months later, in the seventh month, approximately 
October 1 ; and it was in connection with this 
civil year that the Atonement Day sacrifices were appointed, 
in connection with the Feast of Tabernacles 
or Booths, in which the Israelites called to mind their 
wilderness journey on leaving Egypt en route for 
Canaan. 

These two great religious celebrations pictured the 
same lesson from different standpoints: the first emphasized 
more particularly the passing over of the 
first-born, who subsequently were represented in the 
tribe of Levi, at whose head stood the priesthood. Although 
the type seems to carry forward and to picture 
the deliverance of all Israel through this priestly tribe, 
to which Moses belonged, yet specifically, particularly, 
in detail, it dealt merely with the deliverance, the blessing, 
of the priestly tribe, the first-born. The other type, 
in the seventh month, more particularly pictures the 
atonement for the sins of the whole world, the forgiveness 
and reconciliation of all mankind who desire to be 
reconciled to God: nevertheless, in connection with this 
Atonement Day sacrifice, the special favor of God to 
the Church is also represented as preceding the blessing 



coming upon the world, reconciliation for the 
Church's sins being represented in the first sacrifice 
of the Day of Atonement, while the sacrifice for the 
sins of the world in general was represented in the second 
offering. 

"CHRIST OUR PASSOVER" 

There is a force and meaning in the Apostle's expression, 
"Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us," 
which is not generally appreciated. (I Cor. 5:7.) Our 
Lord is not the world's Passover, but the Church's 
Passover. All Israel prefigured or represented the 
world of mankind, and the bondage of the whole people 
represented all mankind under the bondage of sin and 
death, the great taskmaster in the type being Pharaoh, 

R3749 : page 100 

in the antitype being Satan. Deliverance is desired for 
all, and the Lord's arrangement is ultimately to deliver 
all. The Apostle so explains when he writes, "The 
creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage 
of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of 
God." 

But the Apostle divides the groaning ones into two 
classes, saying, "The whole creation groaneth and 
travaileth in pain together until now"— "waiting for the 
manifestation of the sons of God." (Rom. 8:19,21,22.) 
His reference here is to the world of mankind whose 
deliverance from the bondage of Satan and the power 
of sin and death will only come through the manifestation 
of the glorified Church, the Christ in glory and 
power, as God's Kingdom ruling the world. The 
Apostle also mentions the Church of the First-Born in 
her present condition, saying, "But ourselves also, who 
have the first-fruits of the Spirit, do groan within ourselves, 
waiting for the adoption, to wit, the deliverance 
of our body." Both classes have an experience of 
groaning, both classes have an experience of waiting, 
but they wait for different things. The latter, the 
Church of the First-Born, waits for her deliverance as 
the body of Christ through a share in the First Resurrection. 
According to the divine promise, the former, 
the world, waits until the Church class shall have been 
perfected, glorified, empowered, and shine forth as the 
sun in the Kingdom of their Father for the blessing of 
all the families of the earth, for the uplifting of all who 
desire divine favor on divine terms. 

Look now at the type: notice that it is not all Israel 
that is in danger from the destroying angel, but only 
the first-born. Only the first-born of the Egyptians 
were slain. Hence it was only the first-born of the 
Israelites that were spared or passed over. These first-born 
ones, protected by the blood of the lamb, the 
Lord declared to be specially his; and, with a view to 



marking them out and keeping them as a special, peculiar 
people, an exchange was made whereby the first-born 
of all the tribes were exchanged by the Lord for 
the one tribe of Levi, which he accepted as specially 
his and which in the type represents the household of 
faith. Out of this household of faith, in turn, a priestly 
family was selected, which typified Christ our High 
Priest and the Church his body, the under priesthood, 
the Royal Priesthood. So, then, those who perceive the 
matter clearly see that the Passover has to do only with 
the household of faith. It is in full accord with this 
that the Lord's Supper, which antitypes the eating of 
the lamb, is not offered to the world, but is strictly and 
exclusively an institution for the household of faith. 

"LET US KEEP THE FEAST" 

Seeing in the type the slain lamb, its blood sprinkled 
upon the posts and lintels of the home and its flesh 
eaten with bitter herbs, we apply this in the antitype 
and see Christ the antitypical Lamb, see that his blood 
sprinkled upon our hearts cleanses them from a consciousness 
of evil and gives us an assurance of our 
being PASSED OVER, of our being spared, of our being 
granted life through his blood. This sprinkling represents 
our justification by faith; and the subsequent eating 
of the lamb with bitter herbs is represented in the 
antitype by our consecration, our partaking of Christ, 
our participation with him in his sufferings and self-denials 
—also represented by the bitter herbs, which 

R3750 : page 100 

give zest to our appetite and encourage us to partake 
more and more abundantly of the Lamb. All who believe 
the testimony, all who trust in the precious blood, 
are passed over, and, more than this, are expecting a 
general deliverance of the whole people, of all who love 
God, who desire to do him reverence and service. So 
many as thus believe realize themselves pilgrims and 
strangers under present conditions, looking for a better 
country, even the heavenly Canaan. All this was represented 
in typical Israel, for while eating the lamb on 
that night of Passover they stood staff in hand, girded 
for a journey. Likewise the Lord's faithful today 
should realize themselves pilgrims and strangers, having 
no continuing city, but setting their affections on 
things above. 

THE LORD'S SUPPER 

All Christian people to some extent discern what 
we have above stated to be the basis or foundation for 
the commemoration of our Lord's death, usually designated 
the Lord's Supper, the Communion, the Eucharist, 
and by WATCH TOWER readers usually known as the 



Memorial. The difficulty seems to be that the majority 

of Christian people are not sufficiently critical and persistent 

in their study of the Word, and that for this 

reason their faith and hope— not only upon this subject 

but upon all religious subjects— are more or less confused, 

indefinite. To us the ministry appear to be considerably 

to blame in that they have not sufficiently 

taught the Word of the Lord but too frequently the traditions 

of men, indeed preaching chiefly to the world 

and comparatively little to the Church of the First 

Born— the passed-over ones, passed from death unto 

life, adopted into God's family as sons. 

This indistinctness of view respecting our Lord's 
sacrifice as our Passover Lamb slain for us is well represented 
by the confusion of thought respecting the appropriate 
times for commemorating our Lord's death. 
As we look throughout Christendom we find Protestants 
generally observing the celebration, observing the 
Memorial, not upon its anniversary but as irrespective 
of it, as though they had no knowledge of the relationship 
between the typical Passover and the antitypical 
one which our Lord enjoined upon us to celebrate. 
Some, therefore, have Communion every four months, 
some every three months, some monthly, some weekly, 
all except the latter considering it a matter of convenience 
and expediency, and not observing this special 
and appropriate annual observance. Our brethren of 
the Christian denomination, otherwise styled Disciples, 
hold tenaciously to a weekly observance, because they 
read in the book of Acts of weekly meetings of the 
Lord's people in commemoration of his resurrection, 
at which they had "breaking of bread." Not seeing the 

R3750 :page 101 

principles involved they have too hastily concluded that 
a communion service would be the only proper breaking 
of bread amongst the Lord's people. 

On the contrary, we see that as the early Church 
remembered that our Lord after his resurrection made 
himself known on several occasions in connection with 
breaking of bread— as at Emmaus and again in the 
upper room— they were glad to meet together on the 
first day of the week as a fresh reminder of the joys of 
that resurrection day which meant so much to them and 
to us all. There is no suggestion anywhere that these 
were anything more than ordinary meals or love-feasts, 
such as we often have at the conclusion of a general 
convention. There is no intimation that in so doing the 
early Church thought they were keeping the Passover 
the first day of the week, because Christ our Passover 
was slain and because we have been passed over by the 
mercy of God through faith in his blood of sprinkling. 
There is no intimation that they considered this the 
Lord's Supper— there is no suggestion anywhere of the 
cup, which was an equally important feature with 



the bread in the Lord's Memorial Supper. 
ONE ERROR LED TO ANOTHER 

The beginning of this carelessness respecting the 
annual celebration of our Lord's Memorial is easily 
traced. The early Church observed the matter annually, 
and this annual celebration is still preserved in the 
older Christian churches, Roman Catholic, Greek Catholic, 
Episcopal, etc., all of which celebrate Good Friday, 
as the memorial of this slaying of Christ our Passover. 
But to them the whole matter has lost much of 
its vital importance. The sacrifice of the mass— a 
gross error introduced somewhere about the third century 
—has drawn to itself the special interest which still 
should center in the annual Memorial and the great 
sacrifice which it commemorates. In the sacrifice of 
the mass it is held that the priest officiating, by the 
pronouncing of three sacred Latin words, works a miracle 
upon the bread and wine, by which they are transformed 
and become actually the flesh and blood of 
Jesus. Thus the officiating priest claims to make a 
fresh sacrifice of Christ, and as a priest to offer a fresh 
atonement for the particular individual sins represented 
in the mass, sinners for whom the mass is performed. 
Thus the hearts of mankind have been turned 
away from the one atonement sacrifice for sins, by 
which all believers were passed over once and forever, 
and have their gaze attracted to the priest and the mass 
and the blessings and the holy water, etc., etc. No 
wonder the Lord in his Word refers to this as the "Desolating 
Abomination" set up in his Church, his Temple. 
-Dan. 11:31. MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. Ill, Chaps. Ill, IV. 

As the Protestants received their earliest conceptions 
of religious matters from Roman Catholicism, 
with which they were originally identified, it is not 
surprising that many of the errors of that system clung 
to them, and blinded the eyes of their understanding 
as respects the deep import of many of the spiritual 
teachings of God's Word. And this is true of the subject 
we are now discussing as well as of others. What 
we all should desire would be to have our minds freed 
from the errors of the "dark ages," that we might see 
clearly the teaching of our Lord and the apostles, 
Moses and the prophets, the inspired instructors of the 
Church. 

WHEN THE HOUR WAS COME 

The entire Scriptural narrative pertaining to the 
Passover and pertaining to the Lord's Supper, which 
was instituted as a substitute for it, by which his disciples 
might commemorate him as the antitype, all indicate 
particularity of time— that it must be celebrated, 
in the evening, not in the morning, not at noon nor in 
the afternoon, the common custom of various denominations 



of Christians. Our Lord and his disciples did 
not sit down to the Passover until even— the beginning 
of the fourteenth day of Nisan. And so all who recognize 
themselves as members of the household of faith, 
as members of the Church of the First-born, should be 
careful in following the Master's guidance in this matter 
as well as in others. There is a blessing and meaning 
in it. It was the same night in which he celebrated, 
the one in which he was betrayed, that he took bread 
and brake and gave unto his disciples. We are still in 
that night, and the eating of that bread and the drinking 
of that cup are still in progress amongst the Lord's 
disciples. 

Our Lord, of course, was equally particular respecting 
the fourteenth day of the month as the proper time 
for the celebration— that all Israel might celebrate appropriately 
on the same day. But as for the proper beginning 
of the dating there was evidently less particularity. 
The Jewish method of reckoning, based upon 
the phases of the moon, was necessarily different from 
ours, and it was therefore very much less easy to determine 
an exact beginning for their month. Especially 
was this the case when the spring equinox had a bearing 
upon the matter, and when, as was the case with 
the Jews, another type demands that the Passover 
should come at the time of the harvest. All who have 
knowledge on the subject will admit that it would be 
practically impossible to fix dates for the beginning of 
the Jewish year by lunar time, in harmony with the 
harvest season, without there being room for dispute 
and difference of opinion. From our Lord's standpoint 
all that was settled for the people by the decision of 
the Scribes, whose business it was to fix a date as the 
beginning of the new year, and the fourteenth day of 
that year became the established date for the Memorial. 
In other words, whether the Scribes fixed a date earlier 
or a date later would not have particularly mattered; 
the object was to have a uniform date and to recognize 
the fourteenth day of the first month at even. 

So the matter remains today. We do not understand 
that any stress or hair-splitting is necessary in 
the ascertainment of the particular counting of the first 
day of the first month, Jewish time, but that there is 
appropriateness associated with a general commemoration 
upon the same day after sundown, a concensus of 
judgment as to which day shall be observed as the 
fourteenth of Nisan being all that is necessary and proper. 

R3750 : page 102 

In our issue of January 15 we have pointed out 
that this is one of the years in which the definite fixing 
of the first day of Nisan, the first day of the new moon 
after the spring equinox, seems to be difficult. We attach 
no importance to this, however, and have recommended 
the keeping of the Memorial on Sunday night, 



April 8. This is in harmony with the Jewish observance, 
and tallies with the fact that the full of the moon 
occurs on April 9, corresponding to Nisan 15. The 
important features to be remembered are: (1) that it 
be in the spring of the year, approximately at the Passover 
season; (2) that the date be uniformly observed; 
(3) that it be observed in the evening, to correspond 
with the original institution in Egypt and with our 
Lord's subsequent Memorial institution. 

R3751 :page 102 

ASSEMBLE 7.30 P.M., APRIL 8 

In harmony with the foregoing the congregation at 
Allegheny, Pa., hopes to meet at the time indicated (see 
last page) to commemorate the death of Christ, our Passover 
slain for us. We hope to hear later on that little 
companies all over the world celebrated at the same time. 
We meet not as Jews to remember the deliverance from 
Pharaoh and Egyptian bondage, but as antitypical Israelites 
seeking to escape the power of Satan and the 
dominion of sin. We meet not to eat literal lamb and 
bitter herbs and to commemorate the passing over in 
Egypt, but as Spiritual Israelites to recognize and commemorate 
the death of the Lamb of God as our Passover 
—to feast upon him, upon the truths which he 
gave us— to appropriate to ourselves the life rights 
which he gave up on our behalf. 

More than this, as explained by our Lord, we not 
only will use the unleavened bread to represent the 
purity of his flesh broken for us, and the fruit of the 
vine to represent his blood shed for us, but also in the 
light of the Apostle's explanation we perceive that it is 
a part of our privilege to be broken with Christ as a 
part of the same larger loaf, and to have fellowship in 
his cup of suffering and death as a part of the larger 
cup. From this double standpoint we view our relationship 
to the Lord, first as those whom he passes 
over, and secondly as those who join with him in the 
sacrifice, that we may have share also with him by and 
by in the great work of leading forth from bondage to 
sin and Satan all who will accept of the divine favor 
and liberty as the sons of God! How wonderfully 
grand is the privilege thus accorded us! No wonder 
the Apostle said,— 

"LET US KEEP THE FEAST" 

Our feasting upon this bread which came down 
from heaven and which was broken for us is not merely 
for the special occasion of our assembling annually. 
Rather that annual assembling which our Lord enjoins 
represents our experiences throughout the entire night 
of his absence, until he shall establish his Kingdom in 
the morning. It is for us to keep the feast, not merely 



in this special and commemorative manner once a year, 

but day by day, hour by hour, to feed upon the Lamb 

of God, to by faith realize and appropriate to ourselves 

his virtues and merits, and to grow in grace and knowledge 

and love and all the fruits and graces of the Spirit. 

Indeed, we remember the Master's words to be in the 

nature of a command, "As often as ye do this, do it in 

remembrance of me." There is no doubt in our minds 

now as to what we do in this annual celebration of our 

Lord's death— we are keeping the feast because we 

have come to realize that Christ was slain for us as our 

Passover Lamb. Evidently no other time would be so 

appropriate as the anniversary. Whether that be reckoned 

by sun time or moon time, according to the days 

of the week or according to the days of the month, it is 

unquestionably an annual celebration; and as oft as 

we do it, every year as we do it, every year as the anniversary 

occurs, we do it not in remembrance of the 

type, but in remembrance of the grand antitype, Jesus, 

our Redeemer. 

We trust that the coming celebration will be one 
very full of interest and profit to all. We urge that 
none overlook the privilege, and assure all who participate 
with honest intention of heart, as recognizing the 
Lord and the cleansing power of his sacrifice and the 
consecration which we have made to him, that a special 
blessing will surely result from the keeping of this 
feast, from the memorializing of the great central fact 
upon which the entire plan of God for this age and for 
the next is built. 

We urge that the dear friends remember that this 
Memorial may best be celebrated in little groups, and 
not by having various companies of the Lord's people 
assemble together as in a convention. The Lord and 
his twelve apostles met alone, and this was after the 
pattern of the Jewish custom, each family alone. So 
each little group of the Lord's people is a family, a 
brotherhood. If unleavened bread cannot be procured, 
soda biscuits are easily obtainable, and they are unleavened 
bread— that is, bread made without yeast. If 
grape juice be not obtainable raisins may be stewed, 
and thus fruit of the vine may be obtained: or, if any 
consider it preferable, wine may be used. Just what 
our Lord used is not possible for us to determine: for 
our own part we prefer the unfermented fruit of the 
vine, lest the taste of fermented liquor should arouse a 
dormant appetite for strong drink and thus prove a 
snare to some who might partake. As we meet we 
trust that each little company in prayer will remember 
all others of the Lord's dear people everywhere, asking 
the Lord for more and more of his Spirit in all of our 
hearts, which will enable us all the more acceptably 
and the more completely to partake of his cup of suffering, 
of sacrifice, of death, and to be broken with him 
as members of the one life, the one Church, which is 
his body. 



For the convenience of those desiring to symbolize 
their consecration to the Lord by baptism, such a service 
will be held in Bible House Chapel, Allegheny, on 
Sunday, April 8th, at 10 o'clock a.m. No doubt arrangements 
for baptism will be made by all the little 
congregations of the Lord's people everywhere, and 
those desiring the service as preceding their joining in 
the Memorial service of the evening here should communicate 
their desires, if possible, in advance. 



page 103 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY FOR APRIL. 

--FOR EXPLANATION SEE PREFACE OF WATCH TOWER 
BIBLES AND WATCH TOWER, MARCH 1, 1905.- 

STUDIES IN PRAYER 

3 1 . What is the relation between fasting and prayer? 
Z/96-194 (2nd col.) and 195; Z/05-334 (1st col. 

par. 4, to 2nd col. par. 3). 

32. What is the value of secret prayer? F.686, par. 3. 

33. What are the special advantages of family prayer? 
F.687, par. 1. 

34. What is the value of prayer in the Church? F.687, 
par. 2. 

35. Are promiscuous public prayers authorized? 
Z/96-196. 

36. What is the necessity for prayer in opening and 
closing meetings for the study of the Word of 
God? F.688, par. 1. 

37. What are some good suggestions respecting prayer 
and testimony meetings? F.314, par. 5; F.319, 

par. 1, to 322. 

38. Is it proper to pray for baptisms of the Holy Spirit? 
E.229, par. 1, to 235; F.445, par. 1. 

39. May the consecrated pray for physical healing? 
Z.'0 1-212 (1st and 2nd cols.); F.636, par. 1, and 637, 
par. 1; F.644, par. 1, to 654; Z/96-164 (1st col. 

par. 3) to 165 (1st col. par. 1); Z/05-202 (1st col. 
par. 4, to 2nd col. par. 3); Z/05-351 (1st col. 

40. What is our privilege with respect to the healing of 
soul-sickness? Psa. 103:2-5; F.145 to 149, par. 2. 

41. How should we regard modern faith-healing, miracles, 
etc.? F.638, par. 2, to 641, par. 1. 

42. How do we explain Jas. 5:14-16? Z/96-167 (1st 
col. par. 6, and 2nd col. par. 1); F.637, par. 2, and 
638, par. 1. 

43. What lessons should we learn from our Lord's example 
in prayer? Z. '00-184 (2nd col. par. 2) and 

185 (1st col. par. 1); Z/05-136 (1st col. par. 2). 

44. What was the nature of our Lord's petition in John 17:15-26? 
Z/05-136 (2nd col.) to 140. 



45. What is the import of "the model prayer" our Lord 
taught his disciples? Matt. 6:9-13; Z. '96-161, 

162; Z.'04-l 18 (1st col. par. 2) to 121 (2nd col. 
par. l);Z.'98-29 to 31. 

46. What should be the special nature of our petitions? 
Z/04-24 (1st col. par. 2, 3); F.685, par. 1, to 686, 

par. 1;E.242, 243. 

47. Why must we watch as well as pray? Mark 14:38; 
Z/00-268 (1st col. par. 2, 3); Z/03-118, 1 19; 
Z/01-80 (1st and 2nd cols.). 

48. What is meant by "the spirit of prayer"? Z. '01-80 
(2nd col., next to last sentence). 

49. How do we understand that "the spirit maketh intercession 
for us," etc.,— Rom. 8:26,27? 

E.311-315. 

50. What has been suggested as a probable and special 
occasion for prayer in the Millennial Age? 

D.640, par. 2, and 641; F.701, par. 2. 



"IN DUE TIME." 

In thy due time, our heavenly Father, shall be known 

Thy gracious plan, which now is hid 

Except unto thy saints alone. 
O glorious day, when thine All-wisdom, justice, power and 
love, 

The whole creation shall approve! 

In his due time, O blessed Jesus, thou shalt see 

The travail of thy soul, and shalt 

Be satisfied eternally; 
Thine agony on Calvary, the price that thou didst give, 

Shall cause the dead again to live! 

In God's due time, O pilgrim on the "narrow way," 

Thy painful journey ended, darkest 

Night shall turn to brightest day; 
Thine every trial, then, thine every tear, shall prove a gem 

To beautify thy diadem! 

In his due time, O weary, groaning, sin-cursed Earth, 

The Lord will wipe away your tears, 

And bring the promised "second birth," 
And there shall be no pain, nor any death in that blest day 

When sin and sorrow pass away! 

In his due time angelic choirs shall sing again 

In grander strain that heavenly message, 

"Peace on earth, good will toward men!" 
And every knee shall bow, and every loving heart confess 

The Christ who comes to reign and bless! 
-G. W. SEIBERT. 



R3751 :page 103 

"TAKE HEED LEST YE BE DEVOURED." 

"Brethren, ye have been called unto liberty, only use not liberty for 
an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. For the whole 
law is fulfilled in one word, even this, Thou shalt love thy 
neighbor as thyself. But if ye bite and devour one another, 
take heed that ye be not consumed one of another."— Gal. 5:13-15. 

WHERE the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty. 
This is illustrated in the world's history most 
remarkably. It was because the Jews had the 
instruction of the Law and more or less of its spirit that 
for centuries they were known as an unconquerable 
people. That is to say, they were conquered time and 
again, but were so dominated by the spirit of liberty 
that they made trouble for their conquerors and larger 
neighbors continually. 

Similarly, though to a larger extent, the same has 
been true of Christianity: wherever the Word of God 
has gone the effect has been stimulation of the love of 
liberty in the same proportion. When during the "dark 
ages" the Word of God was "clothed in sackcloth," 
and false teachings of men took its place, the spirit of 
liberty slumbered and the world had a measure of 
peace and a general serfdom of the people. With the 
Reformation movement came the love of liberty afresh. 
The latest illustration along these lines is to be seen 
in Russia. 

We do not mean to say that Christ and his apostles 
taught war, and discontent and strife,— neither did 
Moses and the Law. Quite to the contrary; love, 
peace, brotherly kindness, gentleness, patience, meekness, 

R3751 :page 104 

—these were the teachings of our Lord and his 
servants. The influences which proceeded from the 
Word were of two kinds: Some, with the enlightenment 
and liberty, received also the divine instruction 
and sought to cultivate the fruits of the Spirit; others 
receiving the spirit of liberty through the knowledge 
received not the spirit of the truth, but engrafted the 
knowledge upon the selfish stalk of the fallen nature 
and were more discontented because of their increased 
intelligence. 

EFFECT OF TRUTH ON THE CHURCH 

There is a Church nominal which is really part 
and parcel with the world, glossed with a little knowledge 
of the divine Word and plan and with some small 
endeavor to heed divine instruction; but the real Church 
includes only those who have turned from sin and accepted 



Christ with a full consecration of thought, word 
and deed. What effect has the truth upon these? We 
answer that even these "new creatures" find that the 
knowledge they receive and the spirit of liberty which 
comes to them through that knowledge have one effect 
upon their flesh and another effect upon their wills, 
their hearts. With their hearts they desire to serve 
the law of God, to live peaceably with all, to cultivate 
all the fruits and graces of the Spirit of Christ and to 
deal gently, lovingly, not only with the fellow-members 
of the body of Christ, the Church, but also to deal 
gently with the world. But they have, some more and 
some less, difficulty in contending with their own flesh 
and permitting the new mind to dominate it in word 
and in deed. 

What Christian does not know from more or less 
experience the meaning of the words of our text, "If 
ye bite and devour one another"? If the hearts of 
God's people, their wills, their intentions, could be appealed 
to, separate and distinct from the weakness and 
bias of their flesh, there would be no doubt at all that 
every one of them would agree perfectly in his desire 
to live peaceably with his brethren and to glorify God 
by his meek and quiet disposition, his gentleness, 
brotherly kindness. But we cannot have it thus, for 
the new will is in the old body that is sadly warped 
and twisted by selfishness, and it must "fight a good 
fight" against the flesh, and must conquer at least to 
the extent of loving, striving for the right, the gentle, 

R3752 : page 104 

the good, however imperfectly it may attain to it. 

The truth seems to take hold on the stronger 
characters rather than on the weaker ones. These have 
in their flesh more of the firmness, grittiness and the 
combativeness than have many others who are too 
pliable and wishy-washy to be acceptable to the Lord 
as members of the "little flock" of overcomers. Thus 
we see that the very quality which makes us acceptable 
to the Lord and which is one qualification of the 
overcoming position is a serious disadvantage in some 
respects, when a number of these of like strong character 
come together as a Church. Even a diamond surrounded 
by mud would cut nothing, would scratch nothing; but 
place a dozen diamonds together, and the more you 
get rid of the mud element the more gritting, scouring 
and cutting there is likely to be. So it is with the 
Lord's jewels— the more they come together the more 
they get wakened up, the more opportunities there 
will be for friction, and the greater necessity there will 
be that they all be thoroughly imbedded and covered 
with the holy Spirit, which, like oil, is smooth and unctuous 
and tends to prevent friction. 

TRIALS TEND TO INCREASE 



On the one hand we may see that as the Lord's 
people grow in grace and in knowledge and in the fruits 
and graces of the Spirit, there should be less danger of 
friction in the Church; but on the other hand let us 
remember that polished diamonds do more scratching 
than rough ones. Let us remember, too, that in our 
earliest experiences in the Truth we were somewhat 
like babes— we knew not enough to quarrel and dispute 
with each other respecting the lessons we were learning. 
As each grows, therefore, in knowledge and appreciation 
of the Truth he must likewise grow in the spirit of 
the Truth, or else his growth in knowledge will mean 
that he will be that much more of a trial to his dear 
brethren than when he was a babe in knowledge. 

From this standpoint it should not surprise us if 
in the light of our day on every subject, especially on 
the Word, there would be more room for friction year 
by year, and the greater need for our remembrance of 
our 1906 text, "Be patient, brethren." The context 
shows us that these words were intended to be especially 
applicable in the end of the age. The time of trouble 
is accurately described— the conflict between the rich 
and the poor, which is coming about on the lines of increased 
knowledge in connection with the selfishness of 
the fallen nature. Then comes the exhortation, "Grudge 
not one against another, brethren; the Judge standeth 
at the door," "Be patient, brethren, the coming of the 
Lord draweth nigh." 

The lesson here is in full accord with the text we 
are discussing. We need patience; we need to remember 
that it is not in order for us to nurse grudges or 
hard feelings of any kind, especially against those who 
like ourselves are striving to walk in the narrow way 
and to attain joint-heirship with our Lord in the Kingdom. 
Rather we should be willing to sacrifice something 
of our own rights and liberties and privileges in 
the interest of others. This does not signify that we 
should sit quietly and hear the truth misrepresented 
when we have the right and the opportunity to defend 
it. We should contend earnestly for the truth against 
the error, but we should not contend against the brethren. 
If there be any who deny the foundations of our 
Christian faith, the ransom, the Lord through the 
apostles has left us no room to doubt how firmly we 
should take a stand in respect to any kind of fellowship 
with them. (I Cor. 5:11.) But there are a thousand 
and one occasions of friction amongst the brethren 
where no principle of truth is at stake; and these we 
are to be willing and glad to waive in the interest of 
harmony and peace and fellowship. This, however, 
need not mean that we should not present our understanding 
of the truth on proper occasions, but we need 
not insist upon them nor force them upon others if they 
cannot see them as we do. 

In our text the Apostle seems to imply that such 



a condition might arise even amongst the Lord's people 
that some would not only be wounded to the extent 
of being "bitten" by the harshness and slander of 
others, but that the tendency to retaliate more or less 
in kind would arise, and that it would mean a general 

R3752 : page 105 

conflict unworthy of God's children and more nearly 
resembling a fight among dogs. 

"Take heed that ye be not consumed one of another," 
urges the Apostle. What if in our appreciation 
of the liberty that is ours, and of which we know through 
the Gospel, we should reach the point where we would 
be so contentious for our liberties, great and small, that 
we would consume some brother for whom Christ died! 
What if in injuring another the spirit of strife should 
so react upon us as to poison our own spiritual lives 
and we also should be consumed— lost as respects the 
gracious things to which the Lord has invited us and 
for which we have been running in the race! Let the 
Apostle's words ring in our hearts, "Lest ye be consumed 
one of another." 

With this thought before our minds let us more 
and more put on the armor of God to fight against our 
own fleshly weaknesses and to fight for our dear brethren, 
assisting them by example and by precept to war a 
good warfare also against the world, the flesh and the 
adversary. 



R3752 : page 105 

SABBATH OBLIGATIONS AND PRIVILEGES. 

-MATTHEW 12:1-14.~APRIL8.~ 

Golden Text:— "Remember the Sabbath 
day to keep it holy."— Exodus 20:8 

FEW seem to get the proper thought respecting the Sabbath. 
Some consider themselves as Jews under the 
Mosaic Law: others go to an opposite extreme, and, 
declaring that we are not under the Law but under grace, 
repudiate the Sabbath entirely. What we believe to be the 
correct view is the intermediate one between these two extremes, 
as we shall endeavor to set forth. 

God adopted the Jewish nation— all the children of 
Abraham, through Jacob— as his special possession in the 
world. With them he made the Law Covenant through 
Moses at Sinai— to them he sent his messengers, the prophets, 
and, finally, his Son. With them and with no other 
nation it was his agreement that by the keeping of the Law 
they would abide in his favor and have divine blessing upon 
flocks and herds, land and people, instead of sickness, pain, 



drouth and dearth. To no other nation was the Law of 
Sinai given, with no other nation was that Covenant made— 
as it is written, "You only have I known [recognized] of all 
the families of the earth."— Amos 3:2. 

When the Jews rejected Jesus, and when Jesus made an 
end of the Law Covenant on the cross, it did not imply that 
that Law was then extended to the other nations of the 
world as some seem to imagine: quite to the contrary. Nor 
did the Law Covenant extend to the Church— the followers 
of Christ selected from the Jewish nation and other nations— 
for we read, "Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness 
to every one that believeth." (Rom. 10:4.) Whoever sees this 
point clearly has the foundation for correct views respecting 
the Sabbath and every other feature of the Law; those who 
cannot see this will remain in confusion. 

"KINGDOMS OF THIS WORLD" 

Accordingly it is not for us to demand of the nations of 
Europe and America that they shall enforce the Jewish Sabbath 
or any other Sabbath. True, the civilized world 
is called "Christendom"— Christ's Kingdom; but this 
is a misnomer. The kingdoms of earth are still under 
the dominion of the "god of this world" (2 Cor. 4:4); 
they are kingdoms of this world and not kingdoms 
of God. True, God is aware of their existence and 
permits them for a time, but he has never attempted authority 
over them nor made himself responsible for the imperfect 
governments which they represent— they are not his kingdoms. 
When the God of heaven shall set up his Kingdom 
in the hands of the glorified Messiah, Head and body, during 
the Millennial age, its conditions and arrangements will be 
greatly in contrast with those of the kingdoms of this world. 
God, therefore, is not commanding the nations of the world 
to observe the Sabbath day, etc., etc.; whatever they do in 
this line is of their own volition, without command, for they 
are not under the Mosaic Law, and no other law has been 
given them. 

Christian believers, followers of Jesus since he made an 
end of the Law Covenant, nailing it to the cross (Col. 2:14), 
are not under the Law Covenant but, as the Apostle declares, 
"We are not under the Law but under grace." (Rom. 6:14.) 
Our relationship to God is of the same character as that 
which prevailed before Sinai's Law Covenant was effected at 
the hands of Moses over Israel— after the same order as that 
enjoyed by Abraham, Isaac and Jacob— grace under the 
terms of the Abrahamic Covenant: we are the real seed of 
promise. (Gal. 3:29.) Did Abraham, Isaac and Jacob prosper 
without a law? Yes! Much more can Spiritual Israel prosper 
under the same conditions, because we now have much 
advantage everyway through our special relationship by faith 
to the great Redeemer, and to the exceeding great and precious 
promises which centre in him, and which apply to all 
those adopted by him as members of his body— members of 
his Bride class. 



R3753 : page 105 

"WHOM THE SON MAKES FREE" 

Some are inclined to feel alarmed at the very thought 
of being free from a law covenant based upon obedience to 
a law. Such should be comforted with the thought that 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were approved to the Lord without 
the Law. Their faith in God constituted an obligation 
to do the divine will to the extent of their knowledge and 
ability: and the same is true of us, for the Scriptures assure 
us that, as children of God and adopted into his family, 
made partakers of his Spirit, our rule of action must henceforth 
be love, and that to us love is the fulfilling of the law. 
That is to say, if we receive the spirit of adoption into God's 
family it implies that we possess the spirit of love, because 
God is love; and this love for God as it develops signifies 
love for all that are in accord with him, and a love like his 
in respect to all of his creation— a sympathetic love. Such 
a love permits us to be and to do in harmony with the divine 
will to the extent of our ability; and the Lord, who is dealing 

R3753 : page 106 

with us according to our intentions and endeavors, and 
who is covering our unwilling weaknesses and imperfections, 
counts this service of the heart and intention as a perfect 
keeping of the divine law. Thus the Apostle says: "The 
righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us who walk not 
after the flesh but after the Spirit." (Rom. 8:4.) However 
short we may come of the full spirit of the divine law, we 
are counted as fulfillers of it so long as our daily walk is 
in that direction to the extent of our ability. 

From this standpoint we see that God is no longer 
dealing with Israel, nor has he adopted the other nations as 
his. Rather he is forming a new nation, gathering its citizens 
out of every nation, kindred, people and tongue. This 
new nation is the Church, of whom the Apostle says, "Ye 
are a Royal Priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people." 
(1 Pet. 2:9.) Presently this nation will be completed, and 
be ushered into glory, honor and immortality, to rule and 
bless and uplift all the families of the earth. God's dealings, 
instructions, tests, etc., are upon this new nation— yea, as 
we have seen, he has placed no law upon us except the law 
of love— for God and for our neighbor. Before our adoption 
into this holy nation we accepted its law of love, and recognized 
selfishness as part of the works of darkness; and in 
the school of Christ we have been learning more and more 
the full meaning of the word love in its application to God 
and to our fellowmen. These lessons still continue, but 
must reach a certain completion or fruition before we can 
be accounted worthy of transference to the heavenly and 
eternal state as members of this Kingdom. 

OUR RELATIONSHIP TO THE LORD 



Have we then no relationship to the Law given to 
natural Israel, as expressed in the ten commandments, etc.? 
No, we are free from the Law— thank God! Nevertheless, 
we may derive a great blessing through an examination of 
that Law from which we are free, because we recognize that 
it was just and holy and good— that it was not set aside 
because the Law was imperfect, but because man was imperfect 
and unable to keep that Law and to gain life thereunder. 
Looking, then, at that perfect Law, we should seek 
to get, not merely its outward form and letter, but especially 
its inner meaning, its spirit, to determine just what it did 
signify. Then, having ascertained its significance, we as New 
Creatures— while not depending upon it for our life, but 
recognizing that the precious blood of the Lamb of God has 
compensated for all of our unwilling weaknesses and deficiencies 
and imperfections— we should strive, nevertheless, 
to conform our lives to all the blessed thoughts we can 
gather respecting the spirit of the Law. 

We should do this, not thereby to merit salvation, but 
that having obtained the salvation, the forgiveness of sins, 
and having gone further and been begotten of the holy 
Spirit to a new life, a new nature, we no longer seek to justify 
ourselves by the Law, because justified by the blood of 
Christ. We now seek as New Creatures to please our 
heavenly Father, and rejoice to find anything in the Law 
given to natural Israel that would furnish us clearer conceptions 
of the divine will, that for love to God we might do 
with our might everything in our power. 

Accordingly, as we look at the Decalogue we say, "Yes, 
those laws are perfect," and the more closely we examine 
them the more do we grasp the depth of their signification. 
As, for instance, in the first and second of these commandments 
we see prohibited not merely the making of 
images and the worshipping of the same, but equally prohibited 
the having of any object of worship aside from God 
—wife or children or mammon or self, etc. Applying this to 
the fourth commandment respecting the Sabbath, Spiritual 
Israelites will realize that they are not under bondage to a 
day, but will nevertheless desire to know what was the Spirit 
or intent or object of this command, and to be in harmony, 
in accord, with all its spirit. The Israelites, as today's lesson 
shows, got merely the outward form of these three commandments, 
but wholly missed its real purport; and similarly, 
many Christians today merely take the Jewish view of the 
command and entirely overlook its real import. 

"WE WHO BELIEVE DO ENTER INTO REST"-A SABBATH 

The Apostle refers to the real meaning of this Sabbath 
rest of faith into which we Spiritual Israelites enter so soon 
as we accept the Lord Jesus as our Redeemer, the expiator of 
our guilt— our Life-Giver. As soon as we begin to believe 
we begin to enter into this rest, and thenceforth, if we are 
faithful to the Lord and abide in his love, our Sabbath 
never ends— "We which believe do enter into rest."— 
Heb. 4:3. 



Our lesson of faith should continue throughout all the 
days of the week, and thus Spiritual Israel keeps Sabbath 
every day— resting in the finished work of Christ, resting 
from our own works, from all endeavor to justify ourselves 
through the Law. Was not our Lord's ministry a perpetual 
Sabbath? and may not all of the Lord's people today so rest 
in the Lord by faith, and so continually seek to work the 
works of him that hath sent us as his ambassadors to the 
world, that every day with us should be a Sabbath day? 
Thus all the labor of life is sanctified to us. Whether we 
eat or drink, scrub or dig, write or talk, sleep or wake, we 
are to do all to the glory of God— to do all as unto him, and 
in all of our doings to maintain the Sabbath rest in our 
hearts— rest in divine love and care, which applies to us 
through our relationship to Christ Jesus our Lord. 

PROPRIETY OF SUNDAY OBSERVANCE 

The question comes, then, Should the Lord's people who 
see the true rest and who are enjoying it— should they 
observe the Sabbaths or Sundays appointed by the civil 
laws of Christendom? We answer, Yes! for three reasons: 

(1) It is the divine command that we should obey all 
the ordinances of human law that do not conflict with our 
conscience as Christians; and clearly nothing in the human 
law on this subject could violate our conscience. 

(2) Surely if others can afford to rest from their labor 
one day in seven the Lord's people can afford to do so as 
well, and indeed to better advantage than the world, because 
through our better knowledge of God and his Word we 

can make wiser and better use of the time thus taken from 
worldly affairs. 

(3) Spiritual Israelites are greatly advantaged by the 

fact that the world, nominal Christendom, has made a mistake 
in the matter, and is under the impression that the Jewish 
law obligates the keeping of one day in seven as a religious 

R3753 : page 107 

rest day. Thus all things work together for good to 
them that love God— even the world's mistakes and 
ignorance. 

Not only should Spiritual Israelites rejoice to have the 
privilege of one day in seven for a special rest from physical 
labor and for special engagement in spiritual works, pleasures 
and refreshments, but additionally they should realize 
that the world is watching them, and that their influence for 
good would be greatly interfered with by their violation of 
this civil law, which the world supposes to be backed by 
divine command. Our advice, therefore, to all true Spiritual 
Israelites is that they be as strict or more strict in their 
observance of Sunday as a Sabbath of rest than are their 
neighbors— that all works except those of necessity or mercy 
be avoided, that this precious day be considered a boon from 
the Lord, a great privilege and opportunity for growth in 
grace and knowledge and love. Let our homes be the most 



quiet of all in civilized lands on the appointed day of rest, 
let no sounds of labor or of worldly pleasure be heard in our 
habitations, but let our joys of hope and love and faith 
abound, and let our happy hearts manifest themselves in 
cheerful words and tones and looks, that thus our moderation 
as well as our joy in the Lord may be manifest to all 
with whom we have to do, that they may take knowledge of 
us that we have been with Jesus and learned of him. 
(Acts 4:13.) To those of our neighbors and friends with 
whom we are very intimate we might explain that from our 
standpoint every day is a Sabbath day of rest in faith— 
that though upon some days it is necessary we should labor 
also for the meat that perisheth, our hearts are resting still 
in the great Lord of the Sabbath and his finished work. 

This would not signify that we of today should attempt 
an observance of the outward forms of the Jewish Law, according 
to all that is proper and required of the Jew. For 
instance, no doubt it would be a violation of the fourth 
commandment to operate a street-car line; and if the 
Jewish Law were in force upon us it would be absolutely 
wrong and sinful for any of us to ride in a street-car, 
much less to operate the same. But since we are not under 
the Law but under grace, and since Sunday riding is 
not prohibited by the civil law nor regarded as evil by our 

R3754 : page 107 

fellows, there is no reason why in this and in similar matters 
we may not enjoy reasonably and with profit the conveniences 
of transportation on the Sabbath. 

THE PHARISAICAL SABBATH 

Our lesson applies to a time when the Jewish Law was 
still in force, and shows us that even then the right, the 
true, the proper interpretation of the fourth commandment 
was much more in accord with our observation of it than 
with the extreme observances accorded today by the Jewish 
teachers. The difference between then and now would be 
that the Jews under the Law were forbidden to do work of 
an earthly kind on the Sabbath, while we are not forbidden, 
except as earthly laws may limit without a commandment, 
and that we may delight to abstain from temporal labors 
that we may the more fully enjoy our spiritual privileges. 

Our lesson pictures to us Jesus and his disciples in a 
public pathway across a wheat-field (in old English called 
a corn-field). The wheat was ripe or nearly so, and the 
disciples, feeling hungry, had plucked a few of the heads 
and rubbed them in their hands to remove the chaff for the 
eating of the wheat. The Pharisees, appreciating the shell 
rather than the meat of the divine Law, were very particular 
for outward observances of it, while entirely overlooking and 
neglecting its real sentiment or spirit. Here they thought 
they saw an opportunity for showing off their religious devotion 
by calling attention to the disciples of Jesus as being 
law-breakers, and to Jesus himself as being little better, in 



that he as their teacher had not reproved them. We see frequently 
this same spirit in our day: Some today would be 
scrupulously careful not to ride in a street-car on the Sabbath 
who would think nothing of allowing their minds to 
rove not only after the worldly things but worse, to dwell 
upon evil subjects, or perhaps meditate how they could take 
advantage of their neighbor the day following. This is hypocrisy, 
one of the worst sins from the divine standpoint. 

It is really amusing how the Jews, while neglecting the 
real essence and spirit of the Law toward God and man, exaggerated 
that Law as respects the trifling and unessential 
matters. For instance, the ruling of the Rabbis was that 
catching a flea on one's person was hunting, and therefore 
prohibited on the Sabbath; that rubbing the grain in both 
hands and blowing away the chaff constituted winnowing and 
threshing, and violated the rest of the Sabbath. Our Lord 
did not accept the reproof, but, on the contrary, pointed out 
that his disciples not only had his approval in their course 
but that they were fully justified by the course of others 
whom the Pharisees recognized. Our Lord's illustration of 
what constituted necessity and mercy was drawn from the 
Bible narrative of David's eating the shew-bread, lawful 
only for the priests to eat, because of the necessities of his 
position, his hunger. Also the labor performed every Sabbath 
in the Jewish Temple, in connection with the worship 
there, by the priests and Levites. Our Lord held logically 
that these approved matters showed the proper principle 
governing the Sabbath. He did not claim that reaping, 
threshing and winnowing on the Sabbath day would be 
justifiable; his argument was that no such interpretation 
should be put upon the Law as would make the satisfying 
of hunger, as the apostles did, a crime, a violation of the 
Sabbath commandment. 

"LORD ALSO OF THE SABBATH" 

But after convincing them from the Scriptures that 
their position was untenable, our Lord asserted to them his 
authority as an interpreter of the Law, saying, "I say unto 
you, One greater than the Temple is here." If it was right 
for the Levites to perform the Temple services on the Sabbath, 
Jesus was greater than the Temple in that he was the 
Son of God, the mouthpiece of God, and his disciples might 
therefore rest secure in anything done in his service and 
with his approval. What a personality our Lord must have 
possessed that he could make such a statement before his 
enemies without its being challenged! We are convinced 
that he not only spake as never man spake, but that his 
appearance must have been superior to that of members of 
the fallen race. 

Mark his statement again (v. 8)— "The Son of man is 
Lord even of the Sabbath day." As the Lord of the Sabbath, 

R3754 : page 108 

as the great Teacher, he had not indeed the right to abolish 



this feature of the Law except by fulfilling it, "nailing it to 
the cross"; but as the Lord of the Sabbath he was the proper 
Teacher to set forth its real significance to the Jew. Our 
Lord called the attention of his critics to the testimony of 
God through the prophet, "I will have mercy and not sacrifice." 
(Hosea 6:6.) Our Lord declares that if they had 
given heed to this direction their thoughts would have been 
more merciful, more in line with the divine sentiment, and 
this would have hindered them from condemning the disciples, 
who the Lord declared were entirely guiltless of any 
violation of the Sabbath day commandment. 

Similarly we may say today that the great lack of 
many critics and fault-finders is their lack of mercy, lack of 
love. Love is the fulfilling of the Law, and whoever has 
most of it will come nearest to the standard. The possession 
of love is always indicated by mercy— toward our friends, 
toward our brethren, toward the world, toward our enemies. 
Proceeding to the Synagogue the same question was raised 
—the predominance of Love above any law was manifested. 
A man there had a withered hand, and the Pharisees, seeking 
to prove Jesus and to catch him, inquired whether or not 
it would be right to heal on the Sabbath day. They fain 
would condemn him on some score; his defense of his disciples 
was complete— would he now commit himself to a matter 
of healing on the Sabbath? 

Our Lord's answer was along the lines of the prophecy 
he had just quoted, namely, that mercy was higher in God's 
estimation than sacrifice, and he proceeded to show mercy to 
the afflicted man. First, however, he showed them from 
their own course in life that they were inconsistent: that if 
they owned but one sheep and it fell into a pit on the Sabbath 
day it would be rescued— not for love of the sheep but 
for fear of the loss of its value. Our Lord inquired, "How 
much then is a man of more value than a sheep? Wherefore 
it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath day." This question, 
as to the superior value of a man over a beast, is one 
that the world seems to find difficult to answer, but one 
which should be quickly answered by the Lord's people of 
spiritual Israel. The Lord set the value of a man when by 
the grace of God he gave himself a ransom for man. Those 
who receive of his Spirit should more and more count it a 
privilege to do anything they can for the relief of their fellow 
man in matters temporal or spiritual. 

The Pharisees were answered at every point, and, less 
popular in Galilee than in Judea anyway, they felt that 
their influence before the people had been lessened by their 
conflict with the Lord, the great Teacher. So when Jesus 
had healed the withered hand by word they went out of the 
synagogue angry, to take counsel against him how they 
might destroy him. They were rabid sectarians, fully 
convinced of their own importance. They felt that anything 
that discredited them must be injurious to the Lord and to 
his cause, that they were the orthodox body, and that they 
would be fully justified in murdering anyone whose words 
and conduct so overmatched them as to hinder their influence 
from spreading more and more over all the people of 



Israel. A similar spirit prevails today, we aver, amongst 

many who are outwardly very zealous for religion. They 

are so deficient in mercy, love, so bound by the sectarian 

systems with which they are identified, that they would be 

willing to persecute as thoroughly as opportunity would 

permit any of the members of the Master's body whose presentations 

of the Truth today would seem to diminish their 

honor and standing before the world. Let us, dear friends, 

remember the Master's word, and understanding and appreciating 

our relationship to the Lord, let us be obedient to 

the very spirit of it. 



R3754 : page 108 

RESURRECTION POWER IN JESUS. 

-LUKE 7: 1-17.- APRIL 15.- 

"Jesus said unto her, I am the 
resurrection and the life."— John 11:25 

RESURRECTION power resided in our Lord Jesus because 

in the divine plan it was he who was to redeem 

the world by the sacrifice of himself and 

consequently to restore it. This included not merely an 

awakening from death, but also such vitalization as would 

overcome the dying processes of disease and ultimately bring 

the revived one up, up, to the full perfection of being originally 

enjoyed by our first parents in Eden but forfeited because 

of disobedience under the sentence, "The soul that 

sinneth it shall die." (Ezek. 18:4.) This is the most important 

feature of all the plan of God revealed to us, and if 

we discern it clearly it assists us in the understanding of 

every other feature of that plan. We must see that death is 

the absence of life, the loss of life— that it is a penalty upon 

our race because we are judged unworthy of life. 

All references to a future life imply a redemption from 
the curse or sentence which came upon us because of the 
original sin. The cancellation of the debt or sentence, however, 
does not revive or restore mankind, but it does remove 
the legal barrier to man's restitution to all that was lost. 

R3755 : page 108 

Hence it is that our Savior's work is to follow. First, it is 
to be a redemptive work: the redemption was accomplished 
at his first advent— though he has used this Gospel age as 
the period in which to accept also some of the redeemed ones 
as his members, his Bride, his Church, under him as their 
Head, to be his associates in the great work of restitution 
which belongs to the next age. 

Second, restitution is to be our Lord's work at his second 
advent, when his Church, his members, will have been 
selected, polished, prepared, glorified and associated with 



him in glory, honor and immortality. Then the full work 
of the redemption will be granted to the world of mankind 
—not by raising them from the dead to absolute perfection 
in an instant, but by first awakening them from the sleep of 
death, and then, under the disciplines and instructions of 
the Millennial age, lifting them gradually in harmony with 
their own wills and cooperation, step by step, out of sin and 
death conditions into life eternal, as they may respond to 

R3755 : page 109 

these mercies and opportunities. The disobedient, being 
counted unworthy of life eternal, will be cut off in the Second 
Death. 

JESUS, THE LIFE -GIVER 

The words of our Golden Text, although specially applicable 
to our Lord in the future, at the beginning of his 
Millennial reign, when he will abolish death by lifting mankind 
out of its power, out of the great prison-house and out 
of the weaknesses that are associated with the fallen condition, 
nevertheless were applicable also in some degree at the 
first advent. True, our Lord's own sacrifice was not finished 
until he died at Calvary, and the sacrifices of the members 
of his body would not be finished for centuries; but when 
our Lord at thirty years of age made a full consecration of 
himself to do the Father's will, to lay down his life, etc., 
that divine plan which he there undertook to carry out included 
all these subsequent features— the completion of his 
own sacrifice and that of his completed body, of the Church. 

That our heavenly Father so regarded his sacrifice was 
evidenced by the impartation of the holy Spirit, which 
anointing upon him constituted him the Messiah, the Christ, 
and the hope of the Church, which is his body, as well as 
ultimately the hope of all things. Hence, since our Lord 
had never abrogated that covenant of consecration, sacrifice, 
since he was still in line with his Covenant, and since the 
Father still so recognized him, it was proper for him to 
think and act and speak from that standpoint, which not 
only looked down to the end of his own course with faith, 
but also looked down to the end of this Gospel age with 
confidence, and to the end of the Millennial age with assurance 
that all the good purposes of God would finally be 
accomplished in and through him. From this standpoint, 
therefore, he said, "I am the resurrection and the life." He 
knew that the sacrificial work he had undertaken would secure 
to him the privilege of being the Life-Giver to the world, 
and that in the exercise of that right he would raise up not 
only from the tomb, but completely out of death conditions 
up to perfection, all who would come unto the Father 
through him— all who would have the right desire of heart 
to return to loving obedience to the Creator. 

OUR LORD'S MIRACLES ILLUSTRATIVE 



Our Lord's miracles were performed with a view to 
proving him to be the Life-Giver, not merely as having the right 
or privilege of giving life but as having pleasure in so doing. 
From this standpoint our Lord's miracles were small illustrations 
on a limited scale of that much grander work which 
he, with and through his glorified Church, will accomplish 
for mankind during his Millennial reign, when all the blind 
eyes shall be opened and all the deaf ears shall be unstopped, 
and all the mentally, morally and physically lame 
shall be healed, and all the dead in trespasses and sins will 
be revived and, through obedience, gradually obtain full 
restitution of all things lost, as promised through the mouth 
of all the holy prophets since the world began.— 
Acts 3:19-23. 

Our present lesson follows the Sermon on the Mount— 
the thought evidently in the minds of Matthew and Luke in 
thus arranging matters being to show that he who had given 
the wonderful teachings on the mount was fully attested by 
the miraculous powers shown to reside in him. He had returned 
to Capernaum on the Sea of Galilee, the home city of 
Peter and others, and now the home city of Jesus, since he had 
been spurned and rejected at Nazareth. We remember that on 
a previous occasion at Capernaum he had healed many, and 
cannot doubt that his fame had reached all classes. A centurion, 
captain of the Roman guard, with a company of soldiers, 
resided here, and a much-prized servant having been taken 
sick the centurion was anxious to have Jesus cure him. That 
he was a man of humble mind, as well as full of faith and 
benevolence, is clearly shown by the narrative. Indeed, so 
far as we remember, all three of the centurions mentioned in 
the New Testament were evidently reverential: this one, 
the one who put Jesus to death and who subsequently declared, 
"Surely this man was the Son of God," and the centurion 
Cornelius, the first Gentile convert— Matt. 27:54; 
Acts 10:1. 

THE NOBLE CENTURION 

The centurion of our lesson was both wise and humble. 
He realized that as a Gentile he could have no special claim 
upon this Jewish Prophet and the work he was doing for the 
Israelites, and hence he secured the cooperation of some of 
the elders of the city— not the elders of the Synagogue, but 
the chief men of the city— to present to Jesus on his behalf 
a request for the healing of his servant. A man of less 
humble mind would doubtless have thought of the dignity 
of his own position, and would have ignored the distinctions 
which the Jews and the Scriptures both fix, the "middle 
wall of partition" between Jew and Gentile excluding the 
latter from the divine mercies of the former. He was like 
the Syro-phenician woman who desired a crumb from the 
children's table without claiming to be one of the children. 

The elders, his representatives, besought Jesus on his 
behalf, testifying that although he was not a Jew he was a 
noble character, a lover of Israel; he had built them a synagogue 
for their worship, in which he himself could not 



engage because a Gentile. Had he taken any other position, 
had he ignored the fact that he was not one of the "children," 
doubtless it would have been necessary for our Lord 
to have impressed this lesson before granting the request; 
but since all this was conceded in the request our Lord 
promptly acceded thereto. A lesson for each of us in this 
connection would be humility of mind in approaching the 
Lord on any subject, which would make us ready for his 
favors and blessings. We, too, should concede that we have 
nothing of right or of merit to demand, that we should approach 
the Lord from the standpoint of unworthy suppliants, 
seekers of grace and mercy, not justice, at his hands. 

Then the centurion bethought him of the fact that, being 
a Gentile, according to Jewish custom it would be an impropriety 
for a Jew to enter his house, that a certain measure 
of defilement would be implied. Doubtless, too, he thought 
of himself as a sinner, and that here was a representative of 
the Almighty, whose power he acknowledged. His feelings, 
doubtless, were akin to those of Peter when the latter cried 
out, "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord."— 
Luke 5:8. 

The centurion reasoned that if the Lord could exercise 
the power when present he could also exercise the power of 
healing though absent, and possibly he had heard of the 
healing of the son of the nobleman of his own city, Capernaum, 

R3755 :page 110 

when Jesus was at Cana and merely spoke the word. 
For these reasons the centurion at once sent a messenger to 
Jesus, explaining his own disinclination to incommode the 
Master, his unworthiness to have him under his roof, and 
his complete faith that a word from him would be sufficient. 
He explains this faith in the Lord's word by the illustration 
that he himself had been given a certain amount of authority 
by which he could tell his servants to go and to come, 
and that, recognizing Jesus as the Lord's anointed, he was 
sure that he had control over the influences of nature as his 
servants, so that he could bid the disease go from the servant 
and he should be well. 

MARVELLOUS FAITH OF AN ALIEN 

Jesus took him at his word and went no further, but he 
expressed his astonishment at the amount of the man's faith, 
saying to the multitude with him, "I have not found so great 
faith, no not in Israel." Only in one other place do we read 
that Jesus "marvelled," and that was at the instance of the 
unbelief of the people of Nazareth. (Mark 6:6.) The people 
so long favored, so greatly blessed, so richly fed with 
divine promises and instructed by divine providences, lacked 
the faith that might have been expected of them, while the 
Gentiles, unfavored, were possessed of faith in many respects 
remarkable. No wonder our Lord contrasted the people of 
Capernaum with the heathens of Sodom and Gomorrah. No 
wonder that he declared that if the mighty works done in 



Capernaum had been done in Sodom and Gomorrah they 
would have remained— would never have been destroyed— 
would have repented in sackcloth and ashes. 

How glad we are that the Scriptures assure us that it 
is the divine plan to give all the heathen peoples— yea, and 
all the Jews— the favorable, gracious opportunities of the 
Millennial age whereby to rise out of sin and death conditions 
and to restore to the obedient the life conditions lost 
through sin, redeemed by the precious blood. Are we not 
sometimes surprised today, likewise, to find that some prominent 
in religious affairs seem to have less faith in the Lord 

R3756 :page 110 

in his goodness, in his power, in his wisdom, in his love, 
than have some who are of the world? What surprises there 
may be in this respect by and by when the knowledge of the 
Lord shall fill the whole earth and the eyes of understanding 
of all mankind shall be opened to appreciate the knowledge 
of the glory of God. How many who were not God's 
people shall then become his people; and how many who 
now have much advantage everyway, and who have forms 
of godliness without the power, may then be seen to be inferior 
to some who now appear to be their inferiors. 

Soon afterward (R.V.) our Lord, the disciples and 
quite a multitude of followers were approaching the little 
city of Nain, when forth from the gateway of the city came 
a funeral procession, a widowed mother and mourning 
friends, pall-bearers, and a bier or litter on which lay a 
dead young man, the widow's only son. Our Lord was 
touched with compassion as he saw the widow's tears, and 
he said to her, "Weep not," and, approaching, the pall-bearers 
stood still and Jesus touched the bier and said, "Young 
man, I say unto thee arise." The dead man stood up and 
began to speak. In a manufactured story it would be considered 
the proper thing to suppose that the widow fell at 
the Lord's feet, praised him in a loud voice, and that the 
whole multitude would join in acclaiming him; but in the 
simple narrative of our lesson, "there came a fear upon all" 
—a realization that God was very near to them as represented 
in the power of Jesus. 

The very thought of the imminence of God is very sure 
to bring awe to mankind as they realize the holiness, the 
absolute perfection of the Almighty and their own blemishes 
and imperfections in contrast. The multitude glorified God, 
not with loud hosannas, but with a reverential appreciation 
of the fact that a great Prophet, a great Teacher, was in their 
midst, and that God was thus with him, saying, "God hath 
visited his people." The Jews at that time looked back to 
God's special dealings with their fathers, in which miracles 
attested the Lord's favor. They remembered also the promise 
that a Prophet like unto Moses would be raised up to them 
with still greater power than Moses. They expected to some 
extent what Peter refers to in Acts 3:19-21, that "times of 
refreshing would come from the presence of the Lord"— 
that the Lord Jehovah would manifest his favor toward his 



people in reviving them, blessing them, sending them times 
of restitution spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets. 

PROPHET, PRIEST AND KING. 

Their anticipations were quite correct: Jesus was the 
great Prophet, the representative of the Father and of his 
favor. And yet how long the test of faith! How long the 
period necessary for the raising up of the members of the 
body of Christ, and until the heavenly Father's plan should 
thus be fully developed and the times of restitution fully 
ushered in at the second advent of the Lord. Our Redeemer's 
work of healing and of awakening from the sleep of death 
were merely premonitions or foreshadowings or illustrations 
of the great universal blessings coming to mankind through 
the merit of his obedience even unto death as our sin offering. 
No wonder the message of Jesus and his work spread 
over all parts of the country. 

A greater work was being accomplished by our Lord's 
miracles than was apparent at the time. We are inclined 
to be surprised that only about "five hundred brethren" 
were gathered during the Lord's ministry— that only that 
number were counted worthy of the name brethren and of 
the privilege of meeting our Lord after his resurrection during 
the forty days. However, we may reasonably suppose 
that under the new dispensation, under the ministries of the 
apostles from Pentecost onward, a large fruitage was found 
to our Lord's ministry. For instance, we would think it very 
probable that this widow of Nain and her son would ultimately 
become followers of Jesus, and that others in that 
multitude who witnessed the miracle and who were in proper 
condition of heart would therein find a sufficiency for a 
foundation to their faith in the Messiah. We cannot doubt 
either that after "the middle wall of partition" had been 
broken down, and Cornelius the first Gentile convert had 
been brought into faith-fellowship, this centurion, whose 
servant was healed and who manifested everyway so noble a 
character, would be one who would be specially susceptible 
to the message of grace and truth. One lesson we may learn 
from this is that we must not at once look for the full fruitage 
to our own efforts in the Lord's service. We must be 
content to labor and to wait, and must realize that the Lord 
himself is behind his Word, his message, making the selections 
of those whom he esteems worthy of joint-heirship in 
his Kingdom. Another thought would be that there may be 
worldly persons who may now come to some knowledge of 
the Truth and yet not be blessed fully by it— who will by 
and by, under the trials and difficulties of the time of 
trouble, or later on during the Millennial age, be profited 
through our ministries of the Truth and our present endeavors 
to glorify the Lord in our bodies and spirits which are 
his. 

Let us then scatter the good seed everywhere as we 
have opportunity, for we know not which shall prosper, this 
or that. Sometimes that upon which we bestowed the greatest 
zeal and effort proves fruitless, and sometimes that from 



which we expected the least proves very fruitful. Let us 
remember that the Lord will reward us according to our 
zeal or efforts, and not according to results; and indeed the 

R3756 :page 111 

chief results he seeks are in ourselves, in the development of 
the graces of his Spirit, which will manifest themselves in so 
many ways in connection with our love for him, for his message, 
for the brethren, yea, for the whole world of mankind, 
even for our enemies. 

"QUICKEN YOUR MORTAL BODIES" 

Our Lord's ministries of healing lasted but a few years 
and reached comparatively few of the Jewish people, but 
since he ascended he has been carrying on a work of healing 
on a still higher plane— through his disciples whom he 
acknowledges as "members of his body." (1 Cor. 21:27.) 
Operating through these, many eyes of understanding have 
been opened, many deaf ears have been unstopped, many 
morally halt and lame have been cured, and many have 
been raised from the dead in the sense that the Apostle refers 
to when he says, "You hath he quickened who were 
dead in trespasses and sins;" and again, "If ye be risen 
with Christ seek those things which are above;" and again, 
"If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead 
dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall 
also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth 
inyou."-Eph. 2:1; Col. 3:1; Rom. 8:11. 

If we are inclined to marvel that the Jews rejected Jesus 
after seeing his mighty works, what might be said of us 
if for any reason we become doubters or unfaithful to him 
who has so clearly spoken to us from heaven, by whose 
stripes we have been healed and who have realized him to be 
indeed the resurrection and the life? Whoever, therefore, has 
experienced this quickening to newness of life, this begetting 
of the Spirit, has come under so clear a demonstration of the 
divine power and goodness and wisdom and love operating 
through Jesus as to be without excuse "if they fall away." 
Hence the Apostle tells us that it would be "impossible to 
renew them again unto repentance." (Heb. 6:6.) He tells 
us that in their case such a falling away would be a wilful 
act, not one of ignorance or weakness, and that to thus fall 
away would imply the same attitude of heart which the Jews 
entertained toward our Lord when he was with them— that 
it would be virtually crucifying the Lord afresh and putting 
him to an open shame.— Heb. 6:6. 

But, dearly beloved, to use the Apostle's thought, we 
have more confidence in each other than to surmise such 
an unworthy ending to our call, such an unworthy response 
to the mercies and favors which we enjoy at the hands of 
him who loved us and bought us with his precious blood. 
Let us be faithful, let us remember that the resurrection 
work begun in us as New Creatures is the one which is to be 
completed by the grace of God in the First Resurrection, 



when in a moment of change we shall be like our Lord, see 
him as he is and share his glory. 



R3756 :page 111 

A VOICE FROM OVER THE SEA. 
-FROM OUR SOCIETY'S LONDON REPRESENTATIVE- 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

I have noticed that which seems to be a pointed corroboration 
of the parallel which you gave in the TOWER a 
little while back when you showed that the culmination of 
the "time of trouble" might be expected in 1915, since the 
Gentile powers have a lease which runs to the end of 1914. 
I refer to the first dispensation and its culmination in the 
year of the flood. I think this year with all of its particularized 
events is intended as a forecast of the year of trouble, 
1915, A.D. I will put my thoughts as briefly as possible. 

Since our Lord said, "It shall be in the days of the 
Son of Man as it was in the days of Noah," we have his 
authority for a comparison of the times, and this has led to 
the thoughts:— 

(1) That the whole of the first dispensation is a miniature 

R3757 : page 1 1 1 

of the permission of evil, the end of the first dispensation 
and the end of the permission of evil being alike in 
that they end in catastrophe. 

(2) The race which was destroyed at the flood represented 
Adam's whole progeny; while the replenishing under 
Noah represents the new race which shall find life under 

the Life-giver, the Everlasting Father, our Lord and his Bride. 

(3) Noah and his family, therefore, do not represent 
those of the human family which will be carried over from 
this present evil world into the Kingdom of heaven soon to 
be established on the earth. Rather he and his family with 
the ark represent the Church. Lifted up above the whole 
earth, saved by the flood, they will be preserved from the 
terror of the trouble, and "when the trouble is overpast" 
will come down from heaven to bless and replenish the 
earth. 

But it is in reference to the time features that I now 
write. From the day when Bible chronology was seen so 
explicitly, accounts of time in the Scriptures have always 
demanded their full measure of regard; and the account of 
the days of the year of the flood, given so particularly, have 
always been regarded as of importance. But as the forty 
days of rain and of the breaking up of the fountains of the 
great deep seem so clearly to correspond with the forty years 
of the present harvest, one has, perhaps naturally, looked for 
the other periods of the flood year to follow, in type, on into 
the establishment of the Kingdom. But without result, for 



there seems to be a complete lack of Scripture corroboration 
of this thought. Now, I think that way is not the correct 
one, and that probably we should view the matter from this 
standpoint:— 

(4) That the first dispensation covers the entire period 

of evil under present ruling powers, which last until October, 
1914, A.D.; and that 

(5) The year of trouble so remarkably detailed is a 
figure of the year of trouble, 1915, A.D., and that probably 
the details fit exactly to the events of this year. 

If the kingdoms of this world are undermined, as many 
Scriptures and parallels indicate will be the case, when the 
restraining power of God is removed little will be needed to 
bring about their destruction. Probably the forty days will be 
ample for the overthrow and utter ruin. The remaining 
part of the 150 will serve to let anarchy have its raging and 
tossing whirlpool, and, to an extent, to exhaust itself. From 
that time the trouble will begin to abate, partly for lack of 
power, and partly because the horror and desolation is being 
felt. The raven may signify that even yet trouble is rampant. 
It found no need to return to the ark, while the gentle dove 
soon came back. But a little later the dove brings the olive 
leaf: there is capitulation, the trouble is fast dying down 
and peace is wanted. Soon the waters are dried up, and on 
the "first day of the first month" of a new and blessed year 
and dispensation the earth is ready to be blessed by those 
whom God has prepared. 

No doubt most of these thoughts are old to you; but I wonder 
if you have connected the year of the flood with the year of 
trouble, and if you have whether you think this is the type. 
A little time ago one was almost precluded from seeing the 
above by reason of the thought that all the trouble would 
be over in October, A.D., 1914. Much love to you, as ever. 

Your brother in the Lord, J. HEMERY. 



page 113 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVII. APRIL 15, 1906 No. 8 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 115 

The "Hell Cycle" Started 115 

Evolution in the British Museum 116 

Wheeling and Louisville Conventions 117 

The Bridegroom's Dove (Poem) 118 

"I Have Prayed for Thee" 118 

"Sift You as Wheat" 120 

Forgiven Much, She Loved Much 120 

Without Humility No Forgiveness 121 

"Thy Faith Hath Made Thee Whole" 122 



"The Seed is the Word of God" 123 

Why Teach in Parables? 124 

Passed Beyond the Vail 126 

Some Interesting Letters 127 

page 114 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



SMALL VOLUNTEER ORDERS. 



We are temporarily deprived of our postal facilities on 
tracts and hence are sending the Volunteer tracts for 1906 by 
freight. If you have ordered only a portion of what you will 
need best order the balance at once. Shipments of less than 
100 lbs. cost just as much freight. This is delaying some shipments 
and we now have an abundant supply. 

OUR NEW HYMN BOOK WITH MUSIC. 



Three hundred and thirty-three of the choicest hymns selected 
from every quarter, with some of the grandest tunes, 



cloth bound, 35c. by mail, by freight or express collect, 25c. 
now ready. The same cost price in any quantity. 

KEY TO THE BEREAN LESSONS. 



The friends everywhere are growing in their appreciation 
of these studies. Rightly conducted they are entertaining as 
well as profitable. We remind all once more of the meaning 
of the abbreviations used: Z'05 refers to the WATCH TOWER of 
1905, mentioning page, column and paragraph (par.). The first 
six letters of the alphabet refer to the six volumes of Dawn or 
Studies; T for Tabernacle Shadows; H for the hell booklet; 
S for Spiritism pamphlet. 



R3757 :page 115 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE "HELL CYCLE" STARTED 



IN "THE WESTMINSTER," a Presbyterian journal, 
Philadelphia, Reverend H. H. Barstow predicts a 
return to "The Hell Cycle." He says: 

"We ministers have easily caught the cue from the 
popular demand, and have fed the people the love of 
God and the beauty of holiness and the doctrines of 
sweetness and light— shall I say it?— ad nauseam." 

He believes that the signs of the times indicate 
that "the pendulum has touched its limit in that direction; 
that the cycle of hell-fire— figurative, yes, but for 
that reason all the more awful and appalling— is due 
once more." Are we to understand the gentleman to 
mean that the preachers merely watch the popular sentiment 
that they may preach what will please the majority 
of the people? Does he mean that it was because 
of the popular demand which he mentions that he was 
preaching the love of God, the beauty of holiness, etc.? 
Evidently he has been preaching more of it than he 
believed, as is indicated by his nausea in connection 
with these teachings. His nausea is somewhat relieved 
now, and he feels a little more free to speak against the 
beauty of holiness and the love of God because he realizes 
that the "popular demand" is turning his way again 
and bids fair for another hell-fire cycle. 

This is what we have feared for some time— that a 
great many preachers are merely endeavoring to find 
the popular demand, and are proportionately careless 
respecting the will and Word of the living God. They 



have been telling the people of their dreams respecting 
politics, woman's rights, social fads, etc., and sending 
them off wholesale to a dreamy heaven quite contrary 
to the Word of God. The people are waking up to a 
realization of the fact that they have been fed ad nauseam 
something unsatisfying, and an increasingly large 
proportion of the intelligent, especially of the male sex, 
no longer attend such preaching. Reverend Barstow 
believes he has the secret, and that "popular demand" 
is moving toward a love for hell-fire for other people, 
and that if he gets in on the tidal wave soon enough it 
will score him a big success. 

Perhaps the gentleman is mistaken. We believe he 
is, and that he will find it out before very long. In our 
opinion many people are getting awake, so that they 
begin to know the difference between dreams and realities, 
and are wanting something more substantial. 
Their craving is in line with the divine direction, "He 
that hath a dream let him tell a dream, but he that hath 
my Word let him speak my Word."— Jer. 23:28. 

After calling attention to the wave of sentiment in 
favor of pure politics that is sweeping over the country 
and the general arousing of the public conscience on 
the subject of graft, the gentleman says: 

"This is our revival, the answer to our prayers. 
And this is the cause and heart of it. What is true in 
the civic sphere is just as true in the spiritual, and the 
two are not to be separated. I firmly believe that the 
hearts and consciences of the people are ready for the 
preaching of judgment on sin, without dilution or reservation, 
given with the clear note of Christ to the Pharisees 
and laid hot upon life for this world and the future: 
'How can ye escape the damnation of hell?' Let 
love glow undimmed— but let justice flame. The fear 
of the Lord is still the beginning of wisdom; and some 
will never learn wisdom unless fear be stirred. The 
Felixes of the home, the mart and the throne need to 
tremble at the message of righteousness, temperance 
and judgment to come, and we all have them in our 
congregations. Let the hell-fire cycle strike once 
more." 

So this is the revival that has come in answer to 
prayers— not a revival of the Lord's saints to renewed 
zeal in self-sacrifice on behalf of the divine Word and 
plan, nor a conversion of sinners to repentance and 
reformation of life and consecration to God, but merely 
the arousing of the spirit of righteous indignation 
against trusts and boodlers— an indignation which is 
usually fraught with anger, malice, hatred, strife, etc. 
This is what one minister at least has been preaching 
for, and is now rejoicing that his prayers have been 
heard. It is well that he states himself so exactly: on 

R3757 :page 116 



our part we see the uncovering of rottenness in political 
and financial circles highly esteemed amongst men, and 
to us it reads that we are in the day that the Lord referred 
to when he said that whatsoever things were hidden 
would be made manifest. 

This manifestation of the hidden corruption of the 
hearts of the respectable, the wealthy, the influential, 
is not, so far as we know, leading others to paths of 
righteousness, but rather exciting their bitterness and 
resentment— that others have had the advantage of 
greater opportunities for the accumulation of vast 
wealth by unscrupulous means, and chagrin on their 
part that the opportunity had not been their own, and 
the determination that if they cannot at some time in 
the future find a prospect for accumulating vast riches 
in some such manner they will be ready to wreck the 
interests of those who have fared better. From our 
standpoint this uncovering of the weaknesses of human 
nature means loss of confidence in the rich and influential 
generally, and spells eventually the hatred which 
ere long will fulfil the prediction, "Go to now, ye rich 
men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come 
upon you."— James 5:1. 

R3758 :page 116 

It strikes us as quite pharisaical on the part of the 
majority of mankind to make a great ado over the 
shortcomings of the rich, when in their own hearts the 
majority well know that the only reason they did not do 
likewise was that they did not have the opportunity. 
God forbid that we should say that there are no honest 
people in the world, but our experience with humanity 
leads us to the conclusion that the majority have their 
price— some higher and some lower. Experience, too, 
shows that those who decry cupidity in others are themselves 
frequently found wanting when tried in the balances. 
For instance, one of the most prominent of 
these life-insurance presidents went into office as a 
thorough reformer; he heartily reprobated the shortcomings 
of his predecessors. Do we not usually find 
it the same with politicians? The reformer of one election 
needs to be reformed at another election. The 
trouble is that the whole human family is weak and 
imperfect through the fall, and while they would do 
good evil is present with them, and the temptations 
which assail are more than their characters will stand. 
As for the stronger characters in the world, those 
moulded and fashioned by the power of divine truth, 
they are rarely put in such positions of honor and trust, 
being too much out of harmony with the world and its 
spirit to be chosen. Even the preachers are accused of 
wire-pulling in connection with their securing desirable 
charges and principal offices in their denominations. 

Our Lord did not tolerate unrighteousness or injustice 



in any sense of the word, and his most scathing 
criticisms were hurled against the Pharisees because 
of their hypocrisy, because they pretended to be better 
than they really were. This gives us the thought that in 
the Lord's estimation honesty is one of the noblest traits 
of character, and that it would be more pleasing in his 
sight for his followers to acknowledge that the whole 
world is imperfect through the fall, that all need the 
divine mercy, and to point each other forward to the 
glorious Kingdom of righteousness which the Lord 
alone can establish, than that they should self-righteously 
point at the few evil-doers who had good opportunities, 
and attempt to justify the majority of the race as though 
they were perfect, sinless. 

Let us watch and pray against the temptations 
which lie in our path: let us sympathize with the exposure 
of everything that is sinful; but let us not glory 
in the righteousness of the majority, who have not been 
found unfaithful because they have not been tempted 
in any considerable measure. Let us sympathize with 
the stopping of wrong doings while sympathizing also 
with the wrong doer and with the whole world in its depravity. 
Let us remember that the world has not the 
advantage of the higher ambitions and the new nature 
which are possessed by the Lord's consecrated followers 
and let us have sympathy with them, while hoping 
and waiting and praying, "Thy Kingdom come, thy 
will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 

EVOLUTION IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM 



The world, perhaps, holds no other such single collection 
of scientific curiosities as can be found in the 
British Museum. Gallery after gallery, cabinet after 
cabinet, and mile after mile of shelving, exhibit a bewildering 
array of beasts, birds, fishes and moving 
creatures of every kind, stuffed and preserved, along 
with prehistoric relics, fossil forms and all the various 
specimens of organic life. 

Here would be the place of all others for the scientific 
skeptic of the day to trace the lineage of which he 
boasts, and to demonstrate his descent from the prehistoric 
monkey. But, unfortunately, the men who 
have the greatest opportunities do not always make the 
best improvement of them; and a large proportion of 
the talk about scientific infidelity comes from men who 
know nothing of science. The editor of the "New York 
Evangelist" publishes the following article containing 
the testimony from Mr. Etheridge, who stood at the 
head of the Natural Science department of the British 
Museum: 

"Our friend and fellow-traveller in Palestine, Prof. 
George E. Post, is, as our readers are aware, a man of 



extensive attainments and wide and acute observation 
of facts and phenomena— in short, a man of science in 
the true sense. On the alert for whatever is worthy of 
study, it was a matter of course that while recently in 
London in quest of instruments and apparatus for the 
Medical College at Beirut, he should spend some portion 
of his time in the British Museum— that immense 
storehouse of all that remains to us of the arts, the 
learning and life-conditions of the ages. Treated with 
the utmost courtesy by the large circle of noted men 
and scholars, Dr. Post very naturally, in the course of 
his visits to this great centre of attraction, came in contact 
with Mr. Etheridge, than whom no one is more able 
to interpret and sum up whatever is there to be seen. 
Indeed, he had a special errand with him, and it thus 

R3758 :page 117 

fell out, in common phrase in a good sense, that the 

recognized British expert in all these matters was 'interviewed' 

by our American missionary and man of 

science as to his conclusions, his summing up of the 

bearings of the entire deposit there collected in the department 

of Natural History, and set in order as nowhere 

else in the world. And thanks to a correspondent, 

a former colleague of Dr. Post, we have here an 

account of Mr. Etheridge's conclusions. They are 

given only in summary, but are clear and satisfactory 

as to what may be learned from a full study of the remains 

of all pre-historic periods. Their decisive bearing 

on the controversies of the day will be apparent to 

all. It is seldom that so much that is significant and 

entitled to great, even conclusive weight, is embraced 

in the same space: 

"'London, Aug. 2, 1885. 

'"Yesterday I was in the Natural History department 
of the British Museum. I had business touching 
some fossils which I found in the Lattakia Miocene and 
Pliocene clay beds, and about which I wrote an article 
which appeared in "Nature" last year. Mr. Etheridge, 
F.R.S., kindly examined and named them. I was 
anxious to hear what a first-rate working scientist, with 
perhaps the largest opportunity for induction in the 
world, would say on Darwinian Evolution. So, after 
he had shown me all the wonders of the establishment, 
I asked him whether, after all, this was not the working 
out of mind and Providence. He turned to me with a 
clear, honest look into my eyes, and replied, "In all this 
great Museum there is not a particle of evidence of transmutation 
of species. Nine-tenths of the talk of evolutionists 
is sheer nonsense, not founded on observation, and 
wholly unsupported by fact. Men adopt a theory and 
then strain their facts to support it. I read in all their 
books, but they make no impression on my belief in 



the stability of species. Moreover, the talk of the great 
antiquity of man is of the same value. There is no such 
thing as a fossil man. Men are ready to regard you as 
a fool if you do not go with them in all their vagaries. 
But this Museum is full of proofs of the utter falsity of 
their views." 

'"I have condensed very much, but you may spread 
this out over twenty minutes, and imagine what a comfort 
it was to hear it. I do not propose to surrender 
yet even to theistic evolution, which seems to me at 
best a bad name for God's creation.'" 

Now we want to hear the verdict of bar-room scientists, 
saloon geologists and horse-shed philosophers, 
who are more anxious to establish a connection with 
the monkeys and baboons than with Adam, who "was 
the son of God."— From "The Armory." 



R3758 :page 117 

WHEELING AND LOUISVILLE CONVENTIONS. 

THE interest in Wheeling seemed to warrant us in 
giving it a second One-Day Convention sooner 
than usual— on March 18. The topic for the public 
service was "Resurrection of Damnation." The forenoon 
discourse was given in Odd Fellows' Hall and was 
well attended by the interested, though not publicly announced. 
That discourse was published in the secular 
journals which many of you receive. The afternoon 
discourse was for the public. The services were held in 
Court Theater, the largest auditorium in the city; the attendance 
was large, and the attention and interest manifested 
were very gratifying indeed. The number present 
was estimated at 1400. At this meeting announcement 
was made for two chart talks on the following 
Sunday in a smaller auditorium. Brother A. E. Williamson 
filled the appointments and had excellent hearings 
at both sessions. Our thought is that it requires 
several discourses to mature the interest first 
aroused, and that of the thousands who hear with some 
degree of interest only a small number are to be expected 
to have the deep interest which could only be looked 
for in the fully consecrated of the Lord's people. The 
dear friends at Wheeling did nobly and feel very much 
encouraged. 

Louisville, Ky., had its first One-Day Convention 
on March 25. The locally interested were ably seconded 
in their efforts to make the Convention a success by 
dear friends residing in nearby communities. Their 
mutual efforts under the Lord's blessing and providential 
guidance resulted in a great arousing of the people 
of that vicinity. 

R3759 :page 117 



At the morning session, which was not advertised, 
quite a goodly gathering appeared. Some excellent 
testimonies were given for about an hour preceding a 
morning discourse by Brother Russell, which has already 
been reported in the secular journals, seen by 
many of you. The afternoon meeting in McCauley's 
Theater was jammed to its fullest capacity, about a 
hundred being seated on the rear of the stage and considerable 
numbers standing. The police ordered the 
doors locked that no more should be admitted, claiming 
that no more could be admitted with safety. Those in 
a position to estimate reckoned that there were 2000 
present, and that an equally large number were unable 
to gain admittance; to the latter, however, were distributed 
more than 1 100 copies of the WATCH TOWER 
treating on the subject of hell from the Bible standpoint. 
The audience gave closest attention for nearly 
two hours, and our hope is that some of them were 
there started on a more rational view of the divine 
Word, and inspired to more loving and more reverent 
conceptions of the divine character. 

We are not to expect that a large proportion in such 
audiences would be saints, permitted of the Lord to see 
and understand clearly all the riches of his grace, but 
we do have reason for believing that there were some 
of this class, and that they received help and impetus 
in a good way, and that others were helped nearer to 
the Lord and further from sin. We were introduced to 
one brother, now deeply consecrated, and a very fine 
man, a doctor, and were informed that only a short 
time ago he was practically an infidel as well as a 
drunkard, and that he was reclaimed through the reading 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN, and has been helpful in the 

R3759 :page 118 

bringing of many in that vicinity to the knowledge of 

God and of his Word. Items of this kind are very encouraging, 

but at all events we know that the Lord's 

blessing is always with his own Word, and that it will 

accomplish the purpose for which he sent it, and will 

not return unto him void. We know that this Gospel 

age will gather out the full number of the elect, and 

prepare them for the glory, honor, immortality and the 

great work of the Millennial age. Praise and honor and 

glory to him that sitteth upon the throne and to the Lamb ! 



THE BRIDEGROOM'S DOVE. 

-CANT. 2:14- 

"My Dove!" The Bridegroom speaks to whom? 
Whom think'st thou, meaneth He? 



Say, O my soul! canst thou presume 

He thus addresseth thee? 
Yes, 'tis the Bridegroom's voice of love, 
Calling thee, O my soul! His dove! 

The Dove is gentle, mild and meek: 

Deserve I, then, the name? 
I look within in vain to seek 

Aught which can give a claim: 
Yet, made so by redeeming love, 
My soul, thou art the Bridegroom's Dove! 

Methinks, my soul, that thou may'st see, 

In this endearing word, 
Reasons why Jesus likens thee 

To this defenceless bird; 
Reasons which show the Bridegroom's love 
To His poor helpless, timid Dove! 

The Dove hath neither claw nor sting, 

Nor weapon for the fight; 
She owes her safety to her wing, 

Her victory to flight. 
A shelter hath the Bridegroom's love 
Provided for His helpless Dove! 

As the poor Dove, before the Hawk, 

Quick to her refuge flies, 
So need I, in my daily walk, 

The wings which faith supplies 
To bear me where the Bridegroom's love 
Places beyond all harm His Dove! 

My soul, of native power bereft, 

To Calvary repairs: 
Immanuel is the rocky cleft 

The secret of the stairs! 
Since placed there by the Bridegroom's love, 
What evil can befall His Dove? 

My soul, now hid within a rock, 

(The "Rock of Ages" called), 
Amid the universal shock 

Is fearless, unappalled. 
A cleft therein, prepared by love, 
In safety hides the Bridegroom's Dove! 

O happy Dove! thus weak, thus safe; 

Do I resemble her? 
Then to my soul, O Lord! vouchsafe 

A dove-like character. 
Pure, harmless, gentle, full of love, 
Make me in spirit, Lord, a Dove! 

AUTHOR UNKNOWN. 



R3759 :page 118 

"I HAVE PRAYED FOR THEE." 

"Simon, Simon, behold Satan hath desired to have you, that he might 
sift you as wheat; but I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail 
not."~Luke 22:31,32. 

AS the Passover season approached our Lord not 

only said, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful 

even unto death," and found himself pleading 

"with strong crying and tears unto him that was able 

to save him out of death;" but additionally he had 

great solicitude for his dear followers, and sought to 

arouse them to an appreciation of the hour of temptation 

into which they were entering, saying, "Watch and 

pray, lest ye enter into temptation." Not only was that 

the most trying time of our Lord's earthly experience, 

but it was also the most trying time for his apostles, 

and particularly for Judas and Peter. Both of these 

men were prominent amongst the apostles, the one as 

the treasurer and purchasing agent of the little group, 

the other as a specially bold champion of the Lord's 

cause, who had, as the mouthpiece of the twelve, announced 

their faith in Jesus as the Messiah, and who 

had publicly declared that although all men should forsake 

the Lord he would not do so. From the human 

standpoint it would have been surmised that any temptation 

that might come upon those thirteen would 

have been upon the weaker and less prominent ones 

and not upon the three most prominent. 

THREE TEMPTED -VARIANT RESULTS 

We may draw some valuable lessons from noting 
the course of the three specially tempted. Our Lord's 
course was the proper one, humility, fear, an appreciation 
of the trials leading to watchfulness and prayer. 
He escaped and came out of the trial stronger every 
way, and on the day of his public arraignment before 
the priests and Pilate, and when he was crucified before 
the multitude, he was the calmest of the calm, for the 
Lord had strengthened him. He is our pattern: our 
course should similarly be one that would not deny 
dangers, would not boast of our courage, strength, but 
would lean upon the arm of the Lord and through his 
grace come off conquerors. 

Peter's case we remember well: A good man of 
strong character, he realized not his danger, and hence 
was not prepared for the arts of Satan, by which he was 
placed in so trying a position that his boasted courage 
fled, his wonted strength of character vanished, he denied 
his Lord even with profanity. What a lesson to 
us of human frailty, and of how we ourselves might be 
overtaken and ensnared by the wiles of the devil. How 



much each one needs to watch and pray, lest we enter 
into temptation— lest we succumb to temptation. How 
much we each need to remember the prayer the Lord 
gave us as an ensample, "Abandon us not in temptation, 
but deliver us from the evil one." 

That was a fateful time for Judas: If the Adversary 
could so juggle, deceive and mislead the true-hearted 

R3760 :page 119 

Peter because he was off his guard in watching 
and praying, what might we not expect he might be 
able to accomplish with Judas, whose heart was not 
right, who was selfish, self-seeking, ambitious, covetous? 
We cannot wonder that Satan's victory over Judas 
was soon accomplished— that he fell quickly into 
the snare of the Adversary, and lent his heart and energy 
to the betrayal of the Master for thirty pieces of 
silver. His case was very different from that of Peter, 
the loyal, the true, for the moment bewildered and off 
his guard and fearful. The cases of the two men are 
very different because, although the danger was the 
same, their hearts were in different conditions. 

"TAKE HEED TO YOURSELVES" 

Is it not so with all of the Lord's followers? Is 
not this the secret of the differing results of temptation 
as they surely come to each one of us? The Judas 
class of today and always are those who when temptation 
comes receive it, entertain it, enter into the spirit 
of the ambition or otherwise wrong allurement, and are 
swallowed up by it. The Peter class is also with us 
ever since; and today the true-hearted, but not sufficiently 
watching and praying and on guard against the 
Adversary's allurements, are at times taken unawares, 
and for a moment not only dishonor the Lord but dishonor 
their own hearts and consciences also. The difference 
between these two classes is the heart condition: 
the Peter class do those things which they do not 
wish to do, or leave undone those things which they 
really desire to do, and their difficulty lies evidently in 
the weakness of their flesh, in the power of the Adversary, 
and in their failure to lay hold upon the help 
which the Lord has promised, the succor in their time 
of need. 

The Judas class are those whose hearts are not 
loyal but selfish, and who therefore enter into the Adversary's 
scheme heartily, and are not, in their wrong 
course, going contrary to their own wills but in harmony 
therewith. The difference in God's sight is seen 
in that, although both Peter and Judas repented, the 
one was accepted back to divine favor, the other was 
not— the one who was merely entrapped, but who at 
heart was not disloyal, was restored and blessed; the 
other, though not without conscience, as shown by his 



later remorse, was without the genuine loyalty of heart 
which in the Lord's sight is indispensable, and the absence 
of which, considering Judas' intimate acquaintance 
with the Lord, was inexcusable. 

Our Lord's words in our text give us the assurance 
that, because of this difference in the hearts of the two 
men, he could properly be the advocate of the one before 
the Father but not the advocate of the other. He 
could stand for and represent the one who at heart was 
loyal to him, however weak his flesh, however careless 
he might be of the divine provision for his protection. 
He was still one of the Lord's sheep, therefore subject 
to the Shepherd's care. He was still one of the Lord's 
members, therefore subject to the oversight and interest 
of the Head in his welfare. He was still one of the 
members of the Lord's espoused virgin Church, whom 
he loved and for whom he gave his life, and for whom, 
therefore, he might properly and did make supplication 
as the betrothed Bridegroom. 

But in the case of Judas, his heart alienated through 
selfishness, any appreciation for the Lord and love for 
him which he possessed at the beginning of the ministry 
had evidently died, been swallowed up of selfishness 
and ambition— and into that heart thus fully withdrawn 
from the Lord we are told Satan entered. By 
thus willingly withdrawing his heart and strength and 
consecration from the Lord and lending the same of 
deliberate intention to self-seeking, he became a tool of 
the Adversary. As our Master said, "It must needs be 
that offences come"— that he should be crucified— "but 
woe unto that man by whom the offence cometh." 

SIMILAR CONDITIONS TODAY 

In our experience the Passover season has always 
been one of special danger, special besetment to the 
Lord's consecrated people. For some reason unknown 
to us the Adversary seems to be permitted to have special 
power at this time. We have noticed time after 
time that, as we approach the Passover season, Satan's 
activity has been manifested by some kind of an attack 
upon the Truth and by some kind of a special trial or 
test upon the Truth in connection therewith. Although 
we know in advance that none of the Lord's disciples 
true at heart will be plucked out of his hand by the Adversary, 
nevertheless we fancy that we can sympathize 
to some extent with our Lord's feelings when he exhorted 
the disciples to watch and pray, lest they enter 
into temptation. 

True, Jesus knew who it was that should betray 
him, and was, therefore, not surprised or disconcerted 
in respect to Judas' course; and yet, undoubtedly, the 
thought that one who had eaten bread with him should 
"lift up his heel against him" (John 13:18), one who 
had been his companion, helper, familiar friend, should 
become his enemy (Psalm 41:9), all this must have had 



a saddening effect upon our dear Master, who could assuredly 
sympathize with even his bitterest enemies as 
well as with those who, Peter-like, failed at the first to 
withstand the Adversary's assault but who subsequently 
are recovered by divine mercy and aid. 

Since the body of Christ is one, and since our Lord 
declares that whatsoever is done to one of the least of 
his members is done to him, it follows that the Judas 
class and the Peter class all down through the Gospel 
age to the present moment have been betraying the 
Lord in proportion as they have betrayed or denied his 
members. We, therefore, should note the significance 
of his statement to Peter, "I have prayed for thee that 
thy faith fail not." 

For all of the Peter class the Lord is the Head, the 
Representative, the Advocate before the Father. Without 
his aid, without appearance for us and application 
to us of the merit of his own sacrifice, none of us could 
stand, all would be judged unworthy, unfit to have part 
or lot in the great blessings which the Lord has invited 

R3760 : page 120 

us to share with Jesus. And as the Master prayed for 
such, intercedes for such, makes good the unwilling 
imperfections of such, so should all who have his Spirit 
feel generously, kindly, sympathetically, speak helpfully 
to the Peter class. But as the Master had no such 
words of sympathy for Judas, the open and premeditated 
enemy and traitor, so likewise, whatever our sorrowful 
feelings for such may be, there is no room for any expression 
of sympathy or cooperation in their evil work: 
as for any of the apostles to cooperate with Judas 
would have meant a share in his evil deeds. 

"SIFT YOU AS WHEAT" 

However much sympathy we may feel with Peter 
and others of similar character and experience— since, 
however much we may rejoice with him that the Lord 
prayed for him so that his carelessness in the matter of 
watching and praying for himself did not result in his 
undoing and his loss of relationship to the Lord— nevertheless 
we should strive not to be of the Peter class, 
but of the class represented by our Lord himself. Let 
us be of the watching, praying and faithful kind, who 
will not be overtaken by the Adversary's temptations of 
the present time. 

We are in the "harvest" time; the separation of the 
wheat from the tares is due, and, more than this, the 
separation of the chaff from the wheat is also due— a 
sifting process. While this figure may to some extent 
fit to the experiences of the Church in the past, we are 
sure that it does specially apply to the Church in the 
"ends of the ages"— to those who were living in the end 
or harvest of the Jewish age, and to those who are now 



living in the end or harvest of the Gospel age. And our 

Lord is pleased to permit these siftings; they are necessary, 

apparently, that the Judas class may be entirely 

sifted out, and that the Peter class may be so thoroughly 

stirred up by the trials and difficulties and 

realization of their own weaknesses, and the knowledge 

that they would utterly fail without the Lord's sustaining 

grace, that these lessons may prove profitable to 

them, developing in them more and more of meekness, 

watchfulness, prayerfulness and trust in our all-powerful 

Head. 

We remember in this connection our Lord's words 
which indicate that the present will be a time of trial 
which "will try all them that dwell upon the face of the 
whole earth." (Rev. 3:10.) We remember the Apostle's 
statement also that it will be a time of fiery trial upon 
those who are of the true Church, saying, "Every man's 
work shall be tried so as by fire," and his assurance is 
that only the gold, silver and precious stones of faith, 
hope and love will abide the fiery trial.— I Cor. 3:13. 

"THE FIRE OF THAT DAY" 

Wherever perfect love has not been attained the 
"fire" of this day, the siftings of this day, will manifest 
it— the Lord will separate the deficient ones. This may 
cause us sorrow, as earthly ties are severed and fond 
hopes blighted; nevertheless the Lord's message to us 
on the subject is figuratively represented in the command 
which he gave to Aaron and his sons, when two 
of the under-priesthood perished because they offered 
strange fire before the Lord which he had not commanded 
them. (Lev. 10:1.) Moses as the Lord's mouthpiece 
declared that the survivors in the priesthood must 
make no mourning or lamentation for those whom the 
Lord had cut off. To have done so would have implied 
disloyalty to the Lord and a failure to appreciate his 
wisdom and justice and love in the matter.— Lev. 10:6. 

How searching will be the tests which will prove our 
love and loyalty to the Lord and his divine arrangements 
is clearly intimated in our Lord's prophecy respecting 
our day when he said that the sifting would 
be of such a kind as would "deceive if it were possible 
the very elect." It will not be possible to deceive the 
very elect, because for these our glorious Head stands 

R3761 :page 120 

sponsor. They are his followers, they are his betrothed, 
they are his members; he is their Head and Representative 
and Ambassador; he intercedes, supplicates, 
prays for them, and their faith will fail not because 
they are his, because— however imperfect they may be 
as respects the flesh— at heart they are perfect, thoroughly 
loyal to him and to his cause, to their 
fellow-members. 



So, then, we sound again, as we have previously 
done at this season of the year, the Master's words, 
"Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation." Our 
words, like the Master's will fall on two classes— some 
will make light of the warning and expose themselves 
to danger; others will hearken to the warning of the 
Master's voice, and to them it will be a part of the power 
of God unto their preservation. 



R3761 :page 120 

FORGIVEN MUCH, SHE LOVED MUCH. 

-LUKE 7:36-50.-APRIL 22.- 

Golden Text:— "Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace." 

THE MIRACLES at Capernaum and at Nain spread the 
fame of Jesus far and near in Palestine, and led a 
prominent Pharisee named Simon to press upon the 
Master an invitation for dinner. Not that Simon was a disciple 
and believer, but rather that as a prominent man he 
posed as a liberal one also, affecting that although fully 
content with himself and the expectations of the Pharisees 
he had nothing to lose nor to fear from the new and wonderful 
Teacher. Jesus accepted the invitation, and after the 
manner of the time reclined at the table with the Pharisee 
and the other guests. At an earlier date the Jews had been 
accustomed to sit upon the floor cross-legged when eating, 
but had changed this for the Persian custom of a sloping 
couch table, where the guests reclined resting upon the left 
arm while feeding themselves with the right hand, the feet 
extending back from the table portion of the couch. 

Privacy in the home is still unusual in the East. Neighbors, 
friends, visitors, feel at liberty to come and go much as 

R3761 :page 121 

they please, sometimes coming in to converse with the guests 
while dinner is being served. Thus it was that while Jesus 
and others were at dinner a woman of the city, a disreputable 
character— possibly Mary of Magdala, but surely not 
Mary of Bethany, the sister of Lazarus— came into the room 
with a vial of very precious ointment in her hand, walked to 
the back of the table couch and directly to the feet of Jesus. 
Her intention evidently was to anoint his feet with the ointment, 
but ere she had succeeded in breaking the seals and unstopping 
the vial her pent-up feelings found expression in a 
gush of tears which rained upon the Master's feet— an indignity 
where she had intended honor. Quickly unfastening 
her hair she used it as a towel to dry the feet, and then, as 
expressive of her love and sympathy and adoration, while 
wiping the feet she kissed them repeatedly (for so the Greek 
text implies). Then, opening the alabaster vase, she poured 



upon the blessed feet the sweet, odorous ointment as originally 
intended. 

THE PHARISEE AN EVIL SURMISER 

The Pharisee said nothing, but in his heart concluded 
that he now had proof that Jesus was not a prophet, else he 
would have known intuitively that the woman was a sinner, 
and would have repulsed her approach even to his feet, and 
would have denounced her and her sinful life in no measured 
terms. Simon, however, was measuring the Lord by 
his own standard, for he appreciated not the loving sympathy 
of Jesus' heart, and that, although he recognized the woman 
as a sinner, he had compassion upon her— especially in 
view of the evidence she gave of shame, contrition and reformation. 
The incident furnishes us with a blessed illustration 
of our Lord's sympathy for those who come unto him 
accepting his mercy and love and forgiveness, however unworthy 
they may be of his fellowship. 

One thing is noteworthy: this Pharisee seems to have 
entertained no thought of impurity on the part of our Lord, 
or that there was any acquaintance between him and the 
sinful woman who did him honor. Evidently the Lord's face 
and general demeanor, etc., were such as to preclude all 
thought of evil on his part. So should it be with all of the 
Lord's followers— their words, their manner, their looks, 
should all witness to that high and lofty standard of character 
which would place them above reproach or insinuation. 
It may not be possible for us to manifest so high and lofty a 
standard as did our Lord, because he was perfect while we 
are imperfect; but we should aim for his standards as nearly 
as possible. 

Jesus answered Simon's unexpressed thought with a little 
parable concerning two debtors, the one owing his Master 
five hundred pence, the other owing fifty pence. When 
both parties were forgiven, which debtor would appreciate 
the more the creditor's generosity? which would have the 
more love for him? The question was addressed to Pharisee 
Simon, who answered that he supposed the one who had 
been forgiven most. This off-hand answer seems to imply 
that Simon did not up to this moment realize the bearing of 
the parable upon his own case and that of the woman— that 
he represented the debtor owing fifty pence, the woman, the 
greater sinner, owing five hundred. 

A sin is a sin, a violation of the divine law, whether it 
be in a great matter or in a lesser matter. We are not to 
understand that in God's sight there is any difference as to 
enormities of sin, but, as here illustrated, that some are more 
deeply involved in it than are others— ten times as deeply. 
The point we are to remember, however, is that all sin is a 
transgression of the divine law, and that no sinner can have 
the divine favor of eternal life; hence, whatever our degree 
of sin it must be gotten rid of if we would come back into 
harmony with God and escape the penalty of sin and obtain 
the gift of God, eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
From this standpoint it was as necessary for the Pharisee to 



have his sins forgiven as for the woman to have hers forgiven, 

as neither could enter into life except as they first 

would be purged from sin. From God's standpoint undoubtedly 

Simon was in a better attitude than this sinful 

woman— he was nearer to God, nearer to righteousness; but 

since he could not attain to full righteousness and perfection 

in himself, but must depend upon divine mercy for the forgiveness 

of his sin, he was just as dependent as was the woman. 

As for God, it was just as easy for him to forgive the greater 

sins as to forgive the lesser ones, provided the required conditions 

were met by the sinner. 

Our lesson illustrates this, and shows the attitude of 
those who are in condition to be approved of the Lord— to 
be forgiven. The parable here supposes the desire and request 
for forgiveness on the part of the debtors and the willingness 
of the Lord to cancel the debt for both. In the 
illustration before us we see Simon indifferent because he 
felt that his sin was less, the woman repentant because she 
felt that her sin was great. To the repentant one only could 
God's grace extend mercy; hence the woman was justified, 
her sins were forgiven, while the Pharisee, with really fewer 
sins, was unforgiven because he had not appealed for forgiveness 
nor appreciated properly his need therefor. 

WITHOUT HUMILITY NO FORGIVENESS 

How we see this principle illustrated all about us every 
day! Some of the finest, some of the noblest characters 
among men and women, like Simon the Pharisee, realize that 
they are ten-fold better than some of their neighbors who go 
to the Lord. They seem inclined to say within themselves, 
"Well, my neighbors should go and repent of their sins; 
surely they have need to do so. I hope that they will meet 
with mercy, turn over a new leaf and try to be different, as 
I am." These poor Pharisees know not how much they miss; 
they realize not that some of their more blemished neighbors 
and friends and acquaintances receive a forgiveness and 
divine blessing, while they lack these things because not sufficiently 
humble in heart to make the request— to come unto 
the Father for forgiveness through the only name given under 
heaven and amongst men whereby we must be saved. 

We are not threatening such with eternal torment or 
any other dire punishment: we are merely pointing out their 
loss— that they fail to receive the fellowship, the forgiveness 
with God, the blessings and privileges which might be theirs, 
and from the standpoint of which they might attain to still 
greater favors and mercies under the high calling of this age. 
Surely, therefore, the loss suffered at present is great, regardless 
of any future retribution. 

Here we see the reason why the Scriptures declare that 

R3762 : page 122 

not many great, not many wise, not many learned, not many 
noble or rich according to the course of this world, will be 
amongst the Lord's chosen ones and heirs of the Kingdom. 



Why? Because these more favored ones, according to natural 
conditions, appreciate less the necessity of divine sympathy 
and assistance and forgiveness and help. Hence we 
find still that the Gospel of mercy and forgiveness appeals 
most directly to the sinner class, and this class it is continually 
lifting up out of the mire of sin and death, transforming 
them by the renewing of their minds, changing them from 
glory to glory, until some of them by the grace of God shall 
be heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord in 
the Kingdom and its glory, honor and immortality. It is not 
that our Lord Jesus loves less those who are more moral, 
more upright, more nearly by nature up to the standard of 
perfection. Nay! other things being equal, he certainly 
would love these the more. 

For instance, note the Master's love for the young man 
who was very rich and who inquired what he should do to 
inherit the Kingdom. When the Lord pointed to the Law 
and the young man was able to say, "All these have I kept 
from my youth up," Jesus beholding him loved him— loved 
him, we may be sure, far more than he would have loved 
him had he been a reprobate character, a prodigal. But 
when it comes to the point that the moralist or man of noble 
character spurns divine favor and ignores his own blemishes, 
and when, on the other hand, the poor, the degraded, the 
prodigal, realizing their sins, cry out to the Lord for mercy 
and forgiveness, we can understand why the broken and the 
contrite heart is more acceptable to God and justified rather 
than the other. Let us, dear brethren, while rejoicing in 
every element of natural advantage and likeness to our Creator 
that may be ours, remember to be very humble, remember 
that we have nothing perfect, and hence that we could 
not commend ourselves to God; and that, in order to receive 
his blessing and favor, we must confess to him our sins and 
have his forgiveness, and that in the only channel and name 
in which he has provided it— Christ. 

VIEWED FROM TWO STANDPOINTS 

Simon had been congratulating himself that he was 
honoring the Master by having him to dinner because of his 
own honorable station in society, and that this poor woman 
was dishonoring him because of her inferior station and evil 
reputation. Our Lord reverses the picture before his mind 
by calling his attention to the fact that he had really neglected 
the usual hospitalities of the country as respects an 
honored guest, while the woman had made up for his lack. 
It was the custom of the country for a host to receive his 
guest with distinguished attention, to embrace him, to kiss 
him on the cheek when he entered, to have his head anointed 
with perfumed ointment and to have a servant wash his 
feet. Simon, as a wealthy and prominent man, knew all 
this, and would doubtless have followed the ordinary custom 
had his guest been one in high social standing; but his invitation 
had been of a patronizing sort. He felt that he was 
doing the Master an honor to bring him into his house, and 
that for the sake of others he would not wish that this honor 



should seem too pronounced, because the followers of Jesus 
especially were ignorant, unlearned men and not used to the 
best customs of society. His own servants would occupy a 
higher social plane really than the disciples of Jesus, and 
hence he felt that he must restrain his manifestations of hospitality 
lest Jesus and his humble band and the public 
should get the impression that he really recognized Jesus, a 
Teacher, as his equal or his superior. 

Our Lord in no unkind terms called Simon's attention 
to the fact that he neither gave him an anointing, nor kissed 
him, nor provided the washing for his feet, but that this poor 
woman had washed his feet with her tears, had kissed them, 
and had anointed them with a very precious ointment. The 
Master associated these facts of the moment with his parable, 
and declared that this was an indication of greater love 
which the woman bore and of her greater appreciation of 
his message of forgiveness and mercy. Her course intimated 
that she had accepted the Lord's declaration, and so now 
he probably formally declared to her that her sins were forgiven. 
To the Pharisee he explained that he, having less to 
be forgiven, had been less appreciative of the privilege of 
forgiveness, so the penitent sinner got the blessing and the 
much more nearly righteous Pharisee (holiness professor) 
failed to receive it. 

"THY SINS BE FORGIVEN THEE" 

What words could have been more sweet or more precious 
to the poor woman's ears! Surely she appreciated 
that declaration more than anything else our Lord could 
have said unto her. And so it is with all who approach the 
Lord as their Savior from the right standpoint. We do indeed 
rejoice subsequently to hear our Lord's message respecting 
the glory, honor and immortality which we may attain 
through his assistance, but the first message to every 
one of us must be, "Thy sins are forgiven thee"— otherwise 
we could have no peace, no joy, no hope of a glorious future. 
In other words, every other hope, every other blessing, 
is based upon this one— the forgiveness of our sins. 

Let us make sure not only that we have thus come to 
the Lord recognizing our sins, manifesting our repentance for 
them, but let us be sure also that we have accepted the divine 
grace in and through the blood of Christ, and that we 
are trusting not in any righteousness of our own, but that 
we wholly lean upon the favors secured to us through him 
who loved us and bought us with his precious blood. Upon 
the strength of this faith we may bring our tears and our 
alabaster boxes of perfume of daily endeavor to serve and to 
please him who has done so much for us, but without our 
recognition of our sins and of his forgiveness we could bring 
nothing acceptable to him. In this connection also let us 
remember the Master's words to the woman in conclusion, 
"Go in peace," 

"THY FAITH HATH MADE THEE WHOLE" 



Ah, none but the forgiven ones know the peace of God 
that passeth all understanding which comes into the hearts 
of those who hear the Master's assurance that their sins are 
all forgiven, covered by the robe of his righteousness. They 
and they alone can go in peace, and their peace will be in 
proportion to their faith, and their faith in proportion to 
their knowledge. It is to this end that the Lord gives us a 
full, clear and explicit explanation of what constitutes sin, 

R3762 : page 123 

what is the remedy for it, how that remedy has been provided, 
and how it is applied to us in proportion to our exercise 
of faith, and that our faith is manifested by our devotion. 
Let us bear in mind that it was not the woman's works 
that saved her and brought her the Lord's favor, nor the 
ointment, nor the tears nor the kiss— it was the faith: "Without 
faith it is impossible to please God." (Heb. 1 1:6.) According 
to our faith it shall be unto us. But let us not forget 
either that faith must work; that if it does not work it 
is a sure sign that it is dead. So surely as we have the true 
faith in the Lord, so surely good and honest hearts will bring 
forth worship, praise, honor to our Master and Redeemer. 
These conditions of our hearts will surely manifest themselves 
as did the woman's by tears, by services to the feet of 
the Master, by an anointing of the most precious perfume 
that we can bring. 

"HOW BEAUTIFUL ARE THE FEET OF HIM" 

The Prophet, speaking evidently of the living members 
of the body of Christ at the close of this dispensation, declares, 
"How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of 
him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that 
bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; 
that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth!" There is 
a beauty, a grace, peculiar to our Lord, the Head; and each 
member of his body has some peculiar grace or quality of 
character-likeness to him. And so, when in the end of this 
age the last members of the Lord's body, the Church, announce 
in its due season the parousia of the Lord and that 
his Kingdom is at hand to be established, there is a beauty 
attaching to that in connection with this service, this message, 
in the sight of each other, in the sight of all who are of the 
household of faith, but not in the sight of the world, for, as 
the Apostle declares, "The world knoweth us not even as it 
knew him not."— 1 John 3:1. 

It is not our privilege or opportunity to anoint the 
Head of the body, the Lord Jesus. Simon and others of 
that time had that great privilege, however they used it. 
With us, however, the privilege still remains of anointing the 
feet members of the body of Christ, and day by day we are 
tested along this very line. To what extent do we love 
much the Lord and his members? Is it not in proportion to 
our appreciation of the divine love for us and for all mankind? 
If we love little we will honor little, if we love much 



we will honor much. 

Let us, then, avail ourselves of the privileges day by 
day of anointing the feet members of the body, realizing 
that whatsoever is done unto one of the least of these his 
brethren is done unto the Lord himself, and is a perfume of 
sweet odor to him. Let us be more gentle, more tender, more 
careful in our honoring and dealing with the feet members. 
Let us remember that they have trials and difficulties 
enough in their conflict with the tiresome journey of life, 
and that there must be no neglect of them on our part, for 
the opportunity of thus manifesting our love and devotion to 
the Lord is too great a privilege to be overlooked or slighted. 
Nor need we wait for opportunities to do great things: kind 
words and looks, a little assistance, may be the tears or the 
perfume as circumstances may permit. 



R3763 : page 123 

"THE SEED IS THE WORD OF GOD." 

--MARK 4:l-20.-APRIL 29.- 

OUR LORD had returned to the Sea of Galilee, where 
some of his earliest teachings had been given. Great 
multitudes were attracted to him by reason of the 
miracles he performed. Entering a boat he sat in the prow 
of it and taught the people on the shelving beach by various 
parables, similes, illustrations, the thing said never being the 
thing meant. One of these parables, constituting the basis 
of our lesson, is known as the parable of the Sower, though 
more accurately perhaps it might be described as the parable 
of the four kinds of soil, representing the four kinds of human 
hearts. The parable is introduced by the word. 

"HEARKEN" -TAKE HEED 

This is an implication that an important lesson is contained 
in the parable. Nevertheless the world gives little 
heed to this or other of our Lord's teachings, and even his 
professed followers rarely give the Master's words that deeper, 
attentive thought necessary to their appreciation, and only 
he that seeketh findeth the true meaning, the true lessons. 

The parable itself is a very simple statement of a matter 
familiar to his hearers: A farmer sowed good seed, a portion 
of which fell on the pathway leading through the farm, 
where it was readily seen and quickly devoured by the birds. 
Some fell on stony ground, the soil of which was good 
enough but shallow, with the result that it sprang up quickly, 
made a good show at first, but soon withered under the 
heat of the sun. Other seed fell upon ground infested with 
the seed of thorns, and the two growing together the thorns 
so choked the good seed that it became unfruitful. But some 
of the seed fulfilled the farmer's intention and brought forth 
much fruit, some thirty, sixty and a hundred-fold, because 



the soil was more favorable: it had been prepared by the 
plowing processes to receive the seed, it was deep enough to 
properly care for and root the seed, and it was not 
thorn-infested. 

This picture, familiar to all farmers, was especially clear 
and forcible to the minds of those who heard Jesus, for several 
reasons: (1) The fields of that land are not fenced and 
the paths of travel frequently cross them. (2) The birds of 
Syria, including Palestine, seem to be much more numerous 
than elsewhere, probably on account of the climate; they are 
said to be one of the special pests of the farmer of that region. 
(3) Thorns abound there. A writer says, "There are no less 
than fifty genera and two hundred species of plants in Syria 
and Palestine furnished with thorns and prickles. There is 
probably no country on earth of the same extent which has 
so many.... Thistles grow to a height of ten to fifteen 
feet." As for the stony ground: Palestine abounds with 
limestone, which renders the soil very rich, but when shallow 
very hot. As for the hundred-fold crop we are assured that 
this is not an exaggerated statement. One writer remarks 

R3763 : page 124 

that at Geneva in 1855 he got from the field a single ear of 
barley containing two hundred and seventy-six grains. 

WHY TEACH IN PARABLES? 

Our Lord concluded his parable with the words, "He 
that hath ears to hear, let him hear." The majority of the 
multitude heard, wondered at his gracious words, thought of 
him as a wonderful teacher sent of God, but took no deeper 
interest. They had not the ears to hear, they were not hungry 
for the truth, their hearts were not prepared. There 
remained with the Lord not only the twelve apostles but a 
considerable number of disciples or followers. These now 
crowded about the Master to ask the interpretation of the 
parable. They had ears not only for the story but for the 
meaning, for the lesson: they desired to know the will of 
God that they might do it— they were consecrated to know 
and to do the Father's will. 

The Prophet had foretold that our Lord would open his 
mouth in "parables" and in "dark sayings" (Psa. 78:2), and 
the evangelists record that thus he did, and now to those 
who inquired the meaning our Lord answered, "Unto you it 
is given to know the mystery of the Kingdom of God, but 
unto them that are without [outsiders— not disciples— not 
consecrated] all these things are done in parables, that seeing 
they may see and not perceive, and hearing they may hear 
and not understand; lest at any time they should be converted 
[turned to a proper course] and their sins should be 
forgiven them.— Mark 4:11,12. 

WHY THE MYSTERY-SECRECY? 

From the standpoint of ordinary Christian thought the 



Master's words here are utterly unintelligible. The ordinary 

thought is that all not converted, all left in their sins, 

are destined to an eternity of torture. But if that were 

true how could our Savior have used the words just quoted? 

His words are intelligible only from the standpoint of the 

Plan of the Ages, which alone makes clear the divine Word 

as a whole or in part. When we see our Lord's mission 

amongst men in its true light it has two divisions: (1) 

Through his own faithfulness to the Father's plan and as 

our Redeemer he needed to pay our ransom price by tasting 

death for every man, suffering the Just for the unjust that 

we might be reconciled to God. (2) While thus laying the 

foundation for the blessing of the whole world, with the opportunity 

to escape from sin and death, our Lord began a 

second feature of the divine plan, namely, the selection of a 

Kingdom class, a Church class, which would be associated 

with himself in the sufferings of this present time and in the 

glorious work of the future— the blessing of all the families 

of the earth under the favorable Millennial conditions. 

In harmony with this thought our Lord at the time of 
this parable was not only in process of laying down his life, 
dying daily, hourly, but also engaged in attracting to himself 
an elect class who would be suitable for his Bride, his 
Kingdom, his Church. 

It was some of this Kingdom class, this elect class, that 
had come around him and asked the interpretation of the 
parable. He declared that it was his wish, his desire, to 
make the matter clear, very plain, to these; that it really 
belonged to them to know, because they were in the condition 
of heart that would be profited by the knowledge— because 
the knowledge thus imparted would be essential to 
their development, to their strengthening, to their guidance, 
to their preparation for the Kingdom— "To you it is given 
to know the mystery of the Kingdom." Nearly all of our 
Lord's parables related to the Kingdom, and all of them 
therefore are to be understood by the Kingdom class, the 
elect, the consecrated. All of this class should be earnestly 
desirous of an understanding of "every word that proceedeth 
out of the mouth of God." Their earnestness in desiring 
will be part of the evidence that they belong to this class, 
that it is proper for them to know. It is to their advantage 
that it should be hidden, so that they may seek and find, 
and that in seeking and finding they may have a greater 
blessing than if the entire matter were strewn upon the 
surface. 

Our faith in the Lord and in his wonderful plan is 
strengthened when we find how simple his plan is, how 
grand, how beautiful, and yet how hidden from the world— 
from all except those who have the guidance of the holy 
Spirit and to whom it is given to know the "mystery." 
Some of these mysteries pertain to the present and some to 
the future, and the more clearly we seek the more we may 
find, and the more clearly we discern the stronger will be 
our faith and loyalty and the better will be our prospects 
therefore of making our calling and election sure by 
obedience. 



"LEST THEY SHOULD BE CONVERTED" 

But, says one, how would it have injured the multitude 
to have heard and understood a good parable, even if they 
were not prepared of heart to receive and act upon its message 
heartily? Would they not have received some blessing 
through a partial understanding of the divine plan? Not 
being perfect in knowledge or wisdom it is becoming in us 
to trust the Lord's love, knowledge and wisdom on this subject, 
and to conclude that the multitudes were really better 
off left in ignorance for the time. Perhaps we can see to 
some extent how and why this was so. (1) Even worldly 
wisdom has decided that "a little knowledge is a dangerous 
thing." (2) Had the multitudes been drawn to the Lord to 
accept him fully as a teacher and to believe his doctrines, 
while their hearts were still in an unconsecrated attitude, 
they would not have been of the Kingdom class which the 
Lord is now seeking, but might have hindered certain features 
of the divine plan connected with our Lord's sacrifice 
by so protesting against his death as to have endangered an 
insurrection, which would have forced Pilate to defend him 
against the malice of the rulers. 

All this is reasonable and intelligible when viewed from 
the standpoint of the Plan of the Ages— when we see that 
the election of the Church does not signify the damnation of 
the remainder of the world, but, on the contrary, that the 
elect are to be God's agents by and by for the blessing of 
the non-elect, and bringing all to a clear knowledge of the 
Lord and to opportunities for everlasting life, which would 
be more favorable to the temperament, disposition, etc., of 
the masses. Nothing is more evident than that only a very 
few have ears to hear and hearts to appreciate the invitation 
of the present time— to suffer with Christ in the narrow way 
in hope of the glory, honor and immortality of the future. 

R3764 : page 125 

HOW UNDERSTAND ALL PARABLES? 

Our Lord's words, "Know ye not this parable? How, 
then, will ye know all parables?" may be understood to 
signify, It is proper for you to understand this parable, as it 
will prove a key valuable in the interpretation of all parables. 
Our Lord then proceeded to give a very particular interpretation 
of the parable. 

(1) The "seed is the Word of God" (Luke 8: 1 1). The 
different kinds of soil represent different kinds of hearts 
coming in contact with that Word. By the Word of God we 
are to understand the entire revelation which God has made 
to us— the Bible. This includes, as the Apostle points out, 
"the word spoken by angels"— God's direct messages in 
the past to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, etc., including the 
giving of the Law. These angels represented God as his 
mouthpieces. It includes also the messages sent through 
the prophets, "when holy men of old spoke and wrote as 



they were moved by the holy Spirit." (2 Pet. 1:21.) And it 
includes the teachings of our Lord Jesus and his apostles, 
whom he authorized to speak in his name, as it is written, 
"God hath in these last times spoken unto us by his 
Son," and the Son declared respecting the apostles that 
those who heard them heard him, those who received them 
received him, as those who heard and received him heard 
and received the Father.-Heb. 1:2; Matt. 10:40. 

It is well that we lay full emphasis upon this only proper 
seed, because much confusion has resulted from a mistake 
on this point, the using of improper seed, as we shall 
see in our next lesson. We are not limiting the seed to any 
particular translation of the Word of God, nor do we urge 
that religious writings which contain this Word are invaluable 
and good seed. We do urge, however, most emphatically 
that they are good seed only in proportion as they are 
thoroughly loyal to the divine Word. To whatever extent 
they present human philosophies instead of the divine plan 
and philosophy, to whatever extent they mix the human 
with the divine, to that extent they are not the good seed. 
How careful, then, the Lord's people should be respecting 
the seed which they receive into their own hearts from day 
to day, and respecting the seed of truth which they in turn 
seek to scatter in the good ground of other hearts. 

Alas that we must confess it, but nearly all of the theology 
and theological works outside the Bible are so mixed 
as to be untrue, misleading: hence they do not bring forth 
the intended harvest in the heart, in the life of the individual. 
This is the great trouble with nominal Christendom, 
Churchianity, today. Traditions of men have taken the place 
of the Word of God; the good seed, the Gospel of the Kingdom, 
is a scarce article outside the Bible, and even in the 
Bible presentation of God's Word there are difficulties and 
hindrances in the shape of mistranslations and interpolations 
which hinder its results. In MILLENNIAL DAWN and WATCH 
TOWER publications we endeavor to set forth the Word of 
God simply and without human traditions in any measure or 
degree. We repeatedly, continually, persistently scatter that 
Word by liberal quotations and expositions of it— presenting 
it cleared of many misrepresentations and falsifications 
thereof. By the Lord's grace we trust that only the pure, 
unadulterated seed will ever be scattered by us in the Master's 
name. 

THE WAYSIDE HEARTS 

Our Lord elsewhere declares that the field is the world, 
but not all of the field or world is being planted at the present 
time. Vast areas of the world of mankind are already 
sown thickly with various human doctrines and are growing 
great crops after their kind. The field that the Lord is sowing 
first is a Jewish field, already prepared by divine instructions 
and disciplines. And although the middle wall of partition 
has since been broken down, so that there is no longer 
a distinction made as between Jews and Gentiles, nevertheless 
the portion of the Gentile field that is being sown is but 



a limited one, namely, the comparatively few amongst whom 
the Gospel of the Kingdom, the Word of God, has been 
declared. 

So, then, we may say that Christendom is the wheat-field 
in which the Lord has sown his Word. In Christendom, 
therefore, and not in heathendom, where the Word has 
never gone, we are to look for the four kinds of results 
brought to our attention in the parable. In Christendom 
some are like the wayside, or paths hard trodden by life's 
experiences; sometimes, by too great prosperity and unprepared 
to receive God's message, unappreciative of it. If such 
hear the message it enters not into the heart: it is to them 
merely a mental hearing, they take little interest in it. At first 
indeed they may appreciate the harmony and certain beauties 
and consistencies of the Truth, but it never becomes theirs, 
it never enters in, they are not open to its reception. Ere 
long the enemy comes; Satan the adversary steals away from 
them every element of Truth they once had seen or appreciated. 
The Truth is not for such, even though, being in the 
way, some grains fell on them. 

This class of people may be found in every community, 
in almost every home. They are not specially to be blamed, 
though we may sympathize with them, regretting their inability 
to receive the comfort and grace of the Word of God. 
These hearts are not fit for the Kingdom under present conditions. 
What the Lord may do for them in the future— 
either through trials and sufferings and disappointments in 
the present life, that will plow them up and make them 
ready for the reception of the Truth— or what he may do for 
them in the disciplines of the Millennial age to fit and prepare 
them for the Truth, are different questions. All the 
parable says is that while in this condition they are not acceptable, 
not wanted amongst the Lord's people. 

THE STONY-GROUND HEARERS 

We have all come across this class of hearers in Christendom; 
they not only see something of the beauty of God's 
plan but they receive it with joy, they give every evidence of 
bringing forth much fruit. We say to ourselves, I believe 
that person is a true Christian and will be one of the overcomers. 
But we cannot see as God sees, we know not the 
heart, the shallowness of the nature is not disclosed until, 
opposition being aroused, the sun of persecution blights and 
withers the results. We are inclined to feel discouraged, especially 
if we helped to plant the seed and had expected 
great results. The Lord in this parable cautions us 
against discouragement by assuring us that he knows in advance 
that considerable of the seed will fall upon stony-ground 
hearts, where, having little nourishment backed by 

R3764:page 126 

little character, it will soon wither and bring no fruitage to 
maturity. 
This should not signify to us that the case is a hopeless 



one as respects the future. Under new conditions character 
will be deepened and good results will be proportionately 
obtained, or else, if the heart will not come under the influence 
of the Lord's dealings in the future, it will be utterly 
discarded as useless ground. If any of the Lord's 
people who have received the Truth find in themselves this 
shallowness of nature, this superficiality represented in the 
parable, he or she should at once appeal to the Lord for such 
a deepening of the soil of their hearts as would enable them 
to bring forth fruitage to his praise. 

THE THORNY-GROUND HEARERS 

The soil that brings forth great thorns is rich, and if 
devoted wholly to the production of wheat would bring forth 
large crops. So it is, our Lord explains, with some who hear 
the message of God respecting the Kingdom— they are good, 
strong, deep characters, they would make noble Christians 
and bring forth much fruitage to the Master's praise and to 
their own honor if they were fully devoted to the Lord. But 
alas! their talents, influence, means, time— the strength of 
their hearts, the strength of the soil, is absorbed in another 
direction— in the bringing forth of earthly projects and ambitions 
whose interests conflict with the interests of the Kingdom. 
The parable shows that where the thorns are permitted 
to remain the Kingdom interests will suffer. This is another 
way of saying that those who have heard of the Lord 
and love him are mistaken when they suppose they can love 
both the Lord and the world; it is another way of telling 
us that we cannot serve God and Mammon, that we cannot 
bring forth both thorns and wheat. Our hearts must be single, 
wholly given to the Lord; we must love him with all 
our heart, soul, strength, mind, else we cannot bring forth 
the fruitage which he requires of disciples. 

Alas! of all the disappointing ones who hear the Gospel 
of the Kingdom during this age, the thorny-ground hearers 
have the most conspicuous place. Not much could be 
expected from the wayside heart, not much could be expected 
of the shallow hearted, but great possibilities are lost in 
those in whom the seed of Truth is choked by the cares of 
this life and the deceitfulness of riches— the thorns. All of 
the Lord's people who find these thorns mingling with the 
Truth in their hearts should learn from this parable the impossibility 
of bringing forth two crops— of being prosperous, 
successful and prominent and honored according to the 
course of this world, and also growing prosperous in the 
spiritual interests and in association with their Lord in the 
Kingdom. We cannot serve God and Mammon. The Lord 
seeketh not such as are double-hearted to be his joint-heirs 
in the Kingdom. We must love him with all our hearts in 
order to bring forth the proper fruitage, and eventually to 
hear his, "Well done, good and faithful." 

THE GOOD-GROUND HEARERS 

Thank God that in his providence and grace some of 



our hearts have been plowed deeply by the plowshare of 
experience, trouble, disappointment in respect to earthly affairs 
and conditions. Thanks be to him, too, if the soil of 
our hearts is deep and able to receive and appreciate the 
Truth, the Word of the Kingdom. We praise him if we 
have learned the necessity for the establishment of his 

R3765 : page 126 

Kingdom and have heard the invitation and received 

the seed of Truth which invites us to become heirs 

of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord, and which 

makes known to us the terms and conditions of fellowship 

in his sufferings if we would have fellowship also 

in his glory to follow. Thanks be to him also if our hearts 

have been in the attitude to respond to these things and not 

infested with the double mind of business care, household 

work, etc. 

Doubtless in the very best fields seeds of thorns and 
thistles may be found. O, that we may receive the good 
seed in such abundant measure as to choke out the thorns, 
as to separate us fully from the world, its spirit, its ambitions, 
its aims, and to sanctify us wholly to the love and service 
of him who hath called us from darkness into his marvellous 
light. 

Let us, dear brethren, not only be sure that our hearts 
are of the good-ground sort, and be sure that we have received 
and are developing the good seed, the Word of the 
Kingdom, but let us seek also to bring forth much fruit. 
Seeing that some of these may bring forth thirty, some sixty, 
and some an hundred-fold to the Master's praise, let us determine 
that by the grace of God, which we know is ours and 
will assist us, we will be of those who bring forth fruitage 
an hundred-fold— to our largest possible capacity and measure 
of service to our King. How may we increase our faithfulness? 
We answer, by increasing honesty of heart, which 
prepares us for increased measure of the seed and which enables 
us to bring this forward to perfection. The harvest is 
nigh: let us give diligence, therefore, while still there is opportunity, 
that the Master may find us fruit-bearing to the 
very largest degree of our possibilities of nature, surroundings 
and opportunities. 



R3765 : page 126 

PASSED BEYOND THE VAIL. 

ANOTHER member of the Board of Trustees of 
the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
Brother William M. Wright, passed beyond 
the vail, into the Most Holy, we trust, on April 3rd. 
He was well known and dearly beloved by the friends 
of the Truth in various parts, but especially by the 
Allegheny company, with whom he has lived and met 



for the past eight years. He was buried from the Bible 
House chapel on the 5th. 

We have every reason to hope that the deceased 
was not only called and chosen but faithful unto death. 
We had distinctly the evidence that he "loved the brethren" 
and delighted in laying down moments and hours 
of his life on their behalf. He died after a brief illness 
which came on while he was telling the divine plan of 
the ages to two of his sons and some of their acquaintance 
who had just returned with him from our Church 
service at Carnegie Hall on the 1st. 



R3765 : page 127 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS. 

DEAR BROTHER:— Several weeks ago we were 
studying 1 Thess. 3, where Brother Paul was expressing 
his love and concern for the brethren. One brother 
remarked that we could draw from this that an occasional 
letter to you would be appreciated. 

Realizing that I have been thoughtless in this matter, 
and out of a motive of love to you, will give you a 
few lines of testimony. 

My rejoicing in the glad message (which I have had 
in the last four years) has been the most profound experience 
of my life. The Bible is more and more commanding 
my reverence by its harmony, its beauty and 
its majesty, which can only be seen by observing God's 
order in its study, and can also say as much of my dear 
brethren here. 

We had a visitor at our public meeting last Sunday 
from a neighboring town, and the effect of sound doctrine 
on him may be of interest to you. He is a man of 
about thirty-six years and had been a drunkard for 
many years. Nine months ago he came in contact 
with the Truth through a brother in Christ and it appealed 
so forcibly to him that it allured him from his 
old habits. He is quite a sturdy student of the Bible 
now and has quite a ravenous appetite for the Truth. 
He is considering seriously a full surrender of himself 
to the Lord. His fellow-townsmen of the Babylonian 
frame of mind, seeing his wonderful reform, are 
at him on all sides to join their churches and to 
head a siege of the "joints," etc., but the spirit of a 
sound mind turns a deaf ear to these. The dear brother 
is running under a higher tension than the ordinary, 
but will not be tested beyond that which he can endure. 
Thank God! 

Praying for you, dear brother, that our heavenly 
Father may continue his care over you, I am yours in 
Christ to the glory of God. 

HUGO H. REIMER,-Colporteur. 



DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:-For some time I have 
been thinking of writing to you a brief statement concerning 
the Lord's dealings with me, and will do so now. 
I am rejoicing in the blessed hope set forth in the glorious 
gospel of Christ. I am truly grateful to my heavenly 
Father for permitting me to see and appreciate 
the wonderful truths which I now so clearly see, and I 
now especially thank you, his faithful steward, for the 
part you have had in opening the eyes of my understanding 
to these blessed truths, which so cheer and 
comfort me. 

My parents were Methodists, and when I was converted 
at the age of nineteen I joined the same denomination, 
and some years later became a minister, 
preaching during five and one-half years in the North-West 
Kansas Conference. I was a sincere and loyal 
minister in that denomination until the last year of my 
ministry, when I began to have a clearer and more 
Scriptural view of the character of God's Church, and 
I could no longer in good faith perform all the duties 
required of a Methodist minister. Then I asked for and 
received a certificate of location from the conference, 
and went back to my former trade, that of carpenter, 
meanwhile studying the Word of the Lord and asking 
for more light. 

Step by step the Lord has led me and given me 
light as I was ready to receive it, until a few years ago, 
in the providence of God, I was led to come to this 
place. Here, through the faithfulness of Brother S 



my attention was called to the MILLENNIAL DAWN 
books, and I scarcely need say I have seen a great 
light. I now see a beautiful harmony in the entire 
Scriptures such as I could not see before. 

I am rejoicing in the glorious prospect of the speedy 
beginning of the fulfilment of Dan. 2:44, and many other 
precious promises contained in the Word of God. 

Again I sincerely thank you, dear brother, for your 
faithfulness as God's steward in providing "meat in due 
season." Your brother in Christ, 

J. W. ADAMS.-California. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I feel moved to write 
and express my gratitude for the new light which has 
been shed upon the "Path of Life" through the influence 
of the "Plan of the Ages" and "The Time is at Hand." 
The Bible is a new book to me, and although I have 
read it for years I can truly say that I have learned 
more of the wonders of God's love from the reading of 
those two books than in all my years of misdirected 
study. 

I now prize the Bible as never before. Stumbling 
blocks have been removed. New light has come in. 



I have had a wonderful experience of God's love and 
direction. I have always craved more light, and in 
prayer asked God to grant me the true light, and the 
manner in which the WATCH TOWER came to my notice 
was God's answer to the prayer for light. 

In 1900, while located in G , as a local preacher 

for the Methodists, a sample copy of the TOWER came 

to a Mr. R , with whom I was living, and I read it with 

great interest, as it treated a subject with which I was 
having a great amount of trouble (the future state of 
the wicked). I could never accept the doctrine of eternal 
torment as the plan of a loving God. I wrote you 
for the TOWER and you sent it to me as requested, but 
I must truly confess that I did not give it the attention 
I should, but gave away some and left some without 
reading, for I was impressed with the idea that in 
reading the TOWER I was disloyal to the teachings of 
"my Church." 

In 1902 I withdrew from the Methodists and joined 
the Church of Christ, for they were not creed bound, 
and gave one liberty to study the Bible as the only "rule 
and guide for our faith and practice" and the Bible only 
as a creed to follow. Since that time I have devoted 
all my time to the study of the holy Book and have 
never preached a sermon without being able to give 
God's Word as proof. 

I have searched for the truth as a pearl of great 
price, and a few months ago the "Plan of the Ages" in 
WATCH TOWER form, came into my hands, and I read 
it with a mind freed from all sectarian prejudice, with 
the result of being led into more light. I have ordered 

R3766 : page 127 

the remainder of the series and shall continue to test 
them by the Word of Truth, and I have no doubt but 
they will lead into greater light. 

I shall try to preach sound doctrine hereafter, and 
when my people are unable to endure it they will have 
to find another preacher. 

I pray that God may bless you in your great work. 

Yours for the Truth, R. C. SMITH,--N.Y. 



page 129 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVII. MAY 1, 1906 No. 9 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 131 

The New Psychology 131 

Spiritual Unrest 131 

The Memorial Celebration 132 

The Convention at Akron, 135 

Pilgrim Requests Yearly 135 

Neither Male Nor Female in Christ Jesus 135 

Berean Bible Study for May— Evil Speaking and 

Evil Surmising 137 

The Sowing and the Reaping 137 

"Clothed and in His Right Mind" 140 

A Timely Warning to the Classes 143 

London, Eng., Convention 144 

Reading Six Dawns in One Year 130 

page 130 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3766 : page 130 

READING SIX DAWNS IN ONE YEAR. 



A sister recently wrote us that herself and daughter had 
begun the year with the resolution to read at least eight pages 
of the DAWNS each day, and remarked that by so doing they 
expected to reread the entire six volumes during the year 1906. 
The statement astonished us and we figured it out and sure 
enough the 3000 pages of the DAWNS can all be read in one 
year at the rate of eight pages per day. Even beginning now 
at twelve pages per day the entire six volumes could be 
mastered during 1906. 

It is wonderful what a blessing there is in watching the 
minutes— how much can be accomplished by system. We know 
of nothing so likely to be helpful to our WATCH TOWER readers 
as a fresh study yearly of the entire DAWN series. Besides, 
those who reread most assure us that they get an increase 
of blessing with each reading, and an increase of knowledge, 
too, because as their minds expand they are able to grasp more 
surely the depths of the divine plan. It is our experience that 
those who keep up their study of the DAWNS are not only the 
most thoroughly furnished in respect to the armor of God and 
the use of the Sword of the Spirit, but that they are thus kept 
by the power of God from snares of error which entangle 
others. And thus they are qualified to instruct others. 



R3766 :page 131 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE NEW PSYCHOLOGY. 



BY PROF. EDGAR L. LARKIN. 

The discoveries now being made in the great psychological 
laboratories of the world are of the highest 
possible interest. The leading psychologists now assert 
that the only difference between the minds of the 
lower animals and man is merely one of degree only. 
That is, the minds of men are of the same kind as those 
of all other animals, only many times stronger. 

Careful and long-continued experiments have demonstrated 
that even low types of animals have reason 
that differs only from that in man in degree. 

All organic beings are mere colonies of cells— i.e., 
cities of individual living entities. At present it is 
unknown what life is, but each cell is a center or source 



of life. Ganglia are nodes or collections of cells into 
smaller communities; and in the human brain different 
combinations of the same kinds of cells may produce 
different faculties of mind. For differing associations 
of the same kind of ultimate corpuscles— there is but 
one kind— give rise to all the phases revealed by ordinary 
chemistry, and by the spectroscope. The universe 
is made up of varying combines of life corpuscles 
into infinite diversity; and variations in thought, from 
late analysis of mind and brain, seem to be caused by 
varying clusters together of one kind of brain cells 
into ganglia. 

Mind is now known to be a product of brain activity 
—that is, mind is a result. Mice, birds, insects 
have been shown to be possessed of reason. Animals 
learn by experience and store this experience in memory 
for long periods of time. Love, affection, veneration, 
love of the beautiful, gratitude, conscience, consideration, 
contrition, sorrow, trouble, care, mercy, pity 
and many other attributes for long deemed to be human 
only are now known to be possessed by animals, in 
many cases to a high degree. 

Several books giving thousands of instances are 
published. The most rigid scrutiny made by careful 
and conservative scientific psychologists during the 
last twenty years has been totally unable to detect any 
trace in body or brain or find any analogy in nature 
concerning the existence of what is popularly called the 
soul. Blood cells build flesh, stomach cells digest and 
brain cells evolve mind. Psychologists are incapable 
of finding any difference between the three processes. 
In the present state of psychic science it is not known 
what mind is, but whatever it may be it is known that 
it is caused by the action of brain and nerve cells. 
When this activity ends all traces of mind come to an 
end. Cells that originate mind are far more complex 
than those that perform the office of secretion in glands. 
The secretion of mind is of greater complexity than the 
secretion of bile or gastric fluids. But all are developed 
by the work of cells. 

Perhaps the world is now ready to receive this generalization, 
thus: The human mind contains no faculty 
that cannot be found in the minds of animals, in 
less degree.— "New York Journal." 



Thus science is concluding with the Bible that man 
is "of the earth, earthly"— not a spirit being but "a little 
lower than the angels";— an animal soul in the image 
of God. As the head of all earthly creatures his faculties 
are on a far higher plane than theirs. Hence his 
joys and his sorrows, his pains and his pleasures are 
more intense. 

SPIRITUAL UNREST-THE WORLD'S VIEW 



"The signs of spiritual unrest abroad in the land 
multiply daily. 

"The enlightenment of the age is dissatisfied with 
dogmas which were accepted without reservation a generation 
ago and wants the creeds amended to conform 
to the liberal spirit of today. 

"The Episcopal Church sees in higher criticism a 
way to meet this demand. In brief, this criticism is to 
harmonize the contradictions in the Bible, to expunge 
miracles which have dubious claim to the supernatural 
and to retain those which are supported by reason and 
the strongest proofs. 

"Presbyterianism is gradually dismissing doctrines 

R3766 : page 132 

long held sacred, the most repugnant of which is predestination, 

which is abhorrent to the rising generation 

of the communion, and is otherwise setting itself 

abreast of modern thought. 

"Methodism is relaxing its devotion to beliefs long 
dear to its heart. The latest evidence of this is that 
its oldest and most conservative university, Depauw, 
at Greencastle, Ind., has ordered the study of the Bible 
to be optional where heretofore it has been obligatory. 
No denomination has exceeded the Methodist in devotion 
to the good book or been more insistent upon its 
reading wherever possible. This departure has awakened 
widespread attention and proves that in the most 
orthodox of denominations unrest is at work upsetting 
long-cherished doctrines. 

"The Baptists find their adherence to close communion 
prevents the Church from allying with itself a large 
following who are not members and who believe the 
sacraments should be open to them by virtue of attendance 
upon and belief in the Church, and, further, in aiding 
in its maintenance. 

"The Lutherans, like the Catholics, are so satisfied 
with ceremonials that the agitation for a modern interpretation 
of Scriptural pronouncements has made only 
slight headway. 

"Even intellectual churchmen look upon evangelical 
adherence to revelation as being the great and primary 
cause of backsliding and of swelling the millions 
outside of pulpit influence. They believe its most repellant 
doctrine, that of endless punishment after death, 
is the largest contributory cause in driving people toward 
infidelity and in fortifying the position of those 
who have long defied the invitation to come into the 
Church. 

"Higher criticism has a large clerical following, 
strange as it may seem. The men who have studied 
the subject more than any other class, who are actuated 



by the highest motives, believe that the time is at hand 
when something must be done to check the growth of 
unbelief, to present doctrines which can be conscientiously 
accepted by the enlightened and which in turn 
will prevent thousands from lapsing into indifferentism 
or worse— the complete rejection of the message from 
on high."— "Utica Press." 



R3767 : page 132 

THE MEMORIAL CELEBRATION 

ANOTHER celebration of the Memorial of our dear 
Redeemer's death has come and gone;— one 
less intervenes between the full end of the 
sufferings of the Christ and the glory which shall surely 
follow. Each one in its turn seems more precious than 
the former ones as we grow yearly in grace and in the 
knowledge of all that the Memorial signifies,— of the 
great ransom for all, our dear Redeemer's sacrifice, and 
of our wonderful privilege of being accepted as his 
"members" to share his cross and ignominy now and 
by and by to share his glory, honor and immortality. 

The gathering at Allegheny was one of the most 
enjoyable we have ever held, and by far the largest. 
The company was estimated at 800, nearly all of whom 
partook of the symbolical body and blood of Christ, a 
conservative estimate being 750. At a preceding meeting 
twenty-three adults symbolized their consecration 
unto death by water-immersion. The discourse preceding 
and introducing the "Supper" set forth the 
meaning of the institution, tracing it back to the original 
Passover of the first-born of Israel in Egypt down 
to the antitype Christ and his members or body, "the 
Church of the First-born." We saw that as only the 
first born of Israel were in danger in the type, so only 
the Church of the First-born are now in danger as respects 
the Second Death,— though all must later be 
tried for life everlasting or death everlasting. 

As we broke the unleavened bread we remembered 
our Lord's words, "This is my body." We discerned 
that he meant, This represents or symbolizes my body, 
—that he could not have meant that the bread had been 
turned into flesh, because he had not yet been crucified, 
but still had his body of flesh. We partook of the symbol, 
meditating in our hearts that only by reason of our 
Lord's sacrifice could we be justified from sin-and-death 
condemnation. By faith we appropriated our 
Lord's pure manhood, sacrificed for us and for all. 

Then we took the further view brought to our attention 
by the Apostle Paul (I Cor. 10:16,17), that the 
consecrated members of Christ are reckoned in with 
him as members of one greater loaf, which is being broken 
throughout this Gospel age, and will be the bread 



of life of which the whole world will partake during the 
Millennium if they would have everlasting life. 

We partook of the "fruit of the vine" as a remembrancer 
of our Lord's cup of self-sacrifice and of our 
pledge to share it with him. "The cup of blessing 
which we bless, is it not a communion of the blood of 
Christ?" He is the vine, we are the branches, and 
every branch must bear the fruit of sacrifice. "If we 
suffer with him we shall also reign with him." We 
who hope for immortality by a share in "his resurrection," 
we who hope thus to have inherent life, life in 
ourselves, do well to remember that our Lord has specifically 
stated the terms to be that we must drink of 
his cup, his blood (consecration), as well as eat of his 
flesh (justification). 

We again reminded the dear flock that this season 
of the year seems to be one of peculiar testing; and 
that this will probably be increasingly the case as we 
near the final Memorial on this side the vail. We reminded 
them that noble Peter almost fell at the same 
time that the ignoble Judas sold his Master for thirty 
pieces of silver. We reminded all of the Master's words, 
which, if heeded, would have spared Peter so severe a 
test— "Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation!" 

The fiery trial is necessary for the separating of the 
gold of the New Creature from the dross of the old creature. 
The "wheat" must not only be separated from the 
"tares," but then it must be threshed and winnowed ere it 

R3767 : page 133 

is fit for the garner. All of our experiences in connection 
with these harvest siftings accord with the Apostle's 
words: "Grievous wolves shall enter in among you, not 
sparing the flock [self-seeking ones who never were 
true sheep], and from among your own selves shall 
men arise, speaking perverse things to draw away the 
disciples after themselves."— Acts 20:29,30. 

The safe course is to watch and pray, lest we be ensnared 
by the Adversary either by old or new methods. 
If our hearts be full of loyalty to the Lord it will hinder 
"man-worship" of every form, including idolatry of self. 
If additionally we are "filled with the spirit" of meekness, 
gentleness, patience, brotherly kindness— Love- 
it will prevent barrenness and unfruitfulness, and drive 
out every vestige of anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife, 
and all other works of the flesh and the devil. Thus 
doing, dearly beloved, very soon the Chief Shepherd 
will grant us an abundant entrance into the everlasting 
Kingdom. 

GENERAL REPORTS FAVORABLE 

As we write (April 24) we have before us reports 
from 337 Memorial celebrations on April 8th. Quite 
well indeed— improving in promptness every year. Ten 



of these reports are from Great Britain. The numbers in 
attendance ranged from two up to the largest number, 
which met at Allegheny. The average of all was 20 plus: 
the total reported is 6,267. Although this total is far beyond 
that of any previous celebration it leaves much to 
be desired. We are now issuing 30,000 copies of the 
WATCH TOWER twice a month, and two readers to each 
would show 60,000 earnest Bible students. Of that 
number, surely many more should feel a deep interest 
in celebrating their Redeemer's death in harmony with 
his injunction. We hope to hear from a much larger 
number next year. 

We here give the names of the gatherings reporting 
20 and over participating: 

New Brighton, Pa., 20; Carbondale, Pa., 20; Johnstown, 
Pa., 21; St. Petersburg, Fla., 21; Olive Branch, La., 22; 
W. Medford, Mass., 22; Springfield, Mass., 23; Canton, O., 
23; Worcester, Mass., 23; Milwaukee, Wis., 23; Danbury, 
O., 23; Omaha, Neb., 24; Tampa, Fla., 24; Pasadena, 
Calif., 24; Newark, N.J., 25; Tiffin, O., 25; Cohoes, N.Y., 
25; Atlanta, Ga., 25; Cedar Rapids, la., 25; Schenectady, N.Y.. 
25; Dallas, Tex., 25; Reedy, Va., 26; Hayne, N.C., 27; 
Youngstown, O., 27; San Antonio, Tex., 27; Richmond, 
Va., 30; Wheeling, W.Va., 30; Decatur, Ills., 34; Louisville, 
Ky., 35; San Francisco, Calif., 35; Binghamton, N.Y., 36; 
Buffalo, N.Y., 37; Lynn, Mass., 39; Altoona, Pa., 40; 
Dayton, O., 43; Kansas City, Kan., 44; Valdosta, Ga., 
45; St. Paul and Minneapolis, Minn., 49; Toledo, O., 
55; Scranton, Pa., 56; Providence, R.I., 58; Cincinnati, 
O., 58; Toronto, Canada, 61; Columbus, O., 74; Indianapolis, 
Ind., 78; St. Louis, Mo., 88; Cleveland, O., 99; 
Washington, D.C., 103; Philadelphia, Pa., 108; New 
York, N.Y., 140; Los Angeles, Calif., 155; Chicago, Ills., 
170; Boston, Mass., 176; Allegheny, Pa., 750. 

In Great Britain: Leeds, 22; Seven Oaks, 30; Bristol, 
32; Luton, 39; Manchester, 80; Liverpool, 148; 
Glasgow, 153; London, 248. 

In Germany: Barmen-Elberfeld, 90; Wanne, 40. 

page 133 
A FEW INTERESTING REPORTS FROM ELSEWHERE 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In Philadelphia last evening 108 partook of the emblems 
of bread and wine in memoriam of our Lord's 
death. We rejoiced in our justification and renewed 
our consecration to be broken with Him and partake of 
His sufferings. We had a blessed time. The evening 
previous, eleven— five brothers and six sisters— symbolized 
their consecration by water baptism. 

With Christian love, E. D., Philadelphia, Pa. 



DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 



For the Church at Brantford, I have the pleasure to 
inform you that 16 souls met last night to memorialize 
with bread and wine our Lord's death for us and our 
death with him, the meeting being conducted as nearly 
in the prescribed order as we were able. May God so 
bless this feast for us that we may be strengthened in 
the great race. 

The meeting was led by Brother A S , who gave 

us a very good discourse on the Memorial Supper, 
showing clearly how, why and when it was instituted 
and who can partake of it without condemnation. 

We think that this anniversary of our Lord's death 
has been the most precious of any that we have yet observed, 
because the spirit of love has been growing 
among us during this last year. It seems that all of 
the little company here have been drawn closer together 
lately than ever before. 

In our prayers we counted it a privilege to remember 
the joint-sacrificers who were everywhere participating 
in the same service. All join me in love to you and 
the other beloved members at Allegheny. 
L. W., Brantford, Ont. 



R3768 : page 133 

DEAR FRIENDS :- 

In accordance with the suggestion in the WATCH 
TOWER I send you a report of the Memorial gathering 
of the little company at New Bedford last evening. 
Every one present seemed to appreciate the meaning of 
the Memorial perhaps as never before. The article in 
WATCH TOWER of April 1 was read, giving all a clear 
idea of the Supper as instituted by the Savior. An unusual 
feature of the meeting was the presence with us 
of seven Portuguese brothers and sisters, with their 
leader, one of our number, who read I Cor. 1 1:20-29 in 
his own language and offered prayer, after which they 
"sang a hymn." Not one of our company could understand 
a word, but it was inspiring and uplifting, giving 
us the happy thought that our Father understands all 
languages and we are all one in him. 

Eighteen were present. All send greetings to the 
Allegheny Church. With love, 

M. B., Massachusetts. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The Memorial was observed by four of the brethren 
at the Penitentiary last Sunday evening. We are all 
rejoicing that we had the opportunity to meet together 
and again renew our pledges to the Lord. We feel that 
it is a wonderful privilege that we should be permitted 
to fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ. 



The recurrence of the Memorial season is attended with 
great blessings to each one, as it strengthens us to 
meet the trials and testings which are necessary for the 
developing of our character, joyfully. I ask an interest 

R3768 : page 134 

in your prayers that we continue faithful in the narrow 
way until the end. 
I remain, your brother in Christ, 

G. E., Columbus, O. 



page 134 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The friends of St. Paul and Minneapolis met this 
evening together in celebration of the Memorial. To 
me, and I believe to all of the friends, this was a solemn 
occasion. Our simple service was a reminder of 
the first one conducted by our Lord the last night of 
his human existence. We felt near to him, felt keenly 
our own personal unworthiness to partake of his sufferings, 
and a realization of his exalted worthiness which 
he has so freely applied on our behalf. Praise be to 
God for such a Savior! 

There were 43 present, while the emblems were 
sent to six, three brothers and three sisters, who were 
unable to attend on account of sickness. 

In the forenoon a meeting was held, when a lesson 
on baptism was given, after which eight— three brothers 
and five sisters— symbolized their consecration unto 
death by immersion into water. It gave us all joy to 
witness this. 

Mention was made to the Lord in your behalf, that 
he would continue to bless you in his service and bear 
you over every trial to the end. We feel so thankful 
for the Truth and for the continual "meat in due season" 
which the Lord is sending us through you. 

And now, with much Christian love, I am, yours 
faithfully in Christ, J. H., St. Paul, Minn. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Last evening the Cleveland Church held the meeting 
in commemoration of the Lord's death. The event 
this year was very impressive and will long be remembered 

by all present. As Brother K explained the 

significance of the emblems our hearts were filled with 
thankfulness to our dear Redeemer for this great sacrifice 
on our behalf. Though the occasion was a sad one 
as we thought of the ignominy and shame our Lord 
passed through, yet we rejoiced that he has gained the 
victory and is exalted to a glorious position. There 



were 99 participators, and we realized our Lord's sweet 
presence with us as we partook of the emblems which 
represented his broken body and shed blood. We remembered 
you all, as well as the little classes of like 
precious faith everywhere and we felt we were remembered 
by you all. 

A baptism service preceded the meeting, at which 
nine were symbolically immersed in water, thereby 
showing the immersion of the heart into the will of 
Christ. It was a solemn and affecting service, not for 
them alone, but for the rest of us who had already consecrated 
our lives and laid our little all at the Master's 
feet. Oh, may we all prove faithful and rejoice that we 
are counted worthy to suffer for his sake, and by his 
grace may we reach the goal and receive the "Well done, 
good and faithful servant." 

May the Lord's richest blessing abide with you and 
those who colabor with you in the grand harvest work. 

Yours with Christian love, M. S., Cleveland, O. 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

One hundred and forty-nine souls assembled here 
to partake of the symbols of the shed blood and broken 
body of our Lord and Redeemer, besides which number 
six, who were unable to leave their homes, were served 
there. It was indeed a solemn and blessed time and 

few eyes were dry as Bro. G called attention to the 

meaning of the symbols and what was implied as we 
partook. It was an additionally solemn thought as we 
noted that some who were with us last year had passed 
to their reward, and that another season would find others 
missing from earthly scenes. Prayers of fervency 
were offered for every member of the one body wherever 
it might be; also thanksgiving for the privileges of the 
present time. 

May the dear Lord continue to use you in ministering 
to the household of faith is our earnest prayer. 

Yours in the one hope, 

F. S., Los Angeles, Calif. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It rejoices my heart to make the following report: 
There were two impressive services held under the auspices 
of the Scranton class to commemorate our blessed 
Lord's sufferings and death; the one in Carbondale, 
being served by Scranton elders, for the first time enjoyed 
this glorious privilege of meeting on an occasion 

like this. With 20 present Brother G appropriately 

called attention to the real meaning of the celebration. 
The other in Scranton, with 56 present, was conducted 

by Brother W , who fittingly led the thought along 

those lines which should bring out and forcibly impress 



the heart with the deep meaning of those events of 
Christ's life coming down to us over a period of 1873 
years. 

The number present in Scranton has doubled since 
1900, and, together with the Carbondale gathering, gives 
the encouraging total of 76. 

Very sincerely your brother in Christ, 
J. H., Scranton, Pa. 



FROM THE GERMAN BRANCH 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

With thankfulness toward God and our Lord Jesus 
Christ I make this little report of the Memorial celebration 
in Barmen-Elberfeld. There were over 90 who 
partook of the emblems this year, as against 64 last 
year. In the afternoon preceding ten of the friends 
were immersed in symbol into Christ's death. We may 
hope that many if not all hearts went out in worship 
in spirit and in truth toward the living and true God 
and our Savior. It is with much pleasure we notice 
this growth of interest, and our constant prayer is that 
the Lord might finish the work of faith and grace with 
power from on high, seeing it is God who giveth the 
increase. May this Memorial give us new strength for 
another year, or less, if it should be "unto the end" of 
our race. 

Brother Kunkel served the friends in Wanne, quite 
recently interested in Present Truth. About 40 
partook of the emblems there, which was a great surprise, 
for it is only a year since the interest began to 
take root and to spread, through the energies of a 
brother who himself had become interested through 
finding a Volunteer TOWER in which some coal miner 
had brought a lunch. 

Your brother and servant in Christ, 

O. A. KOETITZ,--Germany. 



R3767 : page 135 

THE CONVENTION AT AKRON, O. 

THE Convention at Akron, Ohio, on April 15 was a 
joyful occasion for many of us. The Cleveland 
class chartered an electric car, and were present 
to the number of 77, with faces beaming with the light 
of the knowledge of the glory of the Lord. Others were 
from other nearby places. The Akron class of about 
15 was thus encouraged by the presence of about 200 
brethren from outside. 

A Testimony Meeting came first. Many told briefly 
of their joy in the Lord since coming to an intelligent 



understanding of the Scriptures. Just at the close of 
the meeting a man arose who said: "I want to thank 
God for the blessing that has come through MILLENNIAL 
DAWN to myself and others who are striving to live 
manly lives, decent lives, clean lives from the world's 
standpoint." Educated for the ministry and for a time 
a preacher, he had lapsed into infidelity and irreligion 
for some years. He became a book-binder and noticing 
the quantities of DAWNS passing through the bindery he 
read some from curiosity. The first two chapters of 
Volume VI., he declared, lifted him out of infidelity by 
giving him fresh confidence in the Bible. This led to 
his study and acceptance of all the DAWN teachings— 
except that he had never consecrated his life to the 
Lord. He was glad to testify that what he had learned 
gave him higher aspirations toward a manly life. 

The Testimony meeting was followed by a discourse 
on the Resurrection (the first of a series of seven) 
which many of you have read in the public prints, and 
to which we need not here refer more particularly. The 
Akron friends very generously had an excellent luncheon 
provided, which was heartily relished by about 125 
of us. 

The afternoon public meeting was held in Music 
Hall. The friends had evidently done their advertising, 
etc., "as unto the Lord," and had done it well; for 
there was an immense crowd for a place of the size. 
The hall is said to seat 1430, and about 170 stood 
throughout, while about 100 could not get admittance 
because there was not even standing room for them. 
The Lord granted us great liberty in proclaiming his 
plan of salvation for our sin-cursed race, and the audience 
gave profound attention. We trust that some 
were helped nearer to the Lord in faith and obedience. 
After this service the bookbinder mentioned foregoing 
came forward saying that the love of God constrained 
him, and that he had given his little all to the Lord- 
henceforth, forever. 



page 135 

YEARLY REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM VISITS. 

OUR "Pilgrim" service is becoming a very important 
factor in the "Harvest" work. While the 
brethren chosen for this service are not sent 
forth as perfect, the Society considers them worthy 
brethren everyway— ensamples to the flock in doctrine 
and practice. They travel continuously, as per announcements 
on the last page of the TOWER. All of 
their expenses, of every kind, are met by the Society: 
they do not solicit money or anything else, either for 
themselves or the Society. The service is free— the expenses 
being borne by the contributors to the Tract 



Fund. We seek divine guidance as to who shall be 
engaged in this service and where it shall be rendered. 
With the means put at our disposal we seek to do our 
best for the general welfare of the Lord's cause. 

The routine of the Pilgrims is in circuits arranged 
in harmony with the interest shown and requests received; 
and since many changes occur during a year 
we desire that REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM VISITS be made 
yearly, in May. Please answer the following questions, 
or as many of them as apply in your case. These responses 
are filed for our information for twelve months. 
You need not repeat the questions, but merely indicate 
them thus: (a), (b), etc. A postal card will serve our 
every purpose and be easy to file away. All interested 
classes please attend to this matter at once. 

(a) How many "Bible Students" reside in your vicinity? 

(b) Are weekly meetings held by you? 

(c) How many are usually in attendance? 

(d) Where do you now meet? 

(e) At what hours are the Sunday studies held? 

(f) Was a vote taken on the "Pilgrim" invitation? 

(g) How many voted for the invitation to be sent? 
(h) How many, if any, voted against the invitation? 
(i) Would a suitable place be found for a public 
meeting? 

(j) What attendance do you think could be secured for 

the public session by such notification and advertising 

as your class would give? 

(k) Would a suitable place be found for semi-private 

meetings for the interested? 

(1) Have the members of your class chosen leaders in 

accord with DAWN Vol. VI., chapters 5 and 6? If 

so, give names and full addresses of the two to 

whom notification of a Pilgrim coming should be 

sent, and please notify us of any changes. 

(m) Give full name and address of the one who has volunteered 

to entertain the Pilgrim. 

(n) If your town is not on a railroad give name of proper 

railroad station to stop at and tell how Pilgrim 

could get from station. Would he be met? 

(o) Give writer's name and address in full. 



R3768 : page 135 

NEITHER MALE NOR FEMALE IN CHRIST JESUS. 

--GALATIANS 3:28- 

THE APOSTLE'S words above are often quoted to 
prove something that was far from his intention. 

We do not blame those who misuse the quotation, 
nor charge that they are endeavoring to wrest the 
Scriptures; rather we give them credit for sincerity of 
intention, but presume that either they are not thorough 



Bible students or else that in the fall their reasoning 
faculties have been seriously injured, and that they 

R3768 : page 136 

have not yet ascertained the defect and learned how to 
rectify the same so as to have the spirit of a sound 
mind in an examination of this Scripture. The class 
we refer to seem to get the impression that the Apostle 
means that after we have become the Lord's people, 
after we have made full consecration to him, there is 
no longer any difference between males and females, 
that amongst believers the ordinary sex distinctions 
may be dispensed with, that men may treat the women 
as though they were men, and women may treat the 
men as though they were women. This is very false 
reasoning, a total perversion of the Apostle's intention 
in the words quoted. Wherever the sex distinctions are 
ignored there is danger to the morals of all concerned. 

The Apostle's argument taken as a whole cannot 
properly be construed as countenancing any disregard 
of sex distinctions. The Christian man is to be no less 
chaste and reserved than when he was a worldly man. 
The higher ideals of his new relationship with the Lord 
should make him more discreet, more highminded, 
more careful everyway of propriety and true manliness 
in word, in thought, and in conduct. The Christian 
woman is to be no less pure in thought, in word, in 
conduct, than she was before she came into relationship 
with Christ. The Apostle uses the illustration of 
a chaste virgin. The word virgin signifies pure, and 
the word chaste implies a very special kind of purity, 
chastity, discretion— separateness from anything that 
could sully the spotless robe of Christ's imputed 
righteousness. 

We realize well the sentiment leading to this 
misunderstanding of the Apostle's words. We concede 
that the pure love for the Lord Jesus coming into the 
consecrated heart tends to separate it more and more 
from the world and the worldly and the sinful, and that 
the tendrils of the heart's affections naturally seek 
some other support, some other fellowship, and that 
the fellowship of kindred minds in Christ becomes the 
chief attraction. We well understand, too, that while 
this attraction is to all who are the Lord's, male and 
female alike, there is necessarily a special sex attraction 
which is not destroyed by the transformation of 
our love and affection from worldly to heavenly things. 
Rather the heavenly mind operating through the human 
brain will still appreciate the attractions of the opposite 
sex. We agree, too, that the family relationship 
subsisting between the members of the Church, represented 
by the words brother and sister, signify very 
close and very dear relationship, and that the Scriptures 
authorize this— that we should regard our Lord 
Jesus as our elder brother and our Bridegroom, and 



each other as brethren and sisters in the Lord. 

We are not arguing against the proper recognition 
of these terms of precious relationship; we are not arguing 
against the proper enjoyment of this spiritual 
relationship; we are merely cautioning against any 
tendency to ignore or set aside the differences and barriers 
which even nature enjoins upon us as between 
the sexes. Between brothers and sisters of blood relationship 
there should be indeed warm affection, but 
never an ignoring of sex distinctions. A sister should 
always be treated as a sister, a brother should always 
be treated as a brother, and modesty and purity should 
ever guard the happiness of the relationship. And this 
should be no less the rule amongst those who have become 
New Creatures in Christ Jesus, to whom "old 
things have passed away and all things have become 
new." Rather these should be the more on guard, remembering 
that the relationship is merely spiritual and 
not a fleshly one. 

This is indeed the consecrated key to the right understanding 
of the Apostle's words. When elsewhere 
he declares, "Ye are not in the flesh but in the spirit," 
no one understands him to mean that we have no flesh, 
and that the flesh must not be recognized and governed 
and kept under control. The very reverse is his 
thought, that we as New Creatures are no longer to be 
guided and controlled by the earthly interests, but especially 
by the spiritual interests. We have the two 
standpoints, both true: 

(1) From the world's standpoint and from our own 
actual standpoint we are still in the flesh; we still have 
its weaknesses and blemishes to contend with, to fight 
against, to overcome. 

(2) From the Lord's standpoint we are no longer 
human or fleshly beings but spirit beings— that is to 

say, he is dealing with us according to our new resolution, 
our new standing as newly begotten creatures in 
Christ. He is not judging us according to the weaknesses 
and frailties of the flesh, but according to the 
desires and intentions of the new mind. But the new 
mind will assuredly control the flesh to the extent of 
its ability, and nothing could be more unwise than for 
it to ignore the flesh and to expose itself to peculiar 
temptations of the flesh through a misunderstanding 
of the Apostle's words, "There is neither male nor female 
in Christ Jesus." 

What does the Apostle mean? We reply: The 
teaching is that God accepts all those who come unto 
him through Christ without distinctions as to race or 
wealth or servitude or honor amongst men, or sex distinctions. 
In Christ we are one— that is to say, from 
God's standpoint he treats us as one, and has blessings 
for each and for all in the divine arrangement. Take 
the remainder of the Apostle's statement, "there is 
neither bond nor free in Christ Jesus." He does not 
mean by this that the slave who comes into relationship 



as a member of the body of Christ is to be considered 
a free man, and that he is to use his time, etc., in 
disregard of his master's wishes. On the contrary the 
Apostle says, "Art thou called being a slave, seek not to 
be free." That is to say, Do not consider that freedom 
is necessary to your spiritual welfare; the Lord is as 
able to bless you and to bring you off an overcomer as 
a slave as though you were the master and wealthy. 
In some respects indeed the slave position may be 
more favorable to the attainment of the character necessary 
to a share in the Kingdom than the position of 
the Master would be. The slave was to know, however, 
that the Lord would not take notice of his slavery as 

R3769 : page 137 

respects his hopes for a place in the future Kingdom; 
he would have as good if not better chance for honor in 
the Kingdom than if he were the master, because the 
circumstances of life are really against the rich, the 
wise, the noble, the great. Likewise the Jew and the 
Greek: The Jew was not to think that because of the 
favor granted to his nation in the past that he would 
still have a preferential place in the Church and in the 
coming Kingdom; the Greek was not to think that because 
the Jew had been cut off from favor that therefore 
he would be disfavored in the eyes of the Lord as 
respects a place in the Kingdom. Both were to know 
that God would ignore their natural differences of language, 
heredity, etc., and reward each according to his 
faithfulness as a member of the body of Christ, irrespective 
of birth or station or sex or nation. 

We are not discussing the natural differences between 
males and females; we have discussed that 
question elsewhere, and shown that the Lord has adapted 
the one to the other, so that each is the complement 
of the other. We are not here discussing the public 
ministries of the Church, and to what extent these are 
open to males and females, according to the divine arrangement 
—the divine Word. That subject we have 
dealt with elsewhere. We are here endeavoring specially 
to demonstrate that the Apostle's words in our text 
have no reference whatever to the earthly interests and 
associations of the people of God— that they merely relate 
to our standing before the Lord and our hopes and 
prospects as respects the Kingdom of glory, to which 
we have been called and for which we are striving to 
make our calling and election sure. The Apostle's 
words comfort us all when rightly understood, assuring 
us that if we attain a place in the Kingdom it will 
not be on account of our sex, race or condition as human 
beings. 



R3769 : page 137 



BEREAN BIBLE STUDY FOR MAY. 

--FOR EXPLANATION SEE PREFACE OF WATCH TOWER 
BIBLES AND WATCH TOWER, MARCH 1, 1905.- 

EVIL SPEAKING AND EVIL SURMISING 

IT is suggested that leaders of Berean Classes endeavor 
to hold the discussion of each question to its 
legitimate domain. Otherwise later questions will 
have been found partially discussed yet not thoroughly 
digested and much less satisfactory. 

The leader should STUDY the entire lesson and each 
member of the class should STUDY the portion or question 
assigned to him or her, if the largest possible good 
would be derived. The DAWNS and booklets and TOWERS 
cited should be at hand, and so marked as to be 
readily referred to without a moment's delay. The 
DAWNS are referred to by the first six letters of the alphabet, 
the booklets by initial letters and the WATCH 
TOWER by Z. 

1. What is evil speaking? Jas. 3:8-10. Z/99-68 (2nd 
col. par. 1, 2.) 

2. How prevalent is this fault among even those who 
profess to be Christians? Z. '99-69 (1st col. par. 1). 

3. What is the power of the tongue? Jas. 3. F. 586-588; 
Z/99-75 (2nd col. par. 1); Z/97-156 (1st col. 

par. 2). 

4. What is meant by a "tongue set on fire of gehenna"? 
Jas. 3:6. Z/00-98 (1st col., par. 5, 6). 

5. What are the baneful influences of evil speaking, 
and what are some of the excuses and subterfuges 
offered by the fallen nature? Z/99-69 (1st 

col. par. 2) to 70 (2nd col. par. 3); Z/99-72 (1st col. 
par. 2 to 5). 

6. What is evil surmising and what is its relation to 
evil speaking? Z. '05-213 (1st col. par. 3 to 2nd 

col. par. 3.) 

7. What are "secret faults," and of what two kinds are 
they? Z/98-22 (1st col. par. 1). 

8. Is an evil suggestion a sin, and how does it become 
a secret fault? Z. '98-22 (1st col. par. 2 and 2nd 

col. par. 1); Z. '00-32 (1st col. par. 1). 

9. What is a "presumptuous sin," and when does a secret 
fault become a presumptuous sin? Z. '98-22 

(2nd col. par. 1). 

10. What is the "great transgression" to which these 
sins lead? Z. '98-22 (2nd col. par. 1). 

1 1 . How may we purify and keep our hearts pure from 
these sins? Z/99-215 (2nd col. par. 1) to 217; Z/98-22 
(2nd col. par. 2) to 23 (1st col. par. 5). 

12. How is the Lord judging us? Matt. 12:34-37. Z. '96-30 
(1st col. par. 1, 2). 

13. Why should we render to God a daily account of any 
"idle" (pernicious) words? Z. '96-32 (1st col. par. 



4) to 33 (1st col. par. 1, 2). 

14. How are words the index of our hearts? Luke 6:45. 
Z/96-22 (1st col. par. 4 and 2nd col. par. 1); Z/96-32 
(1st col. par. 1). 

15. What does purity of heart signify? Z. '02-358 (2nd 
col. par. 3); Z.'05-230 (2nd col. par. 1); Z/98-25 (2nd 
col. par. 3). 

16. What is the importance of a pure heart? 1 Sam. 16:7. 
Z. '04-22 (2nd col. par. 6) and 23 (1st col. par. 

1 to 3); Z/01-325 (1st col. par. 4 to 2nd col. par. 1) Z/99-140 
(1st col. par. 2). 

17. How may purity of heart be attained? Z. '00-359 
(2nd col. par. 1) to 360 (2nd col. par. 2). 

18. How do we know our motive is pure, since "the 
heart is deceitful above all things"? Z. '00-359 

(1st col. par. 1 to 3). 

19. What is the relation between our conscience and 
purity of heart? Z. '00-360 (2nd col. par. 2). 

(To be continued for June.) 



R3769 : page 137 

THE SOWING AND THE REAPING. 

-MATTHEW 13:24-30,36-43.-MAY 6.- 

"Whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also reap."— Gal. 6:7. 

OUR LORD followed his parable showing the four 

kinds of hearers of the Word (illustrated by the 

wayside, the stony ground, the thorny ground and 

the good ground) with the parable of the wheat and the 

tares, which is the center of this lesson. An intimate connection 

between the two parables is to be observed. The 

majority who heard the Lord's message opposed it directly 

or indirectly. The parable of the sower represents the four 

R3769 : page 138 

classes willing to hear at all, and shows us that but one 
class of hearers could possibly bring forth the good fruit. 
The present parable shows some of the difficulties which 
interfere with the best hearers, the best hearts, some with 
the best seed. 

The parable as a whole is a picture of the Kingdom of 
heaven— not in its complete and glorious Millennial reign, 
but in its embryo condition, in process of development. 
The Kingdom of glory will be the Church in glory, as the 
Kingdom in embryo is the Church under present conditions, 
called to glory, honor and immortality, but first experiencing 
trials and difficulties which must be battled 
against by those who would make their calling and election 
sure to a share in the glory that is to follow. This Kingdom 
class did not begin with Adam nor with Noah nor with Moses, 



but with Christ. There was no Kingdom seed, no Kingdom 

promises and hopes planted, until Christ came, who 

brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel. (2 Tim. 1:10.) 

As the Apostle declares, this great salvation, which 

at the first began to be spoken by our Lord, was confirmed 

unto us by them that heard him. (Heb. 2:3.) It was the 

Son of man who sowed this good seed, and the members of 

his body from his day until now have continued the work— 

—the apostles being most prominent therein. 

SATAN SOWED THE TARES 

"While men slept his enemy came and sowed tares 
among the wheat." This enemy our Lord explains is Satan 
—"the enemy that sowed them is the devil." On this statement 
Dr. Abbott wisely comments thus, "Observe that here, 
as elsewhere, the personality of the devil is recognized by 
our Lord in unmistakable terms. This is no parable, but 
the interpretation of a parable; it is no concession to popular 
prejudice, for it is uttered to his own disciples alone." 

The statement that this was done "while men slept" 
may be interpreted, first, as signifying that while the Lord 
and the apostles lived the enemy did not have the opportunity 
for introducing the tare element; that it was done after 
their death, when they had fallen asleep. It is equally true 
that Satan did this sowing of tares while the entire Church 
slept, in the sense of not being wide awake to their 
duties and privileges. Such a period of drowsiness and 
slumber, non-alertness as respects the Truth, prevailed 
amongst the Lord's people for centuries, which are known 
to the civilized world as the "dark ages." Even yet the 
same thing is true in large measure, and the Apostle's words 
are appropriate, "Let us not sleep as do others." (1 Thess. 5:6.) 
Many of the Lord's true followers have been dreaming 
about the conversion of the world, while the great enemy, 
Satan, has been sowing tares with liberal hand in their very 
midst— or, as the Apostle Peter explains it, "bringing in damnable 
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them."— 
2 Peter 2:1. 

DARNEL COUNTERFEITS WHEAT 

There are various kinds of tares in Palestine, but the 

R3770 : page 138 

most troublesome kind and the kind evidently referred to in 
the parable is known as "bearded darnel." It looks exactly 
like the wheat when springing up, and not until the maturity 
of the head is the difference discernible. Then the 
wheat, weighted with golden grains, humbly bows its head, 
while the tares stand straight, the heads having little weight 
and the seeds being black. At this time the difference between 
the tares and the wheat becomes clearly discernible. 

Passing from the parable picture to the reality, we find 
the good seed, the gracious promises of the Kingdom, which 



the Lord showed has brought forth the children of the Kingdom 

—true Christians who appreciate the Kingdom, who 

have thankfully accepted the Lord's proposition of their becoming 

heirs with him in that Kingdom and who heartily 

lay hold upon the terms of joint-heirship, that they must 

suffer with him if they would reign with him. (Rom. 8:17.) 

These Christians as they develop bring forth much fruit, 

some thirty, some sixty and some an hundred grains, representing 

the fruits and graces of the holy Spirit— representing 

them as New Creatures in Christ Jesus, "God's workmanship 

created in Christ Jesus unto good works"— begotten of the 

Spirit through the Word of Truth. (Eph. 2: 10.) Contrarywise 

the darnel class are those not begotten of the Truth but 

of error— misled into forms of godliness without its real 

power. 

THE DEVIL SOWED THE DARNEL 

Who planted the seeds of error which have developed 
this class? The Scriptures answer, Satan, the devil. But 
why should he plant or develop any teachings that would 
bring forth imitation Christians, those who are outwardly 
godly? Would he not rather plant seeds of immorality, etc.? 
We answer that he already has a large part of the field, the 
world, under cultivation along the lines of ignorance, superstition, 
etc., as the Apostle declares— the heathen worship 
devils. (1 Cor. 10:20.) The work of Satan as represented 
in this parable is one of expectancy. He is not so anxious 
for the development of the tare class as he is anxious to 
choke the wheat. This purpose can better be accomplished 
by the sowing of tares than by other sowings, which from 
the first would show widely in contrast and could be exterminated. 
It is the fact that the darnel-tare exactly resembles 
the wheat for a considerable time, which makes it the 
more dangerous, the more troublesome to eradicate. And so 
it is with the tare class of Christendom: respectable, educated, 
influential in outward morals and demeanor, closely 
resembling the Lord's consecrated ones, there is no means of 
discerning their different character at first. 

GATHERING OUT THE TARES 

In the parable the servants inquired of the Master 
whether or not they should pull up the tares, but 
his answer is that the tares are so abundant that this 
procedure would be unwise, impossible. In eastern countries 
a certain amount of tares spring up with the wheat 
anyway, and these the servants gather out as soon as discerned, 
because the darnel seed is poisonous. So with the 
Church: the parable would be true if the Lord had left out 
all reference to the enemy sowing the tares amongst the 
wheat, and if then he had proceeded to say that certain tares 
sprang up with it. Naturally there would be some imitation 
Christians with the true anyway, just as darnel is usually 
found amongst the wheat in that country. But our Lord 
wished to show an abnormal condition— that the tare seed 



was specially sown for the very purpose of choking the 
wheat. This is in harmony with the Apostle's statement, 

R3770 : page 139 

"We wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with wicked 
spirits in high positions."— Eph. 6:12. 

We have today not merely the natural downward tendency 
of the human heart toward forms of godliness 
without the power, but, far worse than this, the wicked 
spirits— Satan and his associates, fallen angels— have been 
plotting against the divine plan and operating with a view 
to thwarting the same all through this age. The Master in 
this parable showed that he foreknew all this and that it 
was a part of the divine plan to permit it. In permitting it 
the Lord does not endorse it nor make himself responsible 
for it, but he will eventually so overthrow it as to bring out 
of the evil certain valuable lessons for all eternity. 

One of the lessons most difficult for the Lord's true 
people to learn is that the masses of Christendom are tares, 
having merely the form of godliness but knowing nothing of 
its inward power. As they see the wheat-field overrun with 
these they are inclined to think that the majority must be 
the wheat, and the comparatively few stocks that are real 
wheat they are inclined to consider fanatical extremists. 
Only those who are themselves begotten of the Spirit 
through the Word of truth, the good seed of the Kingdom- 
only these as they ripen are prepared to properly discriminate 
and to note the difference of fruitage, and, looking 
backward, to draw their comparisons as between the Lord, 
the apostles and the early believers, and the true wheat of 
the same class and character today. The entire parable 
fully attests this. 

OVERWHELMING MAJORITY OF THE TARES 

(1) They were not merely such as usually sprang up 
amongst the wheat. The parable declares that they were 
sown in the same systematic manner as the wheat, and with 
the deliberate intention of ruining the wheat-field— choking 
the wheat. 

(2) It shows that the tares were too numerous to be 
dealt with after the ordinary fashion of pulling up— that 
such a procedure would have unsettled everything as respects 
the interests of the true wheat in the present time. 

(3) It shows the same preponderance of the tares in 
the picture of the harvest, when it is the tares and not the 
wheat which is gathered and bound in bundles, the wheat 
evidently in smaller proportionate quantity being taken directly 
to the barns unbundled— precious, scarce. 

This parable pictures what we are to expect as the 
result of the entire work of grace throughout this Gospel 
age. The results will be a tremendous harvest of tares and 
a comparatively small gathering of the precious wheat. 

Spiteful enmity, such as is represented in this parable 
as moving the devil to injure the wheat-field, to choke the 



wheat, is not without its parallel in human affairs. As, for 
instance, not long since the public prints told how a tenant 
in Ireland, having been evicted from a farm property he had 
long rented, felt spiteful toward the owner and sowed the 
fields with wild oats. In the case of Satan we can see that 
his course in the matter has been in full accord with his 
entire procedure from the time of the beginning of his rebellion 
against God. He deceived our first parents by malicious 
representations of the divine character and by falsehood, 
telling them that God had forbidden the eating of the 
fruit of the trees of knowledge of good and evil because he 
desired to keep them in ignorance, lest they should become 
competitors with him in knowledge, again assuring them 
that the Almighty was unable to execute the sentence against 
them, "Dying thou shaltdie." 

All the way down the history of the world shows Satan's 
opposition. Amongst heathen nations today, everywhere, 
he has planted the seeds of error and blasphemy 
against God, misrepresenting his character and his plan and 
making them to appear adverse. And these same seeds of 
error he has planted in the wheat-field of Christendom, 
scattering it so that it would intermingle with the truths of 
the Lord's Word. This evil seed is represented in all the 
false doctrines of the "dark ages," which misrepresent the 
divine character and plan. Those influenced by the errors 
of Satan are begotten of fear and not of love, not of the 
spirit of truth with which the Lord begets those who are 
truly his, the wheat; and only in the latter can perfect love 
cast out fear and bring the fruitage and graces of the holy 
Spirit in heart and in character, in word and in deed. The 
error brings merely outward forms of Sabbath keeping, 
Church going, decency and morality, but does not affect the 
heart so as to bring forth the fruitage of consecration, self-sacrifice, 
etc., which are the essential qualities of the wheat 
class which the Lord is now developing. 

"THE HARVEST, THE END OF THE AGE" 

Neither in this parable nor elsewhere does the Lord 
intimate that the present order of things is to continue— the 
strife between truth and error, between righteousness and 
sin, with the latter predominating in every way. Quite to 
the contrary, the Scriptures everywhere teach that the present 
age had a particular beginning and that it will have as 
positive and particular an ending. Unfortunately the translators 
of our common version Bible have used the word "world" 
here and in other places instead of the word "age" or "epoch" 
or "dispensation." Nothing could be further from the Scriptural 
teaching than that the earth is to be destroyed in the 
harvest time when the wheat will be gathered. 

On the contrary, the wheat class now being selected 
will be glorified and, as this lesson shows, "Then will the 
righteous shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of their 
Father." (Matt. 13:43.) They will shine forth for the 
blessing of mankind, to bring order out of present confusion, 
to scatter present darkness and ignorance and superstition, 



to cause the knowledge of the glory of God to fill 

the whole earth, to enlighten every man that has ever come 

into the world, to cause all to know from the least to the greatest 

of the love of God and the abundant provision which he 

has made, which guarantees that none shall die the Second 

Death except the wilfully, intelligently disobedient— John 1:9; 

Hab. 2:14; Jer. 31:34. 

To our understanding we are already living in this harvest 
time, and this accounts for the wonderful commotion 
and changes which we are anticipating in the wheat-field, in 
Christendom. The time of separation has come, and the 
Lord will make no mistake: not a single tare will be gathered 
into the barn— beyond the vail into the heavenly condition 
and glory; and as respects the wheat, the harvest is to 
ripen, and not a ripe head of wheat, whether it bear thirty 
or sixty or a hundred fold, will be left in the field or burned 
with the tares, but all will be safely garnered— gathered to 
the Lord. 

The angels are already at work— the Lord uses various 

R3771 :page 140 

human instrumentalities as his servants, messengers or 
angels. The bundles of human organization are tending 
more and more to combination, federation. Not only those 
institutions styling themselves churches, including Christian 
Scientists, but other institutions, orders, etc., are combining. 
The harvest time is specially favorable to the ripening of the 
wheat, and the Lord's true people everywhere are finding 
assistances in the growing in grace and knowledge and the 
fruits of the Spirit such as they never have enjoyed before, 
because we are in the harvest time, and because the Lord is 
providing these angels, messengers of Truth and Grace, for 
our assistance and development. 

"CAST THEM INTO A FURNACE OF FIRE" 

With false fears already in their hearts there is a disposition 
to interpret this statement about the tares being cast 
into a furnace of fire and all other similar statements of 
the Scriptures as literal, as signifying eternal torment. We 
notice, however, that the parable strictly limits this furnace 
time to the harvest of the age: there is no such furnace for 
the wheat and tares all down through the Gospel age— they 
are to be gathered in the end of the age and to be burned in 
a furnace. This certainly is very contrary to the ordinary 
conception of the matter, that immediately at death many 
pass to an eternity of torture. If this statement had any reference 
to a torture time, either for eternity or for a shorter 
period, it certainly limits the time of its beginning to the 
harvest time, the end of this age. 

But let us look at the figure and we will see more particularly 
what this feature of the parable signifies. The 
field is the world, the wheat are the Lord's people who rise 
up out of the world and bring forth fruit to his praise, the result 
of the good seed, the gracious promises and arrangements 



of the Kingdom which inspire them with hope, faith, perseverance 

to the end. This is the class which the Lord seeks, the 

only class. He is not dealing with the field, the world in 

general, but merely with the corner of it which he has planted 

with the good seed. The other parts of the field, the 

world, are not in the parable at all. When the farmer gathered 

his crop to the barn it was his custom to burn the tares, 

so that the seed might not propagate further and thus cause 

additional trouble; hence it was the usage to burn the tares 

in bake-ovens, to use them as we would use kindling wood, 

for heating the oven for the baking of bread. 

Everything in this figure of the burning of the tares, 
therefore, would signify nothing approximating torment; it 
simply illustrates destruction. When the tares are burned 
they are reduced to dust and become again a part of the 
field, the world. So we understand it will be in the end of 
this age: the Lord will permit various agencies to enkindle a 
great fire of trouble— "a time of trouble such as was not 
since there was a nation." (Dan. 12:1.) With this fire the 
tare class will have terminated, for so-called Christendom 
will be the great furnace. True, there will be trouble in the 
outside heathen nations also, but the trouble will specially 
affect civilized nominal Christendom— Churchianity. By the 
time that trouble has ended imitation Christians will all have 
disappeared, there will be no more. The true Christians, the 
Kingdom class, the elect, will have been changed in the First 
Resurrection to heavenly conditions; the remainder of mankind 
will all be of the earth earthy and make no pretensions 
whatever to be called-out ones of the heavenly order. 

WEEPING AND GNASHING OF TEETH 

There will surely be great disappointment, sorrow, pain, 
trouble and anguish throughout Christendom in that "day of 
trouble." Already, as our Master predicted, men's hearts are 
failing them for fear and for looking after the things that are 
coming upon the earth (Luke 21:25-28); but their fears and 
their anguish will not be eternal. When the trouble shall 
have accomplished its work of mellowing society and preparing 
mankind for the blessings of the Millennial Kingdom, 
when it shall have burned itself out, it will be no more, and 
instead of trouble blessings shall come in— not upon the tares, 
but upon those who once were tares, yea, upon all the families 
of the earth shall the blessings come through the seed 
of Abraham, the glorified Christ, Head and body. "Then 
shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of 
their Father." All cannot understand or appreciate, or receive 
this message, and this our Lord clearly foresaw and declared, 
saying, "He that hath an ear let him hear." Neither 
should we despise those who cannot hear, but rather we may 
sympathize with them and be thankful to the Lord for the 
hearing ear which permits us to appreciate these and other 
features of the divine plan. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 



Our caption, our Golden Text, is true enough and carries 
with it a very valuable thought, but one totally out of 
accord with the lesson of this parable. The parable represents 
the Lord as the sower, the Truth as the seed and true 
followers as the result. The Golden Text pictures a totally 
different matter, and points us to the fact that the seeds of 
today will bring forth fruitage by and by, whether they be 
good seeds of kind words, gentleness, meekness, patience, 
helpfulness, or evil words and evil conduct, backbiting, slandering 
and evil doing. Every act, every word, every look, 
every thought is a seed, and will bring its results in our 
own minds and hearts and conduct, and have to do with 
whether or not we shall bring forth thirty, sixty, or a hundred-fold 
or no fruitage whatever, or an evil fruitage, which 
the Lord declares he will utterly destroy in the time of reckoning 
in the end of this age. All who are the Lord's true 
people can profitably apply both lessons, but they must not 
be confounded or confusion will result. 



R3771 :page 140 

"CLOTHED AND IN HIS RIGHT MIND." 

-MARK5:l-20-MAY 13.- 

Golden Text:— "Go home to thy friends and tell them 
what great things the Lord hath done for thee." 

THOSE who deny the personality of Satan must logically 

also deny the personality of demons, so frequently 

referred to in the Scriptures, including this lesson. 

The Scriptures clearly set forth a prince of devils, Satan, 

and his subordinates, and as clearly refer to them as individuals 

possessed of intelligence and reason. We are aware 

of the subtlety of the arguments by which those who disbelieve 

in spirit beings invisible to men deny intelligences that 

cannot be recognized by the five human senses; but surely 

they find it hard to "kick against the pricks"— to deal honestly 

R3771 :page 141 

with the divine records and yet hold to their position. 

The people of God will find it best to be humble, not 
to attempt to be wise above what is written, to admit that 
their knowledge is limited and to accept the divine testimony 
without wresting it, subverting it, misconstruing into harmony 
with their own ignorance. Their objection is that these people 
were simply insane and not possessed by demons— that 
if demons possessed mankind then we should expect similar 
possessions today. We answer that in our judgment a large 
proportion of the so-called insane are in that condition because 
they are obsessed or possessed by demons— wicked 
spirits— the one-time angels who kept not their first estate. 
— Jude 6. 



OBSESSED BY DEMONS 

The picture of this poor man's condition is most vividly 
given. There are many similarly possessed in our day confined 
in asylums, in padded cells, where they can harm 
neither themselves nor others. Very few are aware to what 
extent insanity has a hold upon humanity even in civilized 
lands. If the comparatively small State of South Carolina 
has 1247 inmates in its Lunatic Asylum, imagine how many 
there are in the asylums of the most populous States and 
throughout the world. Alas, poor creatures ! would that we 
had the power to bid the demons come out of them! How glad 
we are that it will not be very long until he who has the 
power, the rightful authority to deliver mankind from the 
power of sin and Satan and death, will exercise it— when 
Satan shall be bound and the judgment of the fallen angels 
shall proceed as the Apostle has foretold. (1 Cor. 6:3.) 
It is not for us to guess how many or how few of those debauched 
spirits will under favorable influences be rescued 
from their infamous condition, but it is for us to rejoice that 
the Lord has provided for their judgment, their trial, their 
testing, and that his grace is sufficient for the delivery of all 
who under full opportunity shall demonstrate a thorough 
conversion to righteousness. 

As there were no asylums at that time, the maniacs, demonized, 
were subject to the private care of their friends, 
and the one of our lesson, we are informed, had been frequently 
bound hand and foot, but manifested a wonderful 
strength, breaking his cords and fetters, and, leaving his 
home, roamed wildly in the mountainous places and caves 

R3772:page 141 

and open tombs of the limestone formation of that country. 

Verse 6 tells us that he saw Jesus from afar and ran to 
meet him. He must have seen the boat coming across the 
lake of Galilee, heading for the coast near where he was, 
because we have the statement that he met Jesus immediately 
upon the landing of the ship (v. 2). Quite probably 
the disciples were considerably alarmed to see the maniac 
thus come running toward them as the ship landed, and 
doubtless they were surprised when he fell upon his knees 
and worshiped Jesus, crying out in a loud voice, "What have 
I to do with thee, Jesus, thou son of the Most High God? I 
adjure you by God that you torment me not." Apparently 
Jesus had already begun to command that the unclean spirit 
should come out of the man, and this entreaty not to be tormented 
was apparently a plea for extension of time, not too 
great haste. Another account says, "Art thou come to torment 
us before the time?" Another similar statement is, 
"Art thou come to destroy us before the time?" 

The thought apparently would be that the demons understood 
that God had a time appointed which would mark 
the limitation of their liberties and opportunities in connection 
with the tormenting of mankind by obsession, as in this 



case. The false reasoning exhibited in this expression, this 
implication that an interference with their tormenting of 
mankind would be an injury to their rights, their liberties, 
seems peculiar; yet we know that there are many amongst 
men who have similarly perverted notions of what are 
their rights, their liberties— to impose upon the rights of 
others, to defraud others, to mislead others to their injury. 
It is common today for men to claim that their rights and 
liberties are interfered with when they are estopped from 
pillaging and variously injuring their fellow-creatures. 
When great corporations, affecting to be public servants 
chartered by the Commonwealth, use their opportunities 
to the public injury, contrary to the public welfare, they 
also cry out, Let us alone— you are interfering with our 
vested rights. 

WHAT HAVE WE IN COMMON? 

The expression, "What have I to do with thee?" might 
be more literally rendered, "What have we in common?" 
Truly there is nothing in common between the Son of God 
and his mission and the demons and their work; and all 
Christian people who recognize the work of these demons 
through spirit mediums, hypnotism, mental science, Christian 
Science, etc., should be on guard; none should have anything 
whatever to do with them. They should remember 
that there is nothing in common between the Lord and these 
powers— that to have anything to do with these is to neglect 
the divine counsel and to jeopardize their peace and all their 
best interests. 

The plea of the demon apparently arrested the Lord's 
command and he made inquiry as to his name. We may not 
unreasonably suppose that the Lord knew that the man was 
possessed of a legion, a great number, of fallen spirits, but 
that he took this method of bringing out the answer for the 
sake of his disciples and the others who crowded around. 
Everything we know on the subject goes to corroborate the 
thought that the evil spirits do not have special pleasure 
in their own company, and that they are debarred from all 
intercourse with the holy angels, and that therefore they are 
specially solicitous of being in contact with humanity and of 
gaining possession of human beings whom they may use as 
their agents, through whom they may operate and come in 
contact with others. 

Apparently God has so arranged the human mind that 
it is invulnerable to the attacks of these evil spirits except 
as some special condition may give them opportunity: apparently 
the will of the individual must consent in some 
measure to their cooperation. We may see that none would 
consent did they possess full knowledge of what they were 
doing, but the entertainment of evil thoughts, the practice of 
vicious habits, seems to a considerable degree to break down 
the will and to give admittance to these evil spirits to have 
control of it, and, through the will, the mind and the body. 

From what we see and from what the Scriptures declare 
we have every reason to expect that there will be a greater 



onslaught of these evil spirits upon humanity in the near 
future. To our understanding hypnotism, mind cure, etc., 
are already operating in large degree toward this end— 
toward the bringing of the human will into that condition 

R3772 : page 142 

where it will be amenable to the influences of these evil 
spirits. The influences of Spiritism and Christian Science 
and Theosophy are all, we believe, cooperating in the same 
direction. Terrible will the harvest be! Thank God, the 
reign of Satan and his minions will be brief! We are nearing 
the time when Satan shall be bound for a thousand 
years that he may deceive and obsess humanity no more until 
the thousand years be finished.— Rev. 20:2,3. 

THE DEMON-POSSESSED SWINE 

Scholars are of the opinion that this part of the country 
was largely inhabited by foreigners, the owners of large herds 
of swine. While the Jews did not eat swine's flesh the foreigners 
did, especially the Roman soldiers, and doubtless the 
swine industry of those parts must have been a very lucrative 
one, on which account, perhaps, the Jews of that vicinity 
were favorable to it, being more or less interested in its 
prosperity, just as many farmers are interested in the prosperity 
of breweries, distilleries, etc., because through these they 
find a market for their crops, and other advantages through 
the money thus put into circulation. 

There was a herd of swine numbering about two thousand 
near by. (From this we have the intimation that it 
was quite a swine-producing country, and that there may 
have been numerous herds as large or larger.) The demons 
possessing the man besought Jesus that they might not be sent 
away, that they might not be condemned to the abyss— to 
the Second Death, to utter destruction, but that they might 
be allowed to remain in that country even if he should demand 
that they should leave the man. They asked permission 
to go into the herd of swine near by and the Lord permitted 
it. 

Swine were condemned under the Jewish Law, and may 
therefore have been considered contraband and their destruction 
authorized. At all events we may know that our Lord 
violated no principle of justice in permitting the demons to 
take possession of the swine. But here we would ask those 
who admit the truth of this narrative but deny obsession, 
deny that the man was afflicted with evil spirits— we ask 
them in what way they would attempt to account for the 
transfer of a disease of the mind from a man to a herd of 
two thousand hogs? It cannot be accounted for except on 
the hypothesis that a legion of evil spirits possessed the man, 
and that these evil spirits took possession of the swine instead, 
a spirit for each hog. 

Whatever may have been the hopes of the demons in 
respect to these brutes they evidently were disappointed. 
Man, with his higher organization, is able apparently to stand 



much more mental torment than the brute creation. The 
effect upon the brains of the swine was such as to make them 
crazy, and in their insanity the whole herd rushed down a 
steep embankment and were choked in the sea. 

This miracle of healing as well as the permission of the 
demons to enter into the swine was doubtless intended and 
permitted to be a demonstration to the people of those parts 
of the power of the Lord over evil spirits, a demonstration 
also of the fact that they were evil spirits as made clear 
by the conduct of the swine into which they entered. And 
this lesson, we believe, was intended more particularly for 
the Lord's people of the Gospel age than for those who were 
witnesses of the miracle and its results. 

We can imagine the swine-herders barely escaping with 
their lives from the rush of the crazy beasts toward the sea. 
We can imagine their fear and perplexity and their haste as 
they ran to tell the owners of the herd what had happened 
—to clear themselves of responsibility and to tell them that 
the man who caused the difficulty was still near the spot. 
It took but a little while for the owners and herdsmen and, one 
account says, all the people of the city to come to where Jesus 
was. On their arrival they saw the demoniac sitting at Jesus' 
feet, "clothed and in his right mind." In his insanity 
he had torn off clothing and everything, but now peace and 
serenity reigned. 

THEY IMPLORED HIS DEPARTURE 

What was the effect of the miracle upon the people? 
Did they rejoice and glorify God that a fellow-creature had 
been delivered from the power of the demons? This certainly 
would have been the proper course, the natural course 
for people in the right attitude of mind, which these were 
not. On the contrary, selfishness reigned in their hearts instead 
of love and sympathy; hence they did not hail Jesus 
as their friend and deliverer, nor say, "Come on, Master 
and Teacher, we have other poor people here afflicted of the 
devil, cast out from them the evil spirits also. We have 
others who are sick and who need your healing; we all 
need your instruction that we may put off the works of 
darkness and put on the garments of light and righteousness." 
Instead of thus reasoning they thought on the opposite 
side, the selfish side of the question. Two thousand 
hogs are lost, several thousand dollars worth of property has 
been destroyed. If this man remain and should cast out 
any more devils and allow them to go into other herds of 
swine it might wreck all the business of this prosperous 
country. 

This is exactly the reasoning of a large proportion of 
mankind in respect to the liquor traffic and its manufacture. 
Selfishness reigns; evidently the world will not vote for the 
new dispensation and the reign of Christ and the binding of 
Satan, and because they are unwilling to cooperate for their 
own deliverance, their help must come in another way— by 

R3773 : page 142 



the fall of present institutions and the establishment of the 
Kingdom of God's dear Son in power and great glory, the 
binding of Satan and the uplifting of all the debased ones 
and the enlightening of the whole world. 

What further evidence do we need that those people, 
professing to be the chosen people of God, professing to hope 
for the coming of Messiah and his Kingdom, were making 
such professions only with their lips and that they did not 
come from the heart? They loved better the ways of sin than 
the promised ways of righteousness. Our Lord did not force 
himself upon them— with his disciples he again entered into 
the ship to leave their shore. The time had not yet come to 
establish the Kingdom by force. That was deferred until 
the election, the selection of the faithful ones, should be accomplished 
—the selection of the Israelites indeed from 
amongst natural Israel, and eventually, by the begetting of 
the Spirit, from among all nations, peoples, kindreds and 
tongues, to whom the message of God's love and grace will 
be sent. Soon the selection will be accomplished and the 
reign of Messiah begin. 

While it would not be true to say that all mankind are 
possessed of devils, possessed of these evil spirits, these demons, 
and we thank God that it is not so, yet it would be 

R3773 : page 143 

true to say that through the influence of evil all mankind 
has become more or less possessed of the spirit of demons, 
the spirit of selfishness, the spirit of sin, alienation from 
God. From this standpoint the whole world is slightly insane, 
some more, some less so. 

The Apostle corroborates this thought, saying of those 
who have accepted Christ and who have received of his 
Spirit, the new mind, that they have "the spirit of a sound 
mind." (2 Tim. 1:7.) He thus implies that previously they 
did not have a sound mind, and that the world in general 
does not have a sound mind, but unsound. The poor man 
out of whom a legion of devils was cast is an extreme example 
of all out of whom the spirit of evil is cast through 
the power of the Truth. We are not so bad as he, thank 
God! No! Nevertheless it was not until we had received 
the new mind of Christ, not until the old things were done 
away and all things became new that we really stood at Jesus' 
feet, clothed and in our right mind. (2 Cor. 5:17.) 
Thank God for the clothing which we have in Christ's robe 
of righteousness, covering our blemishes and imperfections, 
the bruises of sin and the injury which we did to ourselves! 
Thank God that this is stopped, that we can now see things 
from the better standpoint, from the only true standpoint. 

The healed man alone appreciated Jesus of all the people 
of that country. They wished him to depart, but this 
poor man entreated the Lord that he might go with him, 
that he might become one of his disciples. How touching! 
What a picture we have of those who receive the spirit of a 
sound mind, who now long to be with the Lord, who now 



long to be his disciples, to proclaim him to others, who now 
appreciate him as others do not. As the Apostle declared, 
"To you, who believe, he is precious." (1 Pet. 2:7.) The 
man may have been fearful of being left lest the demons 
should take possession of him again, or he may have been 
ashamed of his previous course in life and of his old associates, 
and thought to find new ones; but more probably we 
think he desired to be a witness to the Lord respecting the 
great blessing which he had received through him. 

"GO TO THY HOME AND THY FRIENDS" 

While Jesus refused the request he did not spurn 
the consecration, but sent the man back to his home and his 
friends, saying, '"Tell them how great things the Lord hath 
done for thee, and hath had compassion on thee.' And he 
departed and began to publish in Decapolis how great things 
Jesus had done to him: and all men did marvel." We know 
not how many of the people as a result of that preaching 
ultimately became the Lord's disciples— after Pentecost, after 
the Spirit dispensation had been ushered in, under the power 
and guidance of which all the Israelites indeed were found and 
sealed by the Truth as followers of the Lord. We may reasonably 
suppose that there was some fruitage of the labor. 
Indeed our Lord's journey on that occasion seems to have resulted 
in the conversion of but the one person, the demoniac, 
his subsequent work there being done through him. 

We thank God that the proportion of those possessed 
by evil spirits is comparatively small, and we thank him 
also that amongst the whole of unsound minds we and others 
who have heard his message have been reached by it, 
reclaimed, and that we have come to the feet of Jesus clothed 
and in our right minds. Has he not a work for us to do? 
If we cannot be the apostles to follow his footsteps we can 
at least follow the example of this one freed from the demons: 
we can go to our own homes and to our friends and 
there confess the Lord and his mighty power in us. We can 
thus sound forth the praises of him who hath called us out 
of darkness into his marvellous light; we can thus be co-laborers 
together with God in the ministry of the Truth, in 
the ministry of reconciliation, telling how great things the 
Lord hath done for us. Moreover, we are glad that he has 
had compassion on us, forgiven our sins, and, when we consecrated, 
accepted us and adopted us into the heavenly family 
and made us partakers of his holy Spirit and commanded 
us to proclaim the good tidings of his grace. 

Truly it would appear that none who have received 
God's favors thus should receive them in vain— that all so 
honored should be awakened to newness of life and energy 
in the service of the Lord. One of the best testimonies we 
have ever heard as respects the power of Christian living and 
its influence upon others was from a lady who asked to be 
remembered in prayer, that she might be enabled to see 
clearly and to follow the Truth. Subsequently we asked 
her why she had been anxious to see the Truth, and her reply 
was: "I have a sister-in-law who has received this 



Truth, and her course in life since has convinced me that 

there is a power in the religion of Jesus that I did not previously 

recognize. For years I have been an agnostic, an 

unbeliever, and my friends and associates are of this class. 

I thought there was nothing to religion but merely ignorance 

and superstition, but when my sister took up with the MILLENNIAL 

DAWN views it made such a great change in her life, 

all her conduct seemed so transformed, that I said to myself, 

'There is a power, there must be truth in the religion of Jesus, 

for I see it now demonstrated in the life of this woman, 

and I desire the same for myself.'" 

O, that we all might be diligent to be thus faithful 
stewards of the grace of God, and faithful representatives of 
our great Redeemer— not only witnessing with our lips, but 
in all the departments of life testifying that we are now 
sane, that we have now the spirit of a sound mind, that we 
love the things that are right and true and noble and good, 
that we hate and are living in opposition to the things which 
are sinful and contrary to the mind of the Lord and the 
ways of righteousness. 



R3774 : page 143 

A TIMELY WARNING TO THE CLASSES 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

There is a little matter I thought might be well to 
mention to you. And that is: A smooth, clever "confidence 
man" is extensively "working" the Truth people, 
in these parts at least. He has a number of very clever 
stories and schemes by which he is very successful in 
gaining the confidence of the unsuspecting and securing 
good sums of money and other favors. He is well 
posted about our religious affairs and talks glibly about 
Brother Russell, the Pilgrim brethren and others; also 
about conventions, etc. He gave his name here as 
James Marshall Stuart of Troy, N.Y. He is short of 
stature, smooth face, and is easily identified by a badly 
deformed right eye. 

He tried to "work" us but failed. A close study of 
his countenance made me suspicious, and so I made investigation 
and found him to be a fraud. As the Truth 
people are generally guileless and easy of entreatment 
he has a good field, and it makes the matter rather serious 
where he is entertained, as it affords a good opportunity 
to rob. 

Yours in the best of bonds, G. B. IMHOFF,-Iowa. 



page 145 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVII MAY 15, 1906 No. 10 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 147 

Sadly Confused Teaching 147 

Reformation by Surgery 148 

Hell Cut From Creed 148 

Beloved, Be of Good Cheer 149 

A Stone of Stumbling 151 

"Ashamed of Me and My Word" 152 

Trifling With Conscience 153 

John the Baptist Versus Herod Antipas 155 

"Shame and Lasting Contempt" 156 

He Giveth Food to the Hungry 156 

"Give Ye Them to Eat" 157 

Gathering Up the Fragments 159 

A Message from the San Francisco Friends 159 

page 146 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES 



These are now in stock in large quantity. Every letter you 
send through the mail may be a more or less potent messenger 
of the Truth, even on its outside, by the use of these envelopes. 
They catch the attention not only of those to whom they are 
addressed, but postmen and others have an opportunity, and 
sometimes the curiosity, to read their message of peace— the 
gospel in condensed form. Price, 25c per 100, postpaid. 

FOR YOUR FRIENDS 



Some will read a newspaper who will not read a tract. We 
now can supply in any quantity— The Six Eaton-Russell Debates 
together in one issue of the Gazette and "To Hell and 
Back" in another issue, and "The Resurrection of Damnation" 
in a third. 

We can supply these post free at one cent each to any address 
in any quantity. Order at once. 

R3776 : page 146 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S WEEKLY SERMONS 



Some friends living in Oklahoma and Indian Territories 
would like to subscribe for a daily newspaper of that vicinity 
publishing the Editor's weekly sermons. They can be accommodated 
if a sufficient number of subscriptions are received. 



R3773 : page 147 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
SADLY CONFUSED TEACHING 



THE Christian Evangelist, in a prominent article 
entitled, "What is the Soul?" says: 

"To man is given the power to create an immortal 
soul, and father and mother walk hand in hand 
with God. It is fitting that the halo of love should 
shine around the mated pair, and that the new home 
should glow with light from the glory-world, for Eden's 
morn is dawning again to sweet new souls— souls that 
are born of man and also born of God." 

When our friends of the Christian denomination 
get sufficiently awake to inquire for a Scripture authority 
for all religious teaching, the editor of the Evangelist 
and others will criticize what is published much 



more thoroughly than they do now; and a totally unscriptural 
article of the kind referred to will not appear 
in journals claiming "No creed but the Bible." 

The idea that God would go into partnership with 
the majority of parents who know him not or who are 
his enemies through wicked works is absurd on the 
face of it, as well as unscriptural. Worse, it is blasphemy 
against God! The very idea! That God should 
be charged with the responsibility of the direct creation 
of the poor misshapen, diseased little babes, the 
one-half of which have not vitality enough to reach maturity, 
is surely the product of a deficient or sadly misdirected 
reason. Let God be true, though at the risk 
of making out that many men are liars or foolish. 
God's Word declares that infants are "born in sin, shapen 
in iniquity"; and the only exceptions to this rule 
are the comparatively few children of the sanctified. 
(I Cor. 7:14.) That the image of God has largely given 
place to the image of Satan is manifest in the many 
who "go astray as soon as they are born" (Psa. 53:3), 
and respecting some of whom our Lord declared, "Ye 
are of your father the devil, for his works ye do."— 
John 8:44. 

Alas that we must admit it, but who will deny that 

R3774 : page 147 

some dogs are far better born than are some of Adam's 

degenerate race? Aye, some of them with better dispositions, 

too— more of meekness, gentleness, patience 

and love; and less of anger, hatred and strife. If God 

has so arranged his laws of nature that each can bring 

forth after his own kind, why should not man, the 

highest of earthly creatures, have the same powers? 

Why should it be claimed that in man's case God interferes 

and helps produce the idiotic and mentally and 

physically unbalanced which constitute the majority of 

our race? Why should this be urged, not only without 

Scripture proof but contrary to the Bible's express 

teachings? 

THERE IS ALWAYS A REASON 

The reason is the desire to prove the immortality 
of the soul, which centuries of Platonic philosophy has 
foisted upon the world as essential to any hope of a future 
life. Plato's followers tell us that this wisdom of a heathen 
poet is implied in the Bible though never stated in 
it. We answer, to the contrary, that the Bible most explicitly 
limits immortality to the Father and the Son (I Tim. 6:16), 
and holds out to the saints the hope of "glory, 
honor and immortality" at the end of life's race.— 
Rom. 2:7. 

The hope of eternal life, according to the Bible, is not 
a power in man to live forever, but a power in God to 
raise man from the dead and to perpetually supply the 



conditions essential to an everlasting existence. Death 
is the wage or penalty of God's law against sinners: 
the death of Jesus was the ransom for sinners; and the 
resurrection promised in the Millennial morning is the 
salvation provided— a salvation from death, a raising 
up from the fallen condition of sin and its penalty to 
the life and perfection originally lost. "By man death, 
by man also the resurrection of the dead; for as all in 
Adam die, even so all in Christ shall be made alive."— 
I Cor. 15:21,22. 

Note the inconsistencies involved. (1) For God to 
interfere with human pro-creation and insert a Platonic 
"spark of deity" into every idiotic or degenerate babe 
to make them death-proof would be in direct contradiction 
to his sentence against the race, "Dying thou shalt 

R3774 : page 148 

die." (2) It would make meaningless our Lord's words, 
"Ye must be born again" (John 3:7), by implying that 
man's begetting and God's begetting are simultaneous. 

(3) If more than 100,000 infants are born each day, and 
myriads more are begotten that never reach birth, the 
Christian Evangelist must believe in a host of Gods 
kept busy day and night supervising and assisting in a 
very unholy and everyway quite unsatisfactory work. 
No wonder intelligent infidels despise such nonsense, 
and, thinking it is Bible teaching, repudiate the latter. 

(4) According to this false theory the whole matter of 
eternal torment is God's responsibility and fault; because 
if God would but exercise reasonable discretion 

in bestowing the gift of immortality and not cooperate 
in the birth of those unfit for everlasting bliss there 
would be none to torment. 

What serious confusion comes from false reasoning, 
human guessing, contrary to God's Word. We devote 
some space to this matter, not from opposition to 
the no doubt well-meaning writer, but because the error 
is widespread. Yes, we are ashamed to say it, this is 
the maudlin view of Christendom as a whole. Let us 
whose eyes the Lord has opened to a clearer, saner, 
holier view of his divine plan be vigilant and wise and 
lovingly kind in helping to the light and food now 
provided all who give any evidence of hungering and 
thirsting after truth. 

REFORMATION BY SURGERY 



The newspapers recount a peculiar case which contains 
a lesson. A boy of 12 years, Harold Hurley, was 
about to be sent by his parents to a Reform School, because 
he was so incorrigible. An officer of the Toledo 
Juvenile Court noticed a scar on the boy's head, and inquiry 
developed the fact that it came from a fall when 



the boy was five years old, and that his incorrigibility 
dated from about that time. He was sent to a hospital 
where a surgical operation was performed, and the 
pressure of a broken bone was removed from the brain. 
Gradually the boy returned to his former condition of 
mind and became obedient. His mother is quoted as 
saying:— 

"Dr. Donnelly states that the pressure of that piece 
of bone upon the brain had gradually dulled all the 
higher sensibilities, and if it had gone on Harold 
would, in time, have become an utter degenerate. No 
one knows how thankful we are today that our boy has 
been saved from Lancaster Reform School, where he 
would have been constantly punished for things for 
which we now know he would not have been 
responsible." 

It is impossible for us to know what proportion of 
the morally weak and bad, the wicked, the merciless 
and the untruthful are to some extent what circumstances 
and conditions, mental, moral and physical, 
have helped to make them. Yet according to the general 
view the boy above described would have gone to 
eternal torment. That is to say, no one would claim 
that he was fit for heaven, and under the general assumption 
there would have been no other place to put 
him. 

How grandly reasonable is the plan of God, which, 
while telling us that only a "little flock" of overcomers 
of the world, the flesh and the devil will go to heaven, 
tells us also that God has provided that "times of restitution" 
shall shortly begin, in which all the weak and 
depraved and ignorant, however unfit for heaven, shall 
have one full chance of restitution to the full perfection 
of human nature in the Paradise of God restored under 
the whole heavens. All of this glorious provision, let 
us never forget, is in and through the ransom paid by 
our dear Redeemer, who "gave himself a ransom for all, 
to be testified in due time."— I Tim. 2:6. 

HELL CUT FROM CREED 



From the Chicago Record-Herald 

Valparaiso, Ind., April 12.— Hell fire and the brimstone 
griddle have no more terrors for the devout Presbyterians 
of northwestern Indiana. Simple and painless 
annihilation has been officially declared to be all that 
the souls of George Ade's sinful fellow-hoosiers need 
fear in the hereafter. The experts in salvation have 
discovered that for more than 1,000 years mankind has 
been laboring under a delusion about the fate of those 
who are turned away from the pearly gates by St. Peter. 

At the meeting of the Logansport Presbytery, which 
has just adjourned its spring session in this city, it was 



decided that the words "eternal torment" and "everlasting 
punishment" should be stricken from the articles of 
the creed. "Destruction" was the substitute which the 
ministers and laymen, representing forty-three congregations 
in this section of the State, recommended. This 
action will be submitted for the approval of the general 
assembly of the denomination, to be held in Des Moines, 
Iowa, in May. 

DOGMA NOT AUTHORIZED 

Without a dissenting vote the members of the Presbytery 
expressed their conviction that the word "torment," 
as implying an unending series of diabolical 
tortures in flames, conducted under the personal supervision 
of Lucifer, was not authorized by the Bible. 
They expressed a conviction that such a dogma tended 
to retard the development of the Presbyterian faith. 
It was admitted, however, that this view would be 
deemed revolutionary by many of the strict followers 
of John Calvin, and probably would cause much dissension. 
Many objections have already been made by the 
conservative elements in the congregations. 

Rev. A. C. Beckes, pastor of the First Presbyterian 
Church of this city, said, in commenting upon the step: 
"Of course our action will have no effect unless the 
general assembly coincides. That body must approve 
before the words 'torment' and 'punishment' can be 
stricken out of the confession of faith. Our vote is 
simply the expression of forty-three ministers and 
forty-three laymen of the northwestern counties in 
Indiana." 



R3775 : page 149 

BELOVED, BE OF GOOD CHEER 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER'S Editor realizes that 
his friends far and near have been caused intense 
pain through the publication of malicious 
falsehoods respecting him. Few of the papers 
which published the falsehoods were interested 
to publish the refutations of the same. Thus we have 
confirmed the old adage that "A lie will travel around 
the world before the truth gets its boots on." Under 
the present reign of "the prince of this world" error, 
falsehood, slander, can be easily circulated— need but 
to be whispered to travel far and near, aided by willing 
tongues and pens. Truth and Justice, on the contrary, 
appeal less to the majority of the fallen race, and at the 
present time are at a discount and disadvantage. The 
time is coming when He who is the Truth as well as the 
Way and the Life, will reign, and all these influences 
pertinent to the curse will be changed. "Behold I 



make all things new." 

The Lord's people differ one from another as did 
the disciples of old. To any who, like the Apostle 
Thomas, need further evidences as a basis for continued 
faith, we say in the Master's words, Stretch hither 
thy hand: write to us. We will not be offended. Be 
not faithless, but believing. To the uncharitable, ever 
willing to believe evil and doubt the pure and good, no 
answer would be satisfactory. To the majority of the 
pure in heart, and especially to those who are acquainted 
with the Editor personally or through his writings, 
it will probably be all sufficient to state in general terms 
that the news-paper reports above referred to are unjust 
slanders which wholly misrepresent him. He assures you 
now in these few words that, born of Christian parents in 
relationship to the Lord, he confirmed that relationship 
by an individual faith and consecration at the age of 
15 years: that since then he has endeavored to live in 
all good conscience toward God and his fellow men, 
without exception. His teachings are recognized by 
those familiar with them as belonging to the very highest 
plane of Christian ethics; and he hereby assures 
you all that in all his relationships of life he has diligently 
sought to live as nearly up to these high Christian 
ideals as possible, trusting in the merit of the 
Redeemer for the covering and forgiveness of blemishes 
which he realizes, as well as of others of which he is 
ignorant, but which the Lord might see. He believes 
that not a soul in the world can point to a single act of 
cruelty or unkindness or injustice or lovelessness on 
his part toward any of the human family, nor even toward 
any of the brute creation. His consecration vows 
to the Lord doubtless did guide his course of conduct 
somewhat differently from what it otherwise would 
have been, and in consequence the worldly have misunderstood, 
misinterpreted him, even as they did the Lord 
and various of his faithful followers throughout the age. 

The Editor's foes have uniformly been those whose 
ambitions have led them step by step in their opposition. 
He blames them only partially for the evil they 
from time to time have sought to do to him and indirectly 
to the cause he serves and to some extent represents. 
His conviction is that the Great Adversary and 
his "wicked spirits in high places" are the real adversaries 
of the harvest work, who seek to use as many as 
they can gain control of through envy, or pride, through 
ambition or vainglory. Our Master forewarned us saying, 
"It must needs be that offenses come." The 
Apostle endorsed the same sentiment when he said, 
"There must needs be divisions amongst you that the 
approved may be made manifest." Again, it seems not 
unreasonable to suppose that the Lord permits reproaches 
to come upon his cause today, as he did in 
times past, for the purpose of making the Truth unpopular, 
to the intent that only those who love the Truth 
above all else and who are fully consecrated to its 



service should be willing to bear the reproaches which 
the Adversary would be permitted to bring against the 
Lord's cause and those who stand prominently connected 
with it. 

To all such we say, Be of good courage, God hath 
not cast off his people and never will. The trials and 
difficulties of the journey will all be understood fully, 
completely, when we reach the end of the way. Our 
Father planned it all— the narrow and rugged way by 
which the Master and his "little flock" of faithful followers 
shall finally reach the heavenly goal. Then, 
perfect through sufferings, copies of God's dear Son, 
they shall share with him in the glorious work of dispensing 
the blessing of life to all the families of the 
earth. So high a calling by so gracious a God is worthy 
of our love and loyalty even unto death. Faithful is he 
who has called us, who assures us that he will not suffer 
us to be tempted above that we are able and has promised 
us that "all things shall work together for good to 
them that love God— the called ones according to his 
purpose." The Editor sorrows especially because he 
is the unwilling agent of suffering to so many of the 
Lord's dear flock, whereas it has usually been his 
privilege and endeavor to bestow comfort and to scatter 
blessings on every hand to the extent of his ability. 
"If one member suffers all the members suffer with it." 



page 149 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

At the beginning of another day a very earnest, 
fervent prayer has reached our heavenly Father's 
listening ear in your behalf, that he may be especially 
near you in these days of the bitter cup of experience. 
Dear Brother, our hearts ache for you— (the shameful 
slander, why permitted?) But I know your loving heart 
would answer, "My Father planned it all." We do love 
you, dear Brother, more than we can ever tell this side 
of the vail, and try to appreciate in some measure at 

least the labor bestowed for us. Sister S joins with 

me in sending these few lines. Mother wishes to be 
especially remembered to you with much love and 
sympathy. 

Yours in him, A. R.~ Illinois. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

May the richest blessing of the Lord be yours to 
comfort and sustain you in the hours of trial. We 
know you are his servant, giving meat at this time to 
the household of faith, so we also know that this terrible 
time of testing which has come to you can only 
result in his glory, your good and the good of all who 



are with you in the Truth. Through the wicked do come 

page 150 

upon you "to eat up your flesh" they will stumble and 
fall, for the Lord is your light and your salvation, so 
whom have you to fear? We are praying for you and 
believing in the integrity of your Christian character, 
and even though false witnesses may rise up against 
you, we trust you and know that you will be brought 
off more than conqueror. Personally I am joyfully 
thankful each day for the light my heavenly Father 
sent me through you. 
Sincerely yours in the Truth, with Christian love, 
S. H.— West Virginia. 



R3775 : page 150 

MY DEAR BROTHER:- 

I notice through the secular press that your enemies 
have again assailed you. I take this opportunity 
of extending you my heartfelt sympathy and of assuring 
you of my unshaken confidence in your integrity 
and Christian character. Praying that heaven's richest 
blessings may attend your every step, I am 

Your Brother in the Lord (Isa. 54:17), 
J. S.~ Illinois. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Knowing that the great Adversary is just now seeking 
to injure you in the eyes of them that believe not, 
and knowing that no tribulation for the present seemeth 
joyous, but grievous, I take this opportunity of 
telling you of my deep sympathy and love for you in 
this hour. I am persuaded that this will neither move 
you nor any whose hearts are set on things above. 
What can separate us from the love of God! With deep 
sympathy and assurance of my Christian love for you, 
I am as always, 

Your Brother in Christ, 

J. W. S.-Ohio. 



page 150 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We have just learned, through the New York newspapers, 
of the severe trials that have recently come 
upon you. We hasten to assure you of the continued 
love of the friends here, and of our heartfelt sympathy. 
You do not need to be reminded of the fact that all 



over this world the prayers of God's consecrated people 
are being offered up continually in your behalf. 
We as members of the one body all suffer together. 

Recent TOWER articles seemed to indicate that you 
felt that trials were approaching. I had begun to marvel 
over the free course with which the Truth has been 
progressing of late and wondering how long such favorable 
conditions would continue. Therefore we are 
not surprised over these fiery trials as though some 
strange thing had happened, but are inclined to accept 
them as the to-be-expected or looked-for things. 

May our heavenly Father's blessings be with you 
and all the dear ones increasingly is the true and earnest 
prayer of 

Yours in the service of the Master, 

BRO. AND SR. H. C. R.,-New York. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In this time of your severe trial and affliction, we 
desire to express to you our heartfelt sympathies and 
to assure you that you have lost none of our esteem 
and love. We pray for you, dear brother, and ask that 
the Lord will strengthen you and bring you off more 
than conqueror. Again assuring you of our love and 
sympathy, we beg to subscribe ourselves, 

Your brethren in Christ, 

H. B. C, B. M. C.,-Washington, D.C. 



R3775 : page 150 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

May the God of all comfort comfort you with 
these words: "The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath 
are the everlasting arms." (Deut. 33:27.) 
"Fear thou not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, 
for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea, 
I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right 
hand of my righteousness."— Isa. 41:10. 

There was a time when storms of trouble, threatening 
destruction to earthly joy, burst in fury upon 
me. I thought my heart would break. I cried out, "My 

soul is exceeding sorrowful." Sister T repeated these 

precious words to me and I was comforted: "When 
thou passest through the waters I will be with thee; 
and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; 
when thou walkest through the fire thou shalt not be 
burned; neither shall the flames kindle upon thee." 
(Isa. 43:2.) God was true to his Word. I was uninjured 
and my faith was greatly increased. 

Tressie and Laurice join me in sending Christian 
love and sympathy to you, and we would assure you of 
our perfect confidence in you as the servant whom God 



has chosen to give the "meat in due season to the 
household." 
Sincerely, your sister in Christ, C. M. E.,— Ohio. 



page 150 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have never taken much of your time, but am going 
to intrude just a little now. I do this to assure you of 
my personal love, and continued faith and trust in 
your honor, integrity and purity of life and conduct as 
a man, and besides this I have the fullest confidence in 
you as that servant whom the Lord has so highly 
honored as to place him as steward over the truths now 
due the "household of faith." Not in the least has my 
faith been shaken by the events lately transpiring. 

You may rest assured that we who know you best 
will but the more besiege the "throne of the heavenly 
grace" that you may be granted an unusual supply of 
help and strength, so that even this severe trial may 
but increase the work of preparing you and all the 
Church for the Kingdom honors and glory. While we 
know we cannot enter into the secret recesses of the 
heart with you, we do want you to know that your sufferings 
are in a sense ours, and we want you to know 
that we share them joyfully. 

With kindest regards and Christian love, your 
brother in Christ, J. T. J.,— Virginia. 



R3775 : page 150 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We deeply sympathize with you in this hour of persecution, 
but are comforted with the thought that it 
has been written and is everywhere shown that the 
Lord knows how to take care of his own. No doubt 
many things scandalous and untrue will be published, 
but 

"Truth crushed to earth 
Will rise again. 

The eternal years of God are here; 
But error falling writhes in pain 
And dies amidst its worshipers." 
Again these words come to us: "All who would 
live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution, and 
we are determined that nothing shall separate us from 
the love of Christ our Lord; not even bitter persecution, 
famine, peril or the sword. We will not forget to 
pray for you. 
Your brother and sister in the faith, 

A. & C. G.~ Mississippi. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We spent the morning in mingled thought, prayer 
and sympathy, and we both wish to remind you that all 
our people know your character and the fruits that 
your life has brought forth in abrupt contrast to the 
fruits of selfishness on the side of your opponent. "By 

R3776 :page 151 

their fruits ye shall know them," said our beloved 
Master. God had not forsaken him. He has not forsaken 
you. He never will forsake you— you have his own 
Word for that! "Blessed are ye when men shall revile 
you and persecute you, and say all manner of evil 
against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding 
glad, for great is your reward." Never was 
there a more applicable expression than is that to your 
especial case! Also the beautiful text from Brother 
Paul for April 28 ("Heavenly Manna") and your own 
beautiful and fitting comment upon it— the text for 
tomorrow and that for the following day also. What a 
comfort these must be to you— and how I praise the 
dear heavenly Father that it is so ! 

Dear Brother Russell, what a magnificent joint-testimony 
is yours for the asking, or for the willingness 
to receive it from us publicly— from all your colporteurs 
in the field and from your own household, if 
we may by some means have the great privilege of 
making it known. Tell me, if you need or desire mine, 
how it may best be given in order to be of the greatest 
help to you. 

I want to try to thank you for the wonderful and 
beautiful sermon of last Sunday, "Risen With Christ." 
It seems to me that every sermon is the most beautiful 
one I ever read or heard, but oh, this one appealed to 
me so deeply! My "heart burned," as did the disciples' 
hearts on the way to Emmaus, as Jesus talked with 
them. Truly, as you say in closing, "So many of us 
as can see this glorious plan have a blessing and a 
privilege which is hidden from the eyes of many others!" 
How glad I am that through yourself this great 
blessing and privilege is mine. 

"The Lord bless thee and keep thee: the Lord make 
his face shine upon thee and be gracious unto thee: 
the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee and give 
thee peace." 

With the very deepest love and sympathy, your 
least sister in Christ, E. G.,— West Virginia. 



R3776 :page 151 

A STONE OF STUMBLING. 



"HE shall be for a stone of stumbling and for a 
rock of offence. ..to them that stumble at 
the Word, being disobedient."— I Pet. 2:8. 

"Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial 
which shall try you; as though some strange thing happened 
unto you."— I Pet. 4:12. 

"Whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus shall 
suffer persecution."— 2 Tim. 3:12. "The disciple is not 
above his Lord. "-Matt. 10:24. 

"Call to remembrance the former days, in which, 
after ye were illuminated [enlightened], ye endured a 
great conflict of sufferings: partly, whilst ye were made 
a gazing-stock both by reproaches and afflictions; and 
partly whilst ye became companions of them that were so 
used. For ye had compassion on me in my bonds, and 
took joyfully the spoiling of your valuables, knowing 
in yourselves that ye have in heaven a better and an 
enduring substance. Cast not away therefore your confidence, 
which hath great recompence of reward."— 
Heb. 10:32-35. 

"My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?"— 
Mark 15:34. 

"Awake, O sword, against my shepherd and 
against the man that is my fellow, saith the Lord of 
hosts: smite the pastor and the sheep shall be scattered; 
and I will turn my hand upon the little ones. 
And it shall come to pass that in all the land two parts 
shall be cut off and die [(1) the little flock of self-sacrificers 
and (2) the 'great company' of Rev. 7: 14]. And 
I will bring the third part through the fire, and will 
refine them as silver is refined."— Zech. 13:7-9. 

"Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? Behold, 
and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow."— 
Lam. 1:12. 

"He was led as a lamb to slaughter. As a sheep 
before shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth" 
[in resistance].— Isa. 53:7. 

"It pleased the Lord to wound him, to put him to 
shame."— Isa. 53: 10. "Many were astonied at thee."— 
Isa. 52:14. 

"And Pilate answered, What evil hath he done? 
But they cried out the more, Crucify him! Crucify him!" 
-Mark 15:14. 

"And Jesus answered, Thou couldest have no power 
at all over me except it were given thee of my Father 
in heaven."— John 19:11. "The cup which my Father 
hath poured for me, shall I not drink it?"— John 18:11. 

"He is despised and rejected of men; a man of 
sorrows, and acquainted with grief."— Isa. 53:3. 

"As he was, so are we in this world."— I John 4: 17. 

"Marvel not if the world hate you. Ye know that 
it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the 
world, the world would love its own; but now ye are 
not of the world because I have chosen you out of the 
world; therefore the world hateth you."— John 15:18,19. 



"Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and say 
all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. 
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward 
in heaven. "--Matt. 5:11,12. 

"If one member of the body suffers all the members 
suffer with it. Now are ye the body of Christ and 
members in particular."— I Cor. 12:26,27. 

"Count it all joy when ye fall into divers trials." 
(Jas. 1:2.) "Our light affliction which is but for a 
moment worketh out for us a far more exceeding and 
an eternal weight of glory." (2 Cor. 4: 17.) "You who are 
troubled rest with us."— 2 Thess. 1:7. 

"God gave Christ to be the head over the Church 
which is his body." (Eph. 1:22,23.) "If we suffer with 
him we shall also reign with him." (2 Tim. 2:12.) "If 
we be dead with him we shall also live with him." 
(Rom. 6:8.) "Humble yourselves, therefore, under the 

R3776 : page 152 

mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time." 
(2 Pet. 5:6.) "Filling up that which is behind of the 
afflictions of Christ."-Col. 1:24. 

"The reproaches of them that reproach thee are 
fallen upon me." (Rom. 15:3.) "Let us go to him without 
the camp bearing the reproach with him."— Heb. 13:13. 



R3776 : page 152 

"ASHAMED OF ME AND MY WORD." 

-LUKE 9:26- 

ONE of the first thoughts to strike us in connection 
with this text is that our Lord so highly 
exalts and honors his Word as to put it on a 
parity with himself. We are not at all surprised at his 
declaration that those who are ashamed of him he 
would be ashamed to own as his joint-heirs in the 
Kingdom— ashamed to own or recognize as of his Bride 
class. All that is what we should expect, and yet as 
we look about us how many we find that seem to be 
ashamed of the Lord. Some may be inclined to controvert 
this and say, "No Christian is ashamed of Christ; 
even the nominal Christians, the tares, are glad to own 
him Lord of all. The name of Jesus is no longer a 
name of shame and contempt. God has highly exalted 
him, and the whole world is coming to adore him more 
and more every day." 

Let us not be too sure that this is the right thought, 
dear friends. Our own thought is that a certain ideality 
has been exalted before the minds of civilized people, 
and that to this ideality they bow and render praise. Our 
thought is that the real Christ has never had the love or 



esteem of the world, and that he will not have it until in 
God's due time the true knowledge shall have filled the 
earth, and the clouds of ignorance and superstition shall 
have rolled away, and when the world in general shall 
have learned some of the great lessons which the time of 
trouble introducing the Millennial Kingdom will surely 
teach. 

The Christ whom the Jews did not love or esteem 
or honor, but on the contrary crucified, was holy, harmless, 
separate from sinners. He was not wealthy, was 
considered a fanatic because of his loyalty to truth and 
righteousness, and because he gave his time and 
energy to loving services for his fellow-creatures and 
especially in providing spiritual nourishment for them. 
Therefore his brethren hated him and hid as it were 
their faces from him— in shame. (Isa. 53:3.) And 
hence it was decided that they could not be of the 
Bride class, and as a nation the Jews were cast off 
until the elect should be found. 

The Lord is still present in the world in the flesh- 
in the flesh of his consecrated members— and the 
world in general still despises him as at first and as he 
foretold— "Marvel not if the world hate you; ye know 
that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the 
world the world would love its own." (John 15:18,19.) 
The world is still ashamed of Christ. Nominal Christians, 
nominal Spiritual Israel, are as much ashamed 
of him today as Natural Israel was ashamed of him 

R3777 : page 152 

eighteen centuries ago. When we consider that our 
Lord is represented by his members in the flesh we see 
that love for the brethren means love for the Lord, and 
hence as the Apostle states this is one of the great tests 
of our relationship to him and to the Father. "He that 
loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he 
love God whom he hath not seen?" (I John 4:20.) "Love 
one another as I have loved you," is the recognized test 
of discipleship, and he therefore who is ashamed of the 
brethren is ashamed of the elder brother. He counts 
all the younger brethren as himself, saying, He that 
despiseth you despiseth me; he that rejecteth you rejecteth 
me and him that sent me.— Luke 10:16. 

It may be a new thought to some that in despising 
the brethren they are despising the Lord; that in being 
ashamed of the brethren they are being ashamed of 
the Lord; and that thus they would be demonstrating 
that a wrong condition of mind and conduct prevailed: 
that they were not fit for the kingdom; that they had 
not reached the mark of perfect love; that they had 
not only not learned to love their enemies but had not 
even learned to love the brethren— those who are striving 
to walk in the footsteps of the Master. 

ASHAMED OF THE LORD'S WORD 



How the Lord's terms and conditions of discipleship 
do sift and test our very innermost thoughts ! He 
does not address those who burn the Bible nor those 
who neglect to have a Bible in the house, nor those who 
neglect to read the Bible, nor those who fail to take 
their texts from the Bible, nor those who quote the 
Scriptures incorrectly when they do quote them, but 
those who in their hearts are ashamed of the Word of 
God and give evidence of that shame, that lack of appreciation, 
by their failure to take their stand in support 
of the Truth. Let us test ourselves, let us prove 
that we are not ashamed of the Lord, of the brethren or 
of his Word. 

The Word of God is not merely the Bible, but it includes 
sermons, tracts, books, etc., in proportion as 
they contain and truly represent the message of God's 
dear Son. This brings the matter still more closely 
home, and it implies that we are not to be ashamed of 
any of the doctrines presented in the Bible, nor to be 
ashamed of any literature which in the Lord's providence 
has been prepared and which represents his 
Truth and expounds and illustrates it. The Lord 
would have a free-minded, open-hearted people, whose 
hearts would be so loyal to him and to the Truth 
which he represents that they would gladly surrender 
everything, even life itself, rather than in any measure 
impede its progress, rather than in any measure bring 
dishonor or discredit upon it. On the contrary, those 
who are not ashamed of the Lord and his Word, and 
who realize that there is nothing in them to be ashamed 
of, but on the contrary everything to rejoice in, to exult 
in, will seek to lift high the royal banner, to tell the 
good tidings of great joy to the extent of their ability, 

R3777 : page 153 

to cooperate with all others who are thus showing 

forth the praises of him who hath called us out of darkness 

into his marvellous light.— I Pet. 2:9. 

Such are the Lord's jewels, whom in the end of this 
age he will garner in the Kingdom and ultimately associate 
with himself in the great and glorious work of the 
Millennial age, the uplifting and refreshing of all the 
families of the earth. Only those who so love the Lord 
and his Truth as to be willing, yea, glad to suffer reproaches 
on their account— only such will be counted 
worthy of the grand and glorious conditions, opportunities 
and privileges of the Millennial Kingdom. 



R3777 : page 153 

TRIFLING WITH CONSCIENCE. 



--MARK 6:14-29.-MAY 20.- 

Golden Text:— "Be not drunk with 
wine, wherein is excess."— Eph. 5:18. 

TRIFLING with conscience is one of the great dangers of 
our time, as it has been of all past time. Our lesson 
offers an illustration along this line, showing how 
Herod Antipas, King of Galilee and Berea, trifled with his 
conscience and was thereby ensnared into adultery and murder. 
Every intelligent person of experience can bear witness 
to the fact that sins usually creep on gradually. No 
one plunges instantly from purity into the depths of sin. 
There is a gradual beginning in which the voice of conscience 
is heard, and if it be heeded the calamity of gross 
transgression may be avoided, but unheeded its voice grows 
more and more faint, its influence in the control of life less 
and less potent, until, with conscience asleep, the outward 
course goes from bad to worse, and there is a rude awakening 
of the individual to find himself ensnared, a captive— 
perhaps a libertine or a thief or a murderer, or all of these, 
and apparently with no alternative except to go on in the same 
direction. How many who have reached such a lamentable 
state have wished in vain that they again had the opportunity 
that was theirs at first— of heeding conscience and 
taking the path of righteousness. 

"THE SPIRIT OF A SOUND MIND" 

The whole world has this experience to some extent, 
because, however depraved and fallen, as a race we are 
still not totally depraved;— there still remains in each sane 
mind an element of conscience, a measure of ability to discern 
truth from untruth, justice from injustice, right from 
wrong. Christians perhaps, at the beginning of their new 
life, have neither more nor less of this quality than the remainder 
of mankind, but having consecrated their lives to 
the Lord and his service they have the promised assurance 
that they are taught of God. Under this teaching their conceptions 
of right and wrong are clarified— they are less 
superstitious, less guided by impressions merely, and, instead, 
have the positive instruction of the divine Word whereby 
they may more clearly than before discern what is the right 
and what is the wrong. Still, conscience is the same; it 
has merely received enlightenment, and must not be any 
less alert in the Christian than in the worldly person. 

On the contrary, backed with the spirit of a sound 
mind, backed with a consecration of their all to the Lord, 
and led by the exceeding great and precious promises of the 
Scripture, they have every reason for following the voice of 
conscience more carefully than ever. To the enlightened 
Christian, guided in judgment by God's revelation, the Bible, 
the voice of conscience becomes really the voice of God, and 
obedience to it is imperative. Any transgression of its commands 
is sure to bring disaster, more serious by far than any 
which could come to the natural man, because the Christian 



has taken the advance steps and has received advance 
knowledge. To the Christian, therefore, the heeding of the 
voice of conscience may mean either eternal life or eternal 
death— the Second Death. And even amongst those who 
will attain the eternal life the Scriptures show us two 
classes— the "more than overcomers," the "little flock," who 
shall be heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, and the 
"great company." 

All of this first class, we may be sure, have given earnest 
heed to the voice of conscience, and have willingly and 
gladly and promptly followed its guidance as the voice of 
the Truth, as the voice of the Lord speaking to them through 
his Word and his providences, leading them from grace to 
grace and from glory to glory until their final change in 
the First Resurrection. To the other class, viz., the "Great 
Company" of Revelation 7, conscience will also be the guide 
by which they will attain the blessing before the throne in 
the honors and blessings which the Lord will confer upon 
them as overcomers of the world. Why will conscience lead 
them to a lower plane, and the first-mentioned class, the 
little flock, to the higher plane of the divine nature? Not, 
we answer, because conscience as the Lord's representative 
will have led them differently, but because they have followed 
the voice of conscience less carefully, with less zeal, with 
less perseverance, with less appreciation of how much importance 
depended upon their following it. 

HEROD'S CONSCIENCE TORMENTED HIM 

The Herod of our lesson (Antipas) was the son of 
"Herod the Great," who slew the babes of Bethlehem in his 
endeavor to thwart the divine program. Palestine was directly 
under the control of the Roman emperors, and instead 
of perpetuating the Kingdom of Herod they partitioned it, 
and gave one quarter to his son, Herod Antipas, the chief 
figure in our present lesson. Herodias, a beautiful and ambitious 
woman, a descendant of Cleopatra, a granddaughter 
of Herod the Great, was ambitious to be a queen and married 
her oldest uncle, Philip, supposing that to him would 
fall the kingdom honors at the hands of the Roman emperor. 
But he was passed by and Antipas was made tetrarch 
(i.e., ruler of a fourth part of the kingdom). Herodias 
was greatly disappointed, and when Herod Antipas came to 
Rome to be invested with royal honors she arranged it that 
he should be entertained at his brother's house, her home, 
and improved the opportunity to entangle him with her personal 
charms, so that when he departed for his dominion she 
eloped with him. 

Here we see the parting of the ways for two and how 
both took the wrong course: the Golden Rule and their 

R3778 : page 154 

instincts for righteousness should have hindered them. 

We cannot doubt that each had a voice of conscience 

at that time, to which both closed their hearts. The woman 



had not only the ties of chastity but the obligations of her 

marriage covenant to assist her conscience and to strengthen 

her in the avoiding of the wrong. The man also had a conscience, 

and knew that in accepting the blandishments of his 

brother's wife he was violating his marriage covenant with 

his own wife; he must have known also that in violating 

the sacred hospitalities of a host, his entertainer, his brother, 

he was doing an unbrotherly act. Above all he had a sufficient 

knowledge of the Jewish Law to know that his conduct 

was heinous in the sight of God. 

Coming to his home, accompanied by his niece, his 
brother's wife, as his paramour, a great scandal was raised 
throughout Palestine, as the people, instructed by the Law, 
recognized that their ruler was living in open violation of it. 
His proper wife, disheartened, crushed, in the presence of the 
usurper, obtained permission to remove from Galilee across 
the lake to another part of the domain, to another palace, 
Machaerus. She was the daughter of the Arabian king 
Aretas, and soon managed to return to her father's house. 
Aretas was very angry and threatened war. 

HEROD, AND NOT OTHER RULERS, REBUKED 

When John's ministry was at its height and he was rebuking 
sin in its every form, the question of Herod's conduct 
came up, and the great prophet roundly denounced the misconduct, 
saying that it was contrary to the Law that Herod 
should thus have his brother's wife, his own niece. The 
Greek text intimates that this was not said once merely, but 
rather as though it read, "John was saying"— was teaching 
continuously that there was wrong at the very head of the 
nation. As the Jewish nation claimed to be and was accepted 
as God's special kingdom and people, and professed 
to live under his special laws in every particular, John was 
probably within the proprieties of the case in denouncing 
a ruler of the Jews, while making no criticism of the other 
rulers of the earth not under divine law and covenant. 

Nevertheless, we are to remember that Jesus made no 
comment along this line. Nothing in John's course should 
be construed as a special example of what we should do 
today in respect to public functionaries— in criticism of their 
lives and affairs. There is no nation today in the world 
which God has accepted in the same sense that he accepted 
the nation of Israel, no nation today that professes to be under 
discipline and guidance as was Israel then. Our Lord 
indicates our relationship to the world, saying, "Render unto 
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things 
that are God's." (Matt. 22:21.) The Apostle explains that 
in all matters that do not conflict with our own personal 
liberties and conscience we are to recognize the official position 
of those who are governing the world. Hence Christians 
of today are to judge themselves and to scrutinize the 
affairs of the Church and to purge out from their midst all 
leaven, but they are not to attempt to purge the world or to 
think of the world as being under their judgment now. 

True, the Apostle says, "Know ye not that the saints 



are to judge the world?" (1 Cor. 6:2.) But he evidently 
refers to the time when the saints shall be qualified as 
judges, when in the end of this age they shall be changed 
from mortal to immortal, from imperfect to perfect, and be 
like their Lord and associated with him in the judging and 
ruling of the world, which then will begin and extend to 
every nation and every member of Adam's race. They were 
to live peaceably, so far as possible, with all men, rendering 
homage to whom homage is due, reverence to whom reverence 
is due, but always, both publicly and privately, acknowledging 
our primary obligations everyway to the Heavenly 
Father and to his Son, our Redeemer. 

HEROD CAST JOHN INTO PRISON 

Herod's pride was stung by John's comments, and no 
doubt he feared that, unreproved, unchecked, this might lead 
to disorders in the realm. He settled the matter by putting 
John in prison. Nevertheless we read that he feared John, 
realizing that he was a righteous man— a man who was following 
his conscience in a right course to the best of his 
ability. There is even an intimation (vs. 19,20) that John's 
imprisonment was in part at least to protect him from the 
anger of Herodias, who desired to kill him, and who doubtless 
would not have hesitated to hire assassins who would 
be more bold to thus procure a large reward, in the 
expectancy that Herodias would intercede with the king and 
secure their release. 

The intimation of the Greek is that Herod gave John 
the Baptist frequent hearings, listened to his arguments— 
that he heard him willingly but was much perplexed. (R.V.) 
Herodias evidently realized that her hold upon the king was 
endangered. She seems to have been a woman of practically 
no conscience. She had risked all for her present station, 
and now what would she not risk to maintain it? If 
John the Baptist's teaching should influence Herod to put 
her away she would be in worse condition than ever before 
—a reprobate, an outcast, without a name or home or anything. 
To such a mind such an outcome was not to be 
considered, and anything was to be undertaken that would 
stand in the way of such a danger. 

Thus it has been with many others occupying less prominent 
places in the world's history: ambition has misled 
them, and pride has been the force which not only overruled 
the voice of conscience but ultimately made murderers of 
those who at first, when conscience began to reprove, would 
have been shocked at the very thought of such an outcome. 
So it is on a lesser scale with some: pride and ambition, 
perhaps operating in another direction, have led conscience 
a chase, until figuratively in a corner the deluded one has 
resorted to lies and slanders and assassinations of reputation, 
the very thought of which at first would have been repelled 
with horror. How necessary to heed the voice of 
conscience! 

Look at Herod, too, how his failure to heed conscience 
led him step by step deeper into the mire. Notice how, 



when he heard John and was perplexed, if he had followed 
conscience he still might have gone free; but failing to heed 
it he became more and more entangled, until the culmination 
recorded in this lesson was reached, until he murdered 
the Lord's prophet. 

Herodias was on the lookout for a convenient occasion 
on which to entrap still further the man who was already 

R3778 : page 155 

under her power through neglecting the voice of his conscience. 

Days were precious to her; she knew not when 

the Prophet's words might take effect upon Herod's conscience; 

she believed that he had a little conscience, and 

that it was troubled to some extent. Her auspicious time 

came with Herod's birthday; she would encourage his vanity; 

she would help to arrange the preliminaries for making 

it a great day of festival; she would thus endear herself to 

Herod as the one who sought most his elevation before the 

world. 

Herod had sent John away from Galilee to the palace 
at Machaerus, which was also a fortress. In so doing he was 
removing him from Herodias and her particular influence, and 
satisfying her also in that he was at a greater distance and 
would be less frequently seen by Herod. It is supposed 
that the feast was held at that palace fortress, that indeed 
Herod was there at that time preparing for the war with the 
king of Arabia, and that the gathering of the nobles of the 
land was in a measure a patriotic rally throughout the kingdom 
to assure himself of the favor and good will of all of 
his under lords and influential subordinates. Such festivals 
were attended by men alone, and bountifully supplied not 
only with food but also with beverages, as a result of which 
the whole company would become quite convivial. 

Herodias knew the king quite well and was laying a 
trap for him. She knew that when he was surrounded by 
his nobles and princes whatever he promised he would 
feel bound to fulfil: she knew, too, that it was the custom 
of the time and country that, toward the conclusion of such 
a feast, dancing girls would appear in the midst clothed in 
transparent garments, and that under such circumstances it 
was customary for the king to give some present to the danseuse 
proportionate to his appreciation of her self-abandonment 
in the voluptuous dancing. Herodias prepared a surprise 
for them all: the dancing girls were usually from the 
lower classes— she would make a special impression upon 
all by sending her daughter, a princess, a granddaughter of 
Herod the Great, to perform this part. The woman's cunning 
shows at every step, and, her plans carried out exactly 
as she had arranged and hoped, the king and his nobles 
were taken by surprise, and the former said to the maiden, 
"Ask your gift and it shall be yours to the extent of one-half 
of my dominion." If we are inclined to think of this 
as an extravagant matter, let us remember that many a 
wealthy voluptuary has been similarly foolish, spending 
thousands and hundreds of thousands upon actresses and 



other conscienceless women in our day. 

THE CUNNING OF A SERPENT 

Herodias kept the matter to herself— not even her 
daughter Salome knew of the price she expected to exact; 
the girl had merely been advised that when the king would 

R3779 : page 155 

ask her choice of a gift and had declared his willingness to 
give her one, she should withdraw to inquire of her mother 
what she should ask. Herod was astonished at the request 
for the head of John the Baptist. Unprincipled as he was, 
hard-hearted, without a conscience, sadly demoralized, he 
had never thought of murdering God's prophet. We read 
that the king "was exceeding sorry." To some extent evidently 
he began to realize that he had been entrapped. To 
a man of well-balanced mind, of properly guided judgment, 
the question would have been easily settled, but not so to 
one of Herod's character. 

Whatever conscience Herod had, now got onto the other 
side of the question, and insisted that he had made oath and 
that an oath should not be broken; and that for a king to 
break his oath, made in the presence of his nobles, would 
imply that he was a man devoid of all principle and character, 
and that these courtiers could not rely upon him or any 
promises he would make to them in connection with the war 
about to be prosecuted. Hence we read that for his oath's 
sake and for the sake of those who were of the company, 
and we might add for pride's sake, Herod yielded, and as 
the request was one that should be met forthwith he sent 
the executioner at once to John. He thus showed his greatness 
as a king, his respect for his illustrious company, and 
his high standard of value for his oath and his authority and 
power as a king. Truly the Scriptures declare that many 
things that are highly esteemed amongst men are an abomination 
in the sight of God, and in proportion as God's people 
become possessed of his spirit, his mind, his disposition, the 
spirit of a sound mind, in the same proportion these things 
become an abomination to us. 

JOHN THE BAPTIST VERSUS HEROD ANTIPAS 

Two great characters on the page of history are before 
our minds: The Lord's prophet, of whom Jesus declared, 
"There hath not arisen a greater prophet than John the 
Baptist," and Herod Antipas, prominent in his day and black 
marked on the page of history for the past eighteen centuries. 
The one was a man of God, whose life and time and 
all were consecrated to the service of his Maker, to the promulgation 
of righteous principles, to exhorting his fellow 
creatures to abandon sin and to follow righteousness: the 
other enthroned in power, with great possibilities of influence 
for good or evil, used those opportunities injuriously to himself 
and contrary to every principle of righteousness and 



every good influence upon the people over whom he held a 
brief authority. The one used up his life in the preaching 
of the truth, suffered imprisonment and then beheading; the 
other lived a luxurious life of self-gratification amongst the 
plaudits of men, and had the power to take the life of the 
other. What will the harvest be? 

Can any one who believes in a God, and trusts to the 
fulfilment of his promises respecting a future life, doubt that 
there will be a wide distinction between these two men in 
the future? Can any one who understands the divine plan 
doubt that John the Baptist, faithful until death, will be one 
of the princes whom the Lord of glory will appoint in the 
future for the guidance and direction of the world's affairs 
and for the uplift of the groaning creation? To such sterling 
characters the Lord can entrust much of his work, and we, 
perceiving the Lord's selection for the same, can have all the 
greater confidence in the grand outcome of that work in 
God's due time. But what shall we expect for Herod and 
others of his class, who have violated their consciences and 
degraded themselves and misused their opportunities for 
evil instead of for good? We must surely expect that they 
will be beaten with many stripes, that they will have punishments 
—not eternal torment, thank God, but, as the Scriptures 

R3779 : page 156 

declare, a just recompense of reward to every soul of 
man that doeth evil.— Rom. 2:9. 

In proportion as Herod had great opportunities and defiled 
and degraded his conscience, in the same proportion, 
undoubtedly, he will awaken in the resurrection morning in 
a low condition morally, and proportionately will he have 
the more steps to retrace to God back to what he was at the 
beginning of his career, poor as that might have been. And 
still it will require further advancement, development, upward 
steps during the thousand years of the Millennial age 
to attain if he will in the end gain the perfection that was 
lost in Eden and redeemed at Calvary. 

"SHAME AND LASTING CONTEMPT" 

The violation of conscience and the abuse of power 
practiced by Herod and Herodias have made them infamous 
throughout the world. The Scriptures assure us that in 
God's due time, during the Millennium, they with the remainder 
of Adam's family will as a result of Christ's redemptive 
work come forth from the tomb. Through the prophet 
Daniel the Lord has pictured the mass of mankind as awakening 
to shame and lasting contempt, and these two, we 
may be sure, will have special shame and contempt along 
with Nero and other horrible characters of history. By the 
time they are awakened, we may presume that the whole 
world will have reached a fair degree of development and 
progress toward perfection. 

The knowledge of the Lord will be world-wide and 
ocean deep, and the human mind will have expanded proportionately, 



so that the misdeeds of this pair will be more 

intensely abhorred than at present, except by the saints. It 

will be a heavy burden upon the guilty ones as they 

face the knowledge of the world respecting their reprobate 

course. They will feel like sinking through the earth from 

very shame. Moreover, the violations of conscience and 

degradation therefrom will serve to keep them longer in this 

detestable condition than they might otherwise remain— their 

progress toward perfection will be the slower on this account, 

and hence their measure of shame and contempt the greater 

and the more prolonged. 

We thank God, however, that through Christ there is 
forgiveness of sins even for the vilest, and that these, who 
never heard of Christ in the true sense of the word, but whose 
minds were thoroughly blinded and degraded by sin under 
the influence of the god of this world, will ultimately reach 
enlightenment, and that learning of the grace of God 
through Christ they will have an opportunity of laying hold 
upon his mercy and receiving an uplifting blessing that 
gradually will deliver them from their shameful condition 
and from the contempt of fellow creatures— or, failing to use 
this mercy and these privileges and thus proving themselves 
unworthy of any of God's favors, they will die the death— 
the Second Death. We must remember in this connection 
our Lord's promise that it will be more tolerable in that day 
for Sodom and Gomorrah than for Capernaum and other 
cities of Galilee, and so we presume it will be more tolerable 
for the King of Sodom than for King Herod. And yet, 
withal, the Lord's blessed provision is such that his arrangements 
for even the worst of mankind in general will not be 
intolerable. Everything that can be done for their recovery 
from sin and death we may be sure will be done. 



R3779 : page 156 

HE GIVETH FOOD TO THE HUNGRY. 

-MARK 6:30-44.-MAY 27.- 

"My Father giveth you the true bread from heaven."— John 6:32. 

THE twelve apostles had returned from the mission work 
to which the Lord sent them two by two. No doubt 
there was a fixed time for their return and Capernaum 
was probably the rendezvous. The presence of Jesus and 
his apostles caused commotion amongst the people, because 
by this time our Lord's fame was generally spread abroad. 
At Jesus' suggestion the twelve went with him to a country 
place that they might have quiet for the discussion of their 
affairs— their experiences on their mission, and the lessons 
Jesus wished to emphasize in connection with their experiences. 
Our Lord intimated, too, that the rest would be beneficial 
to them. Is not the same lesson applicable to us 
today? 



Ours are strenuous times of great activity, mental and 
physical. The Lord's people, busied with the common activities 
of life, endeavoring to provide things needful, honest, 
and endeavoring also to tell the good tidings and show forth 
the praises of the Master and to proclaim his presence, have 
special need to heed the words, "Come ye yourselves apart 
in a desert place and rest awhile." Many of us enjoyed a 
brief season of resting and refreshment at last year's conventions, 
especially at the one held at Niagara Falls. But 
still the rest feature hardly seemed to be sufficiently emphasized 
even there. Hence we are planning for the present 
year two general conventions, with about the same number 
of meetings spread over about twice the number of days, 
giving better opportunity for fellowship, communion and 
rest. It is our experience that while these conventions cost 
those attending them considerable money, especially for railway 
fares, they nevertheless are sources of great spiritual 
profit and refreshment. Likewise the one-day conventions, 
though in a lesser degree and to smaller numbers. The 
Lord, we believe, is pleased that we should estimate spiritual 
strength, refreshment, grace, above financial cost. This, however, 
would not signify extravagance, wastefulness, neglect 
of duty nor the contracting of debt. 

"ALL MEN WERE IN EXPECTATION" 

But the people were hungry for the Lord's teachings, 
and noting the direction of the boat many went afoot and 
some ran so that they awaited the Lord upon the landing of 
the boat. Was the Lord angry that his endeavor for privacy 
and rest should be thus intruded upon by people for whom 
he had already done much? No! his heart was too full of 
sympathy for that. He looked about upon the people and 
was moved with compassion toward them, because they were 
as sheep having no shepherd. John the Baptist had been 
proclaiming the coming of God's Kingdom. Jesus had been 
giving parables illustrative of the Kingdom, which the people 

R3780 : page 157 

but imperfectly comprehended. The disciples, whom 
he had sent out two by two, had proclaimed repentance and 
preparation for the Kingdom. King Herod, living wickedly, 
had gone the length of beheading John, one of the greatest 
of the prophets, and subsequently he had been at war with 
King Aretas of Arabia, the father of his deserted wife. His 
army had been defeated and there was considerable turmoil 
and excitement amongst the people. They wondered as to 
what might be the outcome of these disturbances, when and 
how the Kingdom of God would be established. They questioned 
as to whether or not Jesus were truly the Messiah and 
would shortly announce himself as the king, and call for 
volunteer soldiers, etc., etc. Evidently the people were becoming 
greatly worked up on the subject, and we know that 
it was only a few days after this that Jesus withdrew from 
the public ministry in that vicinity for awhile, lest the people 



should take him by force and make him a king— contrary 
to the divine plan and our Lord's program. 

Although desiring rest our Lord could not forbear to 
teach the people. He was the true Shepherd and ready at 
all times to fulfil his mission, to lay down his very life for 
the sheep— not merely at Calvary but hourly, daily, during 
the years of his ministry while he was approaching the grand 
climax of his sacrifice. This must be the spirit of all who 
are the Lord's true disciples— increasingly so as they become 
partakers of the Master's holy Spirit, by feeding upon his 
Word and following his directions, growing in grace and 
knowledge and love. 

"THY KINGDOM COME" 

Today many of the Lord's people in Babylon are in 
a similar condition— easily persuaded that we are living in 
remarkable times, that some great dispensational change is 
about at hand. Many have heard something respecting the 
Millennial Kingdom being nigh, even at the door, and are 
wondering how, when, why, where it will be established. 
Looking to the political leaders they see more or less of confusion, 
hear of wars and rumors of wars, and the voice of 
Socialism proclaiming a general overturning of matters in 
the very near future. They note an impending time of trouble 
between capital and labor, and they long for information, 
for leading, for guidance, as to what should be their 
proper course. They are as sheep having no shepherd. 

True, there are many shepherds in Babylon, but in proportion 
as they notice that these are leading toward infidelity, 
toward higher criticism of the Bible and evolutionary 
theories, they fear such leading, they lack confidence in it. 
They know not to whom they should look. The most satisfying 
portion that reaches their ears is the message of the 
Kingdom as we proclaim it, and yet they fear to accept this 
in the face of the denunciations and anathemas of their 
shepherds, who in a measure control them through fear, superstition 
and priestcraft. Every member of the body of 
Christ should remember that he is an ambassador for the 
Lord and should be glad to be used as his mouthpiece in 
proclaiming the good tidings of great joy which shall be 
unto all people, and in helping lead the sheep in the right 
way toward the true Shepherd. 

Not that we can hope to influence all who are in a measure 
hungry: evidently only a little flock will be in that condition 
of heart where they will heed not the voice of strangers, 
but will follow the voice of the Son of God— the voice of 
the Truth. Nevertheless, like the Master, we should be 
compassionate toward all, rejoicing that those who cannot 
hear distinctly in the present time will hear unequivocally 
very shortly, when the Kingdom shall be established and all 
the deaf ears shall be unstopped, and the knowledge of the 
glory of God shall fill the whole earth. 

"TAUGHT THEM MANY THINGS" 



We should take a lesson from the Master's example. 
There were many things that he could teach even to the 
multitude that would be to their advantage, to their comfort, 
and serve as a preparation for their development, so that 
they would by and by be prepared for the deeper things. 
To his twelve apostles, and those who were his specially 
consecrated disciples, he had still other things to tell, saying, 
"To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom 
of God: but unto them that are without these things 
are done in parables." (Mark 4:1 1.) And yet even to the 
disciples there were certain things better left unsaid, as our 
Master intimated: "I have many things to tell you, but ye 
cannot bear them now"— "the spirit of truth shall guide 
you into all truth."— John 16:12,13. 

So the Apostle says, we may talk of the deep things of 
God, the wisdom of God hidden in mysteries, to those who 
are advanced in the knowledge of him and those prepared 
in heart for the deeper truths. We are to be especially on 
guard against choking the babes in Christ with the strong 
meat; but nevertheless we are not to allow them to starve, 
but to give them the milk of the Word that they may grow 
thereby. Let us remember our Lord's words as well as his 
example: he said, "Be ye wise as serpents and harmless as 
doves." Doubtless every one who reads these words can 
realize that in the beginning of his efforts to serve the Lord 
and his cause he did more injury than good because of unwisdom, 
indiscretion, a failure to take heed to the instructions 
of the Lord, a failure to follow his example of giving 
milk to babes and strong meat to men. 

From an account given in another of the Gospels it 
seems evident that after teaching the people our Lord left 
them for a time and went with his disciples apart on the 
hillside, where they reviewed their ministries. Doubtless, 
also, they had opportunities for such fellowship and recounting 
on the boat on the journey. It would appear to have 
been later in the day, in the afternoon, that he came down 
from the mountain and that the crowds already there were 
augmented by large caravans, which at this time were en 
route for Jerusalem for the Feast of Passover, the whole multitude 
numbering several thousand. Apparently the newcomers 
were full of questions and interest and our Lord gave 
forth teachings and expositions. 

"GIVE YE THEM TO EAT" 

The night was coming on and the disciples urged that 
the Lord should disperse the people, but he had a purpose 
which they knew not of— he had in mind one of the greatest 
miracles of his entire ministry. However, instead of telling 
them of it, he allowed the matter to come about in the most 
natural way, suggesting to them that they should seat the 
multitude and he would assist them in their helplessness. 

R3780 : page 158 

He inquired what food they possessed, and a lad with four 



barley loaves and two small fishes was found— next to nothing. 
This served our Lord's purpose, however; he wished 
to show his willingness to cooperate in the work of blessing 
the multitude, and thus he illustrated a general feature of 
his dealings with his people and with the world. He takes 
our time and talents, little and unworthy as these are, and 
blesses them and uses them in his service and accomplishes 
great things. He thus associates his people with himself, 
and blesses them by these experiences and lessons even more 
than he blesses those to whom he sends them with his mercies, 
temporal and spiritual. 

The disciples had learned to be obedient in respect to 
whatever the Master would propose; hence we find no objection 
offered to the Lord's command that they apparently 
make themselves foolish in the sight of the people by bidding 
them sit down in a hundred companies of fifty to prepare 
for a feast when apparently no feast could be spread for 
them. They were beginning to learn that he who could fill 
their nets with fish, who could awaken from the sleep of 
death, who could restore withered hands and heal without a 
touch by a word, was so different from themselves as to be 
beyond the power of their judgment or criticism. They 
obeyed; the Lord did the rest. 

BLESSING THE BREAD 

Our lesson says that the Lord blessed the bread; John's 
Gospel recounting the same matter says, "He gave thanks." 
The two thoughts are in close agreement— the giving of 
thanks to God brought indeed a blessing upon the food. We 
pause here to suggest that if it was appropriate that the 
Only Begotten of the Father should render thanks for that 
frugal meal and should ask the divine blessing upon it, it is 
certainly becoming that any who in any sense of the word 
profess to be his followers should copy his example in this 
as well as in other things. How can we partake of food, 
recognizing that it is of God's bounty and provision, without 
returning our thanks or acknowledgments? We feel sure 
that all who do render thanks receive special blessing with 
their food and upon it, and a special wisdom in respect to 
the use of it that others fail to get. The very peace and 
rest of heart which comes as a result of looking to the Lord 
in gratitude, and accepting his provision with thankfulness, 
by natural law insures a tranquillity which is favorable to 
the digestion of the food. Undoubtedly food which is eaten 
in a pleasant and thankful attitude of mind is more nourishing, 
more refreshing, than the same food if eaten in unthankfulness 
or anger or with feelings of dissatisfaction. 

R3781 :page 158 

Notice also that the feast for which our Lord returned 
thanks was not a sumptuous one; it was not served in elegant, 
decorated ware; it was not fine food; it was plain 
barley bread and dried fish. As we think of the simplicity 
of the diet of our Lord's day and of that of the people of oriental 



countries still, and as we consider the food furnished 
to the Japanese army and the usual food of the Japanese 
family, we get the lesson that both in quantity and in quality 
many people of our day are overfed and perhaps not 
benefited thereby— that plainness and simplicity of food 
would not only be more healthful, but would leave much 
more time for the spiritual refreshment, the bread from 
heaven, and the service of the Truth to others. Each should 
consider this matter and act upon it according to his circumstances 
and the interests and preferences of others, which he 
is surely bound to consider. 

One lesson, however, all can appropriate, namely, that 
gratitude to God is appropriate however simple our bill of 
fare. It would be our hope that so far as possible the readers 
of this journal in their family associations are not neglectful 
of this privilege of giving thanks— to the extent that 
they are the persons having properly the authority or conduct 
of the family's affairs. It would be, of course, inappropriate 
for a stranger or a visitor to intrude upon the 

customs of the family, nor can we think that it is always appropriate 
to openly manifest our thankfulness to the Lord when 
at public tables, at hotels, restaurants, etc. We might be 
pleased to thus acknowledge the Lord, but might well refrain 
if our conduct would be misapprehended as Pharisaism. 
In such cases, however, the heart should always render 
thanks— even if no outward sign or word should indicate it 
to those about us— before a mouthful of food be taken. 

THE DISCIPLES GAVE TO THE PEOPLE 

Other accounts show us that as the Lord broke the food 
he distributed it to his disciples, they in turn carrying it to 
the multitude. How gracious of the Lord to so arrange 
matters! The disciples were thus the better witnesses of the 
power of the miracle, and the people were more or less made 
acquainted with the apostles, who perhaps later on, after 
Pentecost, met many of them, and, as the Master's representatives, 
bore to them the heavenly bread. It is still the same, 
for the Lord will find and will feed and will strengthen 
those who are his, for "the Lord knoweth them that are his." 
(2 Tim. 2:19.) He is not at all dependent upon us for the 
carrying of the Present Truth to the hungry multitude, but 
for our advantage he has given us the privilege of becoming 
co-laborers with him. How we should appreciate it! How 
eager we should be that any little barley loaves we may 
possess, any little fishes, any dollars and dimes, any shillings 
and pence, any time and influence, might be used of the 
Lord in his blessed work! 

While such a course on our part is in the Scriptures 
dignified by the name of sacrifice, yet really, to those who 
understand the situation properly, it is the very reverse, a 
blessing, a privilege, a favor. We are glad to note that this 
privilege is so highly esteemed by those who are now rejoicing 
in the Present Truth. It is a matter of continual wonder 
to the enemies of the Truth, as well as to the slightly 
interested, that means seem never lacking for the promulgation 



of the harvest message, and that without resorting to 

appeals to the world through festivals, fairs, etc., without 

importuning the Lord's people by requests for money or any 

collection baskets— the Spirit of the Lord seems to accompany 

the Truth, so that those who have the Truth and have 

talents of any kind for the Lord's service rejoice with joy unspeakable 

to have these used, giving thanks to the Master 

for the privileges they enjoy. 

"ALL ATE AND WERE FILLED" 

It was not merely a taste of food that the Lord provided, 
but a satisfying portion— all had plenty. We may reasonably 
suppose, however, that a meal consisting of barley 
bread and dried fish would not be partaken of as liberally 
as if condiments, spices, sauces and preserves, sweets, etc., 

R3781 :page 159 

had been supplied. Perhaps nature with us all would act 
more reasonably, so we would know when we had enough, 
if we lived more upon the plain substantial of life, and did 
not too much pamper our appetites and encourage ourselves 
to eat beyond the point of proper satisfaction of hunger. 

That great multitude in some respects pictures the world 
during the Millennial age. Those who now follow the Lord 
as his special disciples will then be supplied abundantly by 
the Master with the bread of eternal life and will be privileged 
to distribute it to all the families of the earth. They 
will all have the opportunity of being filled, refreshed, 
strengthened. As we see how much the world lacks in this 
matter now, our hearts rejoice to know of the abundance of 
God's provision for the future and of the share we shall 
have in co-laboring with our Redeemer in the distribution of 
it to every creature, that all who will may take of the water 
of life freely and eat of the bread of life to their satisfaction. 
It was on the day after this miracle that our Lord 
gave his discourse on the bread of life.— John 6:26-58. 

GATHERING UP THE FRAGMENTS 

It would strike us as rather severe economy that the 
Lord should send his apostles to gather of the leavings of 
the feast from the multitude. It would be rather severe 
economy to oblige the faithful twelve to subsist upon the 
scraps that had been fingered by five thousand people. It 
seems much more reasonable to suppose that the small fragments 
left by the multitude were allowed to go to the birds 
and squirrels, and that the fragments gathered by the apostles 
were those broken by our Lord. As he broke the loaves 
and fishes they multiplied exceedingly, so that he supplied 
and resupplied the disciples with the food, while they carried 
it to the multitude, and that a sufficiency remained beside 
for our Lord to fill the twelve baskets with food that was 
good and clean and in every way suitable for further use. 

The lesson of economy is appropriate to us all, but in 



our experience the poorest of the world and of the Lord's 
people often have greatest need for this lesson. While the 
Lord had abundance of power to create, he would have his 
disciples note the principle of economy and practise it. His 
wealth of power should not be a cause of extravagance on 
the part of any who are his. Extravagance in any matter seems 
much out of place in any that are our Lord's followers. If 
we have more than we need are there not others who have 
less than they need? If we have the Spirit of the Master 
we will have the spirit of helpfulness and generosity, and 
that increasingly as we come more and more into his 
character-likeness. 

The same lesson seems to come to us in connection 
with the harvest work. We sometimes say to ourselves, 
"While our Lord is rich why should any of his followers be 
poor?" Undoubtedly it must be to our advantage that the 
Lord provides apparently just what is needed for his work 
and no more. The lesson in this parable is that he desires 
to give us, his followers, opportunities for sacrificing in connection 
with his service, and thus to bless us and to enable 
us more and more to appreciate our privileges. Perhaps, too, 
if the harvest work were blessed with wealthy friends and 
abundance of money this would foster more of a worldly 
spirit, more of pride and outward display, which would be 
disadvantageous to the cause and unfavorable for our own 
development. Let us be content with such things as we 
have, with the plain bread and fish, with our Lord's blessing. 
Let us take heed to the fragments, too, that we may 
render up a faithful record of our stewardship, that we may 
see to it that the talents entrusted to us have not been buried 
in the earth, but have been used to the best of our ability 
to the glory of our King. 

As our Golden Text declares, we are to give our Father 
in heaven thanks for every good thing, including the bread 
of life— including Jesus, the salvation which he provides, 
and the Kingdom blessings which are coming through him 
and the privileges of association with him. All things are 
of the Father, and all our favors are by or through the 
Son. Gratitude is one of the smallest returns imaginable: 
it leads on to perfect love, which includes a self-sacrificing 
spirit. 



R3781 :page 159 
A MESSAGE FROM THE SAN FRANCISCO FRIENDS. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Your kind favor of 25th ult. is before me, just received, 
and I hasten to reassure you as to the safety 
and reasonably good health of all the dear ones in our 
assembly in and around San Francisco— a majority of 
whom were privileged to attend our usual service on 
the 29th at the usual hour. We surely can rejoice in 
having been all so miraculously spared and having lost 



nothing but a few hours of inconvenience and in one 
case their earthly belongings. 

In the name of our Church I desire to thank you all 
for your kind and brotherly interest in our welfare, and 
will state that there is no need at present of any material 
or financial assistance, but if it should become necessary 
in the near future I will gladly avail myself, on 
behalf of our dear ones, of such from your dear generous 
hearts and hands, but at present we are all well 
provided for. It was my intention to advise you concerning 
the welfare of our Church before this, and the 
omission was caused by the necessity of writing so 
many letters in answer to inquiries from so many different 
places and in seeking after those of our number 
who resided in San Francisco, so pardon my negligence. 

This calamity has caused many thousands, like 
myself, to be without employment— not only the actual 

R3782 : page 159 

residents of the stricken city, but those who resided in 
the cities around the Bay, and what will result from it 
remains only to be seen by waiting and exercising patience 
and faith in God. It is impossible for any but 
those who have witnessed the effects of this catastrophe 
to conceive how complete was the destruction of what 
every one must confess was a wicked city. Brother 
Owen and myself viewed the ruined city from an eminence 
that gave us a complete view of both the burned 
and unburned districts. My estimate is that two-thirds 
of the city was destroyed, while Brother Owen thinks 
four-fifths was destroyed; but in either estimate it is 
very bad. What the suffering and inconvenience of 
many have been and will be for a time can only be 
surmised. 

We can, all of us here, thank God for this object 
lesson, and the strengthening effect it has upon each 
one of us, as does every experience in life, and, as you 
say, assists us in recognizing in this the near approach 
of the Kingdom which shall forever end such calamities 
and afflictions. 

Your brother and servant in Christ, 

H. M. FITCH,-California. 



page 161 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVII JUNE 1, 1906 No. 11 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 163 

The Westminster Confession Again 163 

Epworth League Facing a Crisis 164 

Religious Strife in Germany 164 

Berean Bible Study for June 165 

In Due Time 165 

Binding the Strong Man 166 

The Angel of Gethsemane (Poem) 167 

"My Sheep Hear My Voice" 167 

Faith Indispensable to Success 168 

"Be Patient, Brethren" 170 

Good Confessions and Later Trials 171 

"Thou Art the Christ" 172 

"The Gates of Hell Shall Not Prevail" 173 

page 162 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3782 : page 162 

VOL. III. DAWN IN DANO-NORWEGIAN 



We have just issued the above, in cloth binding only. 
Uniform in style with English edition. Price the same, 25c. 
postpaid. 

page 162 

MISSIONARY ENVELOPES 



These are now in stock in large quantity. Every letter you 
send through the mail may be a more or less potent messenger 
of the Truth, even on its outside, by the use of these envelopes. 
They catch the attention not only of those to whom they are 
addressed, but postmen and others have an opportunity, and 
sometimes the curiosity, to read their message of peace— the 
gospel in condensed form. Price, 25c per 100, postpaid. 

R3782 : page 162 

CLIPPINGS FOR THE EDITOR 



Friends are requested to send us clippings unfavorable to 
the interests of the Truth, as well as special news items, writing 
on same the name of the journal and date of publication. 

page 162 

WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 



These are substantially made of stiff cloth boards, and can 
hold two years' issues of the WATCH TOWER. They prevent 
soiling and loss. Price, postpaid, 50c. 



R3782 : page 163 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE WESTMINSTER CONFESSION AGAIN 



NO DOUBT our Presbyterian friends thought they 
had buried the Westminster Confession of 
Faith so deeply under their new statement of 
Presbyterian faith, that they would never have further 
trouble from its bad odor. Rev. Samuel T. Carter, 
D.D., was one of those who warred for its burial at that 
time. Satisfied for the time, apparently, Dr. Carter 
now realizes that the Westminster Confession is still the 
creed of the Presbyterian Church and the newer statement 
a mere blind. His honest soul now charges into 
the battle afresh for its complete repudiation. He recently 
wrote to the Presbyterian General Assembly on 
the subject, and we quote from his letter as follows:— 

"Fathers and Brethren,— Many years ago, when I 
was ordained to the ministry of the gospel, I declared 
in the most solemn manner I believed the Westminster 
Confession to be the truth of God. I now in an equally 
solemn manner declare I don't believe it to be the truth 
of God; that I utterly reject it as a setting forth of the 
character of the heavenly Father. There never was, 
there is not now, and there never will be such a God as 
the God of the Westminster Confession. 

"It is an idol of man's invention, as truly as any 
worshiped in Delhi, Pekin or Africa. I believe the great 
and true God is infinitely and exquisitely good and 
gracious; that the one thing that we can neither fully 
receive nor declare is the boundless love of God; that 
all the noblest exhibitions of human love are but bright 
and beautiful sparks from that intense and divine 
flame— the love that through ages and generations has 
been leading men by the fullest wisdom and most tender 
providence to heights of knowledge, love and 
boundless hope that far transcend all human thought. 
I lift up this overwhelming divine love before my fellow-men, 
believing that this alone will draw all men 
unto Him. 

"I believe that the Westminster Confession darkens 
and denies this great love of God and should not 
be retained as a Confession by any Church today, and 
that our Church is false to its greatest duty of being a 
true witness for God so long as it retains this 
Confession." 



Brother Carter's experiences encourage us to hope 
and wait patiently for further awakenings amongst the 
theological "dry bones." For years and years Dr. Carter 
preached under the Confession which he did not believe. 
For years he lent his name and voice and influence 
for God-dishonoring error until he got strong 
enough and courageous enough to protest and cry for 
liberty from his slavery. The partial liberty granted 
was doubtless appreciated; but now he longs and cries 
for more, more, more liberty to think. He desires to be 



set free. His conscience longs and cries out that it 
can stand the galling errors no longer. 

Poor Brother Carter does not see the inconsistency 
of his position. He should not have entered the Presbyterian 
House of Bondage! He should never have 
confessed the Confession which his head and his heart 
repudiated. Or, if he did believe the errors at the beginning 
of his Christian life and ministry, and learned 
of them later, he should have been prompt to 
obey conscience, and should have stepped out of Presbyterianism 
into the liberty wherewith Christ makes 
free indeed. Presbyterians who honestly and truly 
believe the statements of the Confession have a right 
to hold it and to tell it abroad. It is the others who 
are at fault. If all who disagree with the Westminster 
Confession would promptly and decidedly withdraw 
from the denomination into liberty, explaining their 
reasons for withdrawing, the effect would be a hundred 
times more satisfactory. 

"Actions speak louder than words." Dr. Carter's 
words say that he is an honest, bold, advocate of Truth 
at any cost; but his actions speak the reverse. They 
tell us, "The Westminster Confession has ties and emoluments 
which I love more than I love the Truth and 
the liberty which Christ offers. I prefer the bondage, 
and to be amongst those who misrepresent my God, 
than to forsake all and follow the Redeemer and his 

R3782 : page 164 

'little flock' whom the world counts 'fools' for Christ's 
sake and too conscientious." 

We hope that Brother Carter and many others will 
ultimately grow stronger in the Lord and still more devoted 
to the Truth, so that ultimately they will take 
gladly the spoiling of their goods— worldly prospects, 
etc.— for Christ's sake, the Truth's sake, hoping for 
the "better resurrection" as "more than conquerors." 

EPWORTH LEAGUE FACING A CRISIS 



Throughout the entire Methodist Church, we are 
informed, "mutterings of uncertainty and dissatisfaction" 
are being heard in regard to the future of the 
Epworth League, the young people's organization, 
which has a membership of about 2,000,000. Indeed, 
the crisis has become so serious that The Epworth Herald 
(Chicago), official organ of the League, is publishing 
a series of articles about it from the pen of Dr. 
Wentworth F. Stewart, author of the "Evangelistic 
Awakening." Dr. Stewart says it is his observation 
that "the League in many places is lacking in vigorous, 
self-sustaining life; in others, is a problem in itself; 
and only rarely is it measuring up to reasonable expectation 



in spiritual culture, evangelistic zeal, and missionary 
enterprise;. ..it is not a reviving and recruiting 
force, and is not saving to any reasonable 
degree the young people within its reach." He says:— 

A GENERAL CRITICISM 

"Our whole Church has been for years committed 
to the numerical ideal of quantity instead of quality. 
Anything to secure a crowd, multiply numbers, increase 
the membership roll. Some churches and some leagues 
double their membership while the same pews hold the 
congregation, the same chairs seat the people at the 
mid-week prayer service and the devotional meeting of 
the League, and only the same prayers and testimonies 
are heard because there is not leaven enough to permeate 
their entire following. 

"To gain our membership one by one, seeking 
their conversion first, and relation after, though a slower 
process, is infinitely more valuable than a red-and-blue 
contest with no significance attached; the same 
amount of energy thoroughly spiritualized and spent 
in evangelistic activities would add permanent strength 

R3783 : page 164 

to the League and not give the impression that religion 
is secondary to membership."— Literary Digest. 

RELIGIOUS STRIFE IN GERMANY 



Berlin, May 15.— The question of the divinity of 
Christ now threatens to rend German Protestantism 
into two great parties, the liberal and the orthodox. 

The revolt in liberal churches against the narrow 
limits of orthodoxy has been fanned into a flame by the 
refusal of the State Church Consistory and the Prussian 
Supreme Court to sanction the selection of Rev. Rowen 
as pastor of the Church at Rhemscheid in Westphalia. 

His offense was that he preached sermons in which 
he repudiated the divine parentage of Christ, characterizing 
it as a myth inspired by Graeco-Pagan 
influences. 

FLOCK IS OBDURATE 

The Church at Rhemscheid refused to select another 
pastor, and its pulpit remains unoccupied. 

More than 1,300 mass meetings have been held to 
discuss the religious situation. Taken together they 
form an astonishing revelation of the enormous extent 
of the growth of the so-called higher criticism doctrines. 

The ferment is increasing, daily, hourly. The liberal 
pastors and their congregations threaten secession 



unless the bounds of the creed are widened by the 
elimination of what they call the Supernatural Articles. 

The correspondent, in conversation with a leading 
theologian who occupies a university chair, was advised 
that out of 8,000 German Protestant pastors in active 
service at the present time not over one-quarter are believers 
in the literal text of the Apostles' Creed, and 
only one-tenth hold to the inspiration of the Bible. 

LEADERS OF THE MOVEMENT 

Men like Prof. Harnack and Prof. Delitzsch, author 
of "Babel and Bible," lights of the liberal school of 
theology, propose that the Kaiser, as head of the 
Church, call a general council of the adherents of all 
theological schools to recast the creed and formulate 
some neutral body of doctrine which men of all opinions 
can subscribe to. 

Should the Kaiser do this the cataclysm may be 
prevented. Otherwise it is predicted on all sides the 
Reformed Church of Germany will soon be split into 
warring factions. 



Only those who have some knowledge of the "Divine 
Plan of the Ages" can comprehend such difficulties 
and appreciate the outcome. This is not a strife 
between the true Church and the false one; but between 
two sections of the false or nominal system. 
Money is at the bottom of it. The German Government 
pays the preachers of all denominations; so now when 
one is pushed away from the public teat there is a howl 
of rage, not only from the ousted one, but also from 
others in sympathy with him, who foresee that their 
turn may come next. 

It is not time yet to judge the hearts to determine 
which are honest and which dishonest, but there is no 
mistake about it that if neither honor of men nor financial 
considerations played a part there would be few to 
contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the 
saints. But those few would be the honest and true on 
both sides of the discussions. 

The Lord's people, who have renounced worldly 
and political methods, and who are seeking chiefly, 
solely, the Kingdom of Heaven, will do well to possess 
their souls in peace and go right along proclaiming 
the "good tidings of great joy which shall be unto all 
people." They need not look for worldly help, but, as 
in our Lord's time, should persevere, self-sacrificingly 
preaching without money and without price, seeking 
out the few who "have an ear to hear," even as many 
as the Father shall draw to the Truth. 



R3783 : page 165 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY FOR JUNE. 

--FOR EXPLANATION SEE PREFACE OF WATCH TOWER 
BIBLES, AND WATCH TOWER MARCH 1, 1905.- 

EVIL SPEAKING AND EVIL SURMISING 

20. Might telling the truth be evil speaking? Z/99-70 
(1st col. par. 3 to 2nd col. par. 2). 

21. Is it always necessary to tell all we know about 
every affair? Z. '00-71 (2nd col. par. 3). 

22. Is an uncomplimentary remark evil speaking? 
Z.'02-188 (2nd col. par. 3); F.406, par. 1. 

23. Would it be evil speaking to criticize doctrines publicly 
uttered? Z/02-219 (2nd col. par. 2). 

24. What is a slanderer? Z. '05-215 (2nd col. par. 1); 
Z/99-70 (2nd col. par. 1 to 3). 

25. What is "false witness," and is it possible to bear 
false witness without uttering a word? Z. '02-219 

(1st col. par. 2, 3). 

26. How should we deal with a brother or sister who 
begins to relate an evil report? Z. '05-215 (1st col. 
par. 4, 5). 

27. How should we deal with persons of the world who 
do evil speaking? Eph. 5:11,12; Z/99-70 (1st 

col. par. 1, 2); Z/02-74 (1st col. par. 1); Z/98-368 (1st 
col. par. 1). 

28. Is evil speaking against a brother in Christ more 
culpable than against one of the world? T.S.62, 

par. 3; Z/03-426 (1st col. par. 1, 2). 

29. In order to avoid gossip, slander and evil speaking, 
what is the only proper and Scriptural way of 

redress for grievances, actual or imaginary? 

Matt. 18:15-17, Z/05-214 (1st col. par. 4) to 215 (1st 

col. par. 3);F.414-417. 

30. How should we deal in a matter of evil speaking 
against an Elder? 1 Tim. 5:19. F.293, 294, 418 

(par. 1, 2). 

31. Why is "a bridled tongue" a chief essential in an 
Elder? Jas. 3:2. Z/99-75 (2nd col. par. 2); Z/97-156 
(2nd col. par. 2); F.249, par. 2. 

32. How may we ask advice and not do evil speaking? 
F.292, top of page. 

33. What is the relation between "busybodying" and 
evil speaking? F.583, par. 1, to 586; F.408, par. 1 to 3. 

34. How should the Golden Rule help us to overcome 
evil speaking and evil surmising? F.407; Z. '02-188 
(2nd col.) to 189 (1st col. par. 2); Z/00-262 

(1st col. par. 1, 2). 

35. What is the sole exception to this rule, "Speak evil 
of no man"? Z/99-71 (2nd col. par. 2). 

36. What inspiration should we receive from Jesus' 
example? 1 Pet. 2:23. Z/01-298 (1st col. par. 1, 

2); Manna, Dec. 7; Z/02-310 (2nd col. par. 1). 



37. How can we overcome evil surmisings and evil 
speaking? 

(a) By purifying the heart. Prov. 4:23. F.409, 
par. 2. 

(b) By prayer. Psa. 141:3. Psa. 19:12-14. Z/98-23 
(2nd col. par. 1). 

(c) By keeping the mind filled with pure and 
holy thoughts. Phil. 4:8. Z. '01-324 (1st 

col). Z/03-8 (2nd col. par. 3) to 9 (1st col. 
par. 3); Z. '05-216 (1st col. par. 3 and 2nd col. 
par. 3); Z/00-72 (1st col. par. 1, 2). 

38. What additional thoughts are found in index of 
Heavenly Manna under "Evil"? 

39. What special experiences and practices have helped 
you to overcome evil surmisings to some extent? 

40. As we realize how insidious this foe of the "new 
creature," what should be our daily prayer? 

Psa. 19:12-14. 



R3783 : page 165 

IN DUE TIME. 

TIME is one of the most important factors in God's 

plan. The days of creation were long periods 

of time; the time of man's experience with evil 

has been six days of a thousand years each; the day of redemption 

and of the development of the Church has been 

nearly two thousand years. Time has been necessary 

for the accomplishment of God's great work; and it 

has also been necessary in proving to man the righteousness 

of God's character. Only time could prove to 

men his invincible justice. Six thousand years ago his 

sentence of death passed upon mankind, and during 

all that time he has permitted generation after generation 

to go down into the grave in the midst of agony, 

blood and tears. And though he loved men so, even 

while they were yet sinners, that he spared not his own 

Son, but freely gave him up for us all, yet he has never 

for a moment relented so as to interpose his power for the 

relief or release of the groaning creation: nor will he do 

so until his "due time"— the time which his wisdom appointed, 

which will be the very best time for the securing 

of the largest possible results to the race, both of 

R3784 : page 165 

knowledge and of advantageous experience, as well as 
for the development of several of the most important 
features of his plan. But as time only can develop 
God's plan, so time only can manifest his love as well 
as his wisdom, his grace, his power and his justice. 

Time will fully manifest the divine wisdom in what 
seems to short-sighted humanity like pitiless delay. 



Already those who are privileged to view by faith the 

divine plan see the necessity of time for its full accomplishment. 

It is in view of such necessity that the 

children of God are frequently exhorted to patience. 

God has kindly brought us to his standpoint of view 

and bidden us look into the glorious future— to the 

outcome of his plan; and in proportion as we are able 

to comprehend and believe it, we may rest and rejoice 

in it. But in the meantime, being thus graciously 

refreshed by the cheering prospect, we must patiently 

wait for the end, however painful the waiting season 

may be. 

Patience is a virtue which our heavenly Father desires 
to cultivate in us; and he manifests in himself 
the grandest example of it. Through all the centuries 
past he has patiently endured the reproaches of those 
who, failing to understand the course of his wisdom in 
executing justice and in working out the deep designs 
of his abounding grace, attributed evil, and only evil, 
to his truly glorious and holy character. He knows 
that "in due time" his character will be fully vindicated, 
and so he patiently waits and works and endures. So 
also our Lord Jesus waits and endures. He endured 
great humiliation in coming to our low estate. Then 

R3784 : page 166 

as a man he patiently endured the contradictions of 
sinners against himself and ungrateful persecution, 
even unto death, from those he came to save. And, 
like his heavenly Father, through it all he was cheered 
in consideration of that "due time," though then in the 
far distant future, when his character, and also the 
Father's character, would be fully vindicated and manifested 
to every creature in heaven and in earth. And 
still our blessed Lord Jesus and our adorable heavenly 
Father await with patience the grand consummation. 
So, in similar attitude of mind, we must wait; for the 
servant is not above his Lord, and our rejoicing in view 
of the future will, if we have the mind of Christ, be not 
only because of our own prospective vindication and 
glory, but also in prospect of the vindication and glory 
of God and of our Lord Jesus, and of the prospective 
everlasting triumph of truth and righteousness. 

The waiting time is by no means a time of rejoicing, 
except in hope. This is a time when truth and 
righteousness are being humbled in the dust, when 
they that live godly must suffer persecution, when our 
eyes must look upon scenes of sorrow and mourning, 
when our ears must hear the wails of distress, and 
when our feeble flesh must experience the pangs of 
death. But, oh, there is a glorious release to come "in 
due time! " Wait for it patiently; "Let patience have 
her perfect work." Submit to the humbling process. 
The Church's pathway of present humiliation leads to 
the future glory. 



"Humble yourselves," says the Apostle, "under the 
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due 
time." Do not make the great mistake of seeking present 
exaltation at the expense of that which is to come 
"in due time" to those who patiently endure to the end. 
It is only in proportion as any turn their eyes away 
from the glory to follow "in due time," and thus lose 
faith in it, that they begin to prize the trifling recompenses 
which the world offers for the sacrifice of their 
birthright. Let us, therefore, dearly beloved, keep the 
eye of faith fixed upon the hope set before us in the 
gospel; and, forgetting those things that are behind- 
all worldly ambitions, etc.— let us press toward the 
mark for the prize of our high calling, which shall indeed 
be realized by the faithful— "in due time;" for 
"Faithful is he that hath called you, who also will do 
it." His purposes cannot fail, nor his word return unto 
him void. 



R3784 : page 166 

BINDING THE STRONG MAN. 

"No man can come into a strong man's house and spoil 
his goods except he will first bind the strong man, and 
then he will spoil his house."— Mark 3:27. 

THESE WORDS were spoken in answer to the 
charge of the Pharisees that Jesus was casting 
out devils by the power of Satan, the prince of 
demons. Our Lord first showed how unreasonable was 
the charge that Satan had taken to opposing himself. 
His argument is that if that be true it would imply that 
Satan's power was tottering to a fall, if it was necessary 
for him to thus work against his own plans and 
arrangements, associates, etc. This does not imply 
that Satan will never be so cornered as to find it necessary 
to do good works in order to deceive if it were 
possible the very elect, but it does imply that when 
that time shall come, and the Adversary shall favor 
good works, the healing of diseases, casting out of 
devils, etc., it will be a sure indication that his kingdom 
is tottering. We believe that this is the case to 
some extent at the present time— that Satan has much 
to do with various faith healings that are done by 
Christian Science, Spiritualism, Hypnotism, etc. 
But our Lord's argument was to the contrary of 
all this— that he was not casting out devils as the minion 
of Satan, but on the contrary that he was opposing 
Satan. Then he used the words of our text, which imply 
that he was already binding Satan, already spoiling 
his goods. Satan's control of mankind was certainly 
interfered with when our Lord cast out the 
demons and gave power and authority to his disciples 



to do the same throughout Palestine. This our Lord 
declared was a sign that a stronger one than Satan 
was at work. Satan was indeed powerful and had taken 
possession of the world and was exercising a great 
influence therein, and the fact that now he was interfered 
with to any extent and demons were cast out 
proved that he had met one more powerful than himself, 
and that the time of the complete overthrow of his 
dominion would come. 

This text then is analogous to and in harmony 
with another which declared, "Now is the prince of 
this world cast out." Our Lord again declared, "I beheld 
Satan as lightning fall from heaven." Our Lord 
had come into the world for the very purpose of mastering 
Satan, and in order to vanquish him he had consecrated 
his life even unto death, that by means of death 
he might destroy death and him that had the power of 
death, that is, the devil. God had accepted the consecration, 
the sacrifice, and had granted our Lord the anointing 
of the Spirit at his baptism, and it was under the 
power and influence of this Spirit that he declared that 
as the Finger of God he cast out demons. However, the 
work of destroying Satan's house was not intended to go 
on to a rapid completion, but rather that merely the power 
of the Anointed One should be demonstrated for our 
comfort and joy and faith, and that he should be permitted 
to control the world for a time further, until the 
full end of this Gospel age, when his binding will be 
gradually accomplished and will be followed by the 
liberating of the whole world from his chains of error 
with which he has deceived all nations. 

In Matthew 24:43 our Lord uses somewhat similar 
language, but applies it not to his own day but to the 
end of the age. He speaks of his second advent as being 
unknown to the world and therefore to them as a 

R3784 : page 167 

thief in the night, unexpected. He intimates that such 

a secrecy respecting the time is essential; that if it 

were generally known to the world the divine plan and 

arrangement in respect to the end of the age would be 

foiled. To the Church it would be given to know the 

times and seasons, through the holy Spirit enlightening 

their understanding respecting the Word of Truth uttered 

through the apostles and prophets of old for our admonition. 

But none of the wicked would understand, 

only the wise, the truly wise with the wisdom that cometh 

from above, the consecrated. So far as the world 

would be concerned, its great ones, its master minds in 

Church and in State, in business, in finances, would all 

be surprised in the end of this age. The Master would 

be present as a thief in the night to take, first of all, 

his "jewels," his Bride, his saints, and then to utterly 

spoil, overthrow, the affairs of this present time, that 

on the ruins thereof he might speedily set up his everlasting 



Kingdom of righteousness. 

"Ye brethren are not in darkness"— that day has 
not overtaken you as a thief, though it will thus overtake 
all the world. (I Thess. 5:3,4.) The thief-like 
work of taking the Church is already in progress; by 
and by it will all be completed, and shortly thereafter 
— 1915— the kingdoms of this world, with all of their associated 
institutions, will go down in a climax of trouble 
such as the world has never known, because after 
gathering his Bride class the Lord will execute judgments 
upon Babylon. 

At that time Satan will be bound that he should deceive 
the nations no more until the thousand years are 
finished.— Rev. 20:3. 



R3785 : page 167 

THE ANGEL OF GETHSEMANE. 

'Twas midnight, and the Man of Sorrows took his chosen three, 

And sought with weary step the shelter of Gethsemane 

To pray, his soul exceeding sorrowful, e'en unto death, 

And heavy laden with the sin and woe of all the world. 

In agony of bloody sweat he fell upon his face, 

And cried, with tears, "My God, my Father, if it be thy will, 

Oh, let this cup of shame and numbering with transgressors 

pass,— 
If it be possible! Yet, not my will, but thine be done!" 
And then his thoughts turned to the sacrifice,— a fear bore down 
With agonizing weight upon his heart, lest to comply 
With every jot and tittle of the Law, he might have failed! 
He saw the priestly type, he knew eternal death awaited, 
Should he seek to pass the second vail unworthily. 
Eternal death! Oh, anguish inexpressible,— to see 
No more his Father's face! He sought his well-beloved three, 
Perchance they might refresh his fainting heart with some sure 

word 
Of prophecy. Alas, their eyes were heavy and they slept. 
Three times he sought them, and three times in vain! Yet he 

was heard 
In that he feared. The Father sent a heavenly comforter 
To touch with tender, strengthening hand that dear, devoted 

head, 
And whisper, "I the Lord in righteousness have called thee, I 
Will hold thine hand and keep thee, neither shalt thou fail 

nor be 
Discouraged.' Lo, thou art 'a priest forever, and a king 
Upon thy throne, like to Melchizidek.' And thou shalt see 
The travail of thy soul, and shalt be satisfied." His heart 
Revived, he knew his Father's faithful word could never fail; 
He knew it would accomplish that whereunto it was sent. 
He rose, and from that hour went forth to trial and to death, 
In peace,— a calmness born of perfect confidence in God. 



How oft, throughout the many-centuried "night" of this dark 

age, 
The Father's "little ones" have knelt in sad Gethsemane 
To pray! E'en now the Garden's shade re-echoes with the cry 
Of God's elect, "How long, oh Lord, how long until we see 
The travail of our soul? How long until thou shalt avenge 
Thine own elect, who cry to thee, with tears, both night and 

day?" 



Dear Lord, oh, use me as the angel in Gethsemane! 
Oh, fill me with thy holy Spirit of divinest love! 
Oh, make me sympathetic, wise, that every anguished heart 
May come, nor seek in vain for consolation from thy Word, 
And strengthened, comforted, go forth to prison and to death, 
To suffer patiently the cruel mockings of the tongue; 
To bear the cross unto the bitter end, then calmly say, 
'"Tis finished," and with faith unwavering pass beneath "the vail!" 
--G. W. Seibert, May 6, 1906. 



R3785 : page 167 

"MY SHEEP HEAR MY VOICE." 

-JOHN 10:27- 

CONSIDERING the mental imperfections, the unbalance 

of mind, prevalent in the world, we 

sometimes wonder that our differences of understanding 

are not greater than they are. The secret 

of the measure of unity amongst mankind on various 

subjects undoubtedly is that the majority are in almost 

total ignorance on such subjects, and hence make no 

claim of intelligent reasoning thereon, but merely follow 

some leader of thought. Just as soon as people begin 

to use their own thinking apparatus they begin to differ, 

and sound minds being in the minority the wonder is 

that more mistakes do not result. In the ordinary affairs 

of the world, in the ordinary affairs of life, there 

is no test as respects the soundness of theorizing, reasoning, 

except such as comes from the pages of history, 

showing the outworking of various theories, or such as 

are demonstrated by the mistakes of those about us. 

On these various subjects of life, each must do the best 

he knows how. 

Only on subjects dealt with in the Scriptures have 
we a positive basis of information and positive lines 
along which to use our reasoning faculties. Hence the 
Apostle declares that those who follow strictly, implicitly, 
the divine instructions possess more than others 
"the spirit of a sound mind." (2 Tim. 1:7.) Yet even 
amongst those who are seeking to follow the guidance 
of the Word there is some room for differences, misunderstandings, 



false reasoning, etc. Hence the Apostle 
Paul urged Timothy, who was an elder in the Church 
and who had been reared under the teachings of the 
holy Scriptures, that he should still continue to search 
and to rightly divide the Word of Truth, that thus he 

R3785 : page 168 

might be a workman in the Lord's cause who would not 
need to be ashamed. (2 Tim. 2:15.) What was true of 
Timothy is true respecting all who endeavor to honor 
the Word of God. It behooves us all to be very careful, 
very circumspect, to look carefully on all sides of every 
important question, to endeavor to get the proper bearings 
and not be led off in any specious or false reasoning 
or sophistry which would entangle ourselves and 
others in error. Even with our best strivings for the 
truth, with our greatest care, there is still danger, especially 
amongst those who are awake and using their 
brains. 

"KNOWLEDGE PUFFETH UP, LOVE BUILDETH UP" 

It is safe to say that no other class of religious people 
in the world do as much thinking, studying and reasoning 
on the Scriptures as do the forty or fifty thousand 
readers of ZION'S WATCH TOWER. Their senses 
have been awakened by reason of use; they are earnestly 
desirous of knowing the truth, the whole truth 
and nothing but the truth; they find the promises of 
the Lord's Word assuring them that he will guide them 
into all truth, and hence they go forward with the 
greater sense of rest and security that they shall know 
the truth and that the truth shall make them free. 

Nevertheless, there is a danger point in connection 
with the study of the Truth. It was along this point 
that the Apostle cautioned some in his day, saying, Be 
not many of you teachers, brethren, knowing that a man 
shall receive the greater testing— the severer trial of his 
faith, etc. The spirit of meekness is very essential to 
all of us. We need to realize that of ourselves we 
know nothing, that our own judgment and reasoning 
are not to be depended upon, that we must be continually 
looking to the Lord for the help which cometh from 
him alone. We have learned not to look to human institutions 
of learning, Doctors of Divinity, etc., but to 
the Word of God. We must learn also that, even with 
the Word of God in our hands, we need the Spirit of 
God to direct us in its use, that we may understand it 
aright. We are to remember, too, that God's people 
have had the Bible in their hands for lo, these many 
years, yet have generally failed to understand it. Let 
the thought, then, make and keep us very humble, very 
dependent upon the great Teacher, the Head of the 
Church— the Church which is his body. 



"ALL TAUGHT OF GOD" 

We remember the story of Philip and the eunuch. The 
eunuch had the Scriptures and was reading them at the 
very time, yet he did not understand them until the Lord 
specially sent Philip to expound them to him. We remember 
Philip's question, "Understandest thou what 
thou readest?" We remember the eunuch's reply, "How 
can I unless it be interpreted to me?" We remember 
that the interpretation was sent by the Lord and accepted 
as from the Lord and that the blessing followed. 
We remember the Apostle's discourse along similar 
lines saying, How shall the heathen hear without a 
preacher? How shall any teach unless he be sent? 
How can any really interpret the Word of God and 
make it plain without divine assistance and guidance? 
This assistance apparently comes in two ways: first, a 
preparation of the heart, as the Lord denominated it, a 
hearing ear; and, second, a message sent of the Lord, 
an exposition of his Word for the hearing ears and for 
them alone. Humility is everywhere necessary, not 
only essential to the hearing ear but also essential to 
the tongue that would be the Lord's representative and 
ambassador and the exponent of his truth. 

We remember the narrative of Peter and Cornelius, 
as illustrating the above. Cornelius was already devout; 
he reverenced God, was benevolent, gave much 
alms, was a good man in general, and he had a hearing 
ear, and yet in the Lord's providence it was necessary 
to send Peter to tell him the words by which himself 
and his house might be saved— might come into harmony 
with the Lord. It was not sufficient merely to 
send Cornelius a copy of the Scriptures; but necessary 
to expound to him the way of the Lord. Let us 
not forget these things: let us not become self-conscious, 
boastful, proud, heady, highminded, for such 
conditions of heart would surely interfere with 
our learning further lessons in the school of Christ; 

R3786 : page 168 

and not only so, but some of the lessons already 
learned would speedily begin to fade away, and if the 
light which is in us become darkness how great will be 
that darkness— it will be greater than it is in those who 
never saw the light of Present Truth.— Matt. 6:23. 

The Apostle tells us that the ox knoweth its owner 
and the ass his master's crib— although brute beasts 
they learn where to go for their nourishment. The 
same is true of barnyard fowls and all domestic animals 
—they not only have an appetite for food but soon 
learn the incidents connected with their feeding. The 
Lord seems to intimate that some of his people are less 
wise in these respects than are the dumb animals— they 
forget how, when and where they got their previous food. 
This is not true, however, of the Lord's flock. The 



true sheep know the green pastures and still waters 
and the Shepherd's voice, and a stranger will they not 
follow because they recognize not the voice of strangers 
—"My sheep hear my voice and they follow me." 



R3786 : page 168 

FAITH INDISPENSABLE TO SUCCESS. 

-MARK 7:24-30.-JUNE 3- 

Golden Text:— "Great is thy faith; be it 
unto thee even as thou wilt."— Matt. 15:28. 

WITH the whole of Galilee awakened, with the people 
discussing the wisdom and propriety of taking him 
by force and making him a king, with Herod's 
boldness manifested in the beheading of John the Baptist, 
and with the realization that his time for death had not yet 
come, our Lord left the parts where he was so well known 
and journeyed about forty-five miles toward the Mediterranean. 
This brought him to what in our lesson is called the 

R3786 : page 169 

"borders of Tyre and Sidon," more properly the provinces 
of Tyre and Sidon— within the boundary of the land called 
Phoenicia, of which the cities of Tyre and Sidon had been the 
centers of wealth, influence and business. We are not informed 
that Jesus went to either of those cities: apparently 
he merely crossed the borders of Galilee, and was thus for a 
time free from the authority of Herod. He would rest a 
little from his labors, and allow the truths which he had 
taught to penetrate into the hearts of his hearers. He would 
let the froth work off and the real essence of the truth abide 
in the hearts which were in condition of righteousness for 
it. He knew well that these would be but few. 

The more his work increased and his fame spread 
abroad the more did the Adversary raise up opponents and 
hindrances. After the feeding of the five thousand and his 
return to Galilee he had discussions with the Pharisees, who, 
jealous of his growing popularity with the people, sought to 
oppose him. They would indeed have been glad to have 
recognized him as a Pharisee and to have had him do his 
mighty works in the name of Pharisaism. But his attitude 
was that of an independent— the Pharisees had sins that 
needed to be rebuked as well as others. Outwardly they 
were professing full consecration to God, but our Lord, who 
was able to read the heart, knew that a great deal of this 
was mere pretense, outward form and ceremony, 
show-religion. 

These Pharisees, posing as the leaders of religious 
thought in that day, were made very angry by our Lord's 
plainness of speech, and the fact that he pointed out to the 



common people the general rules and principles by which a 
tree may be known by its fruits— that the Pharisees were 
not to be esteemed according to their professions, but to be 
measured by their deeds. They prided themselves upon their 
strict observances of the Law, but he showed that many of 
the things which they did were not really the Law of God, 
but the commandments of men, and that the very essence of 
the divine Law, love, justice, they largely ignored, not only 
in their teachings but also in their practices. The Pharisees 
feared, therefore, that the high station which they had previously 
held in the estimation of non-professors was being 
shaken, and their pride antagonized this— hence they hated 
him without a cause. They should have been glad to have 
had their attention called to their errors that they might have 
corrected the same, but this is not the attitude of the unregenerate 
heart: it rejoiceth in iniquity and rejoiceth not in 
the truth; it rejoiceth in whatever upholds its pride and 
gives color to its boastings of success. To them Pharisaism 
meant everything, and the fall of Pharisaism meant the fall 
of all religion. 

It is much the same today. Many highly-esteemed people 
today occupy the position of the Pharisees of that time. 
They make an outward show, they boast of their success, 
they delight in the honor of men, especially in the honor of 
the world; they multiply forms and ceremonies and meetings 
and make a fair show in the flesh. They draw near to 
God with their lips, but give evidence that their heart sentiments 
are not in harmony with their lip professions, because 
when the truth is presented to them they hate it instead of 
loving it, and they hate the light-bearers because the light 
makes manifest their own weaknesses, hypocrisies, dissemblings 
in doctrines and practice. 

The improper spirit exemplified in the priests and 
Pharisees and Scribes in our Lord's day finds a parallel 
today in the anger, malice, hatred, bitter words, which, like 
arrows, are shot forth at those who serve the Truth, who seek 
to lift up the standard to the people, who seek to show up 
the errors of the "dark ages," and through the Truth to 
make known the real character of our heavenly Father and 
the real meaning of his Word. Persecutors always claim that 
they are in support of a principle of righteousness; only in 
this way can they deceive some whom they enlist upon their 
side— some of better heart and conscience than their own. 
As the Israelites considered that anything that would undermine 
them would be to the injury of the Lord's cause, so 
today every section of Babylon, every sect of Christendom, 
seems to be fully persuaded that anything which would undermine 
the errors of their systems would be injurious to the 
cause of the Lord; hence they feel that in supporting sectarianism 
in any of its branches they are fighting for God. 
Theirs is a part of the blindness which comes from the god 
of this world, the prince of this world, Satan, who has all 
the heathen thoroughly under his control, thoroughly blind 
to the goodness of God and his message. 

Our duty, nevertheless, is to be bold and courageous 
for the Truth, not with the hope of convincing all of our 



gainsayers, not with the thought of destroying sectarianism, 
but with the thought of gathering to the Lord his jewels 
from every quarter of Babylon, "Those who have made a 
covenant with me by sacrifice." (Psa. 50:5.) This was 
Jesus' work in the end of the Jewish age. He was gathering 
the jewels. His work was a success, although it seemed 
otherwise to his opponents. Similarly our work under God 
will be a success, even though others may see it differently. 
Even our Lord's crucifixion was a part of the success of 
God's plan, favorable not only to the believers but to all the 
families of the earth. 

So with us: "God will turn what seems to harm us 
into everlasting joy;" he will so overrule that all things 
shall work together for good to those who love him, to those 
who are on his side and are faithful in holding up his standard. 
Faith is the lesson here: our Lord had faith in the 
Father's plan and followed it through good report and 
through evil report. The apostles had faith in him, and 
when others said, "It is a hard saying," they said, "Lord, to 
whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal life." 
Similarly with us faith is necessary: if we have faith in the 
Lord and in his Word we cannot doubt what the results 
will be, and will be prepared for all the experiences of life 
as they will be permitted to come to us, and will get blessings 
from them all. 

THE SYROPHOENICIAN WOMAN 

The country of Tyre and Sidon was called Phoenicia, 
and its population was made up largely of Carthaginians 
and Syrians. The woman of our lesson was of Syrian ancestors, 
and by education and language was a Greek. In a 
word she represented quite a mixture of nationalities; she 
was therefore a Gentile out and out. She had a little 

R3786 : page 170 

daughter possessed of an evil spirit, and her mother-love 

awakened her sensibilities as well as her faith. Although 

Jesus had entered the village without ostentation, in a semi-private 

manner, some one had known him, and the word 

some way reached the ears of this poor, afflicted woman. 

She hastened to the place where Jesus was, and prostrated 

herself before him. Matthew says that her cry was, "Have 

mercy upon me, O Lord! Lord, help me!" 

The American consul at Jerusalem, Honorable Selah 
Merrill, mentions the importunity of the people of the East, 
saying, "To one who has ever held a prominent or official 
position in the East the persistency of pleading women is a 
fact one will never forget. They will not be driven from 
their purpose by a rough manner. Severe language does 
not deter them. They are not wearied by delays. They 

R3787 : page 170 

will sit and wait hour after hour, and come day by day, ignoring 



all kinds of refusals. They are importunate beyond 
anything that I ever experienced in our western life." 

The case is just such a one as we know the Master 
would have promptly attended to under ordinary circumstances. 
The faith was there, hence the persistency of the request. 
But on this occasion Jesus simply ignored the woman, 
"He answered her not a word." (Matt. 15:23.) It would even 
appear that he left the house, and that the woman importuned 
the disciples that they would intercede for her with 
their Master, for we read that the disciples subsequently 
came to Jesus entreating him to "send her away." Evidently 
they had first tried to discourage the woman themselves, 
and told her that their Master was a Jew and that his mission 
was to Jews; that she could not have much hope for 
favor, and that his refusal was indicated by his silence to 
her first request. But the woman's faith in the Lord and 
love for her child led her to stay to importune. 

Apparently while the disciples were speaking with Jesus 
the woman again approached him, pleading her own 
cause. This time he answered her, but unsatisfactorily. 
He said, "Let the children first be filled: for it is not proper 
to take the children's bread and cast it unto dogs." Had 
there been pride in the heart this response would have been 
sufficient to have put the woman upon her dignity, so that 
she would have ceased her importunity and have openly 
tiraded against the Lord and against all Jews as ecclesiastical 
bigots. But she was humble as well as full of faith, 
and so far from taking offence at being told that she as a 
Gentile was classed with the dogs, she seized upon our 
Lord's own words as a basis for a further plea, that as the 
little house-dogs ate of the fragments from the family table 
thrown them by the children, so she as a Gentile, as one of 
the dogs, might be granted her request for the relief of her 
daughter from the power of the devil without hindering the 
real spirit of the Lord's argument, without saying that she 
was as worthy as a Jew of his mercy and favors. 

Our Lord was astonished as well as pleased by this 
demonstration of the woman's faith. Matthew says he exclaimed, 
"O woman, great is thy faith!" Her request was 
granted, her daughter was healed, and her further faith was 
shown in that she accepted the Master's word and went to 
her house, there to find that indeed the demon was gone out, 
and that in leaving he had thrown the child in a fit upon 
the bed. A prominent writer remarks, "It is impossible for 
us to realize the tone in which Jesus uttered these words or 
the love which beamed in full glory from his eyes. Nothing 
ever drew from our Lord such commendation as the exercise 
of a supreme faith." 

LESSONS IN FAITH-PRAYERS OF FAITH 

It is proper that we should draw analogies from our 
Lord's conduct and that we should suppose that the illustrations 
of Scripture, showing the trials and tests of faith, 
should teach us something respecting the Lord's plan of 
dealing with those who approach him in prayer. During 



this Gospel age the Lord is seeking for those who can and 
will exercise faith. Some undoubtedly are so constituted 
mentally that they cannot do this— not that God created 
us without the ability so to do in him, but that 
the fall has distorted the original creation so that many today 
are unable to exercise faith in a proper and full degree. 
It is not for us to denounce such, but rather to learn from 
God's Word that he has a gracious plan, which is broad 
enough to include this class as well as all others in the 
mercy and forgiveness provided through the redemption at 
Calvary. 

After the present age shall have selected out those who 
can exercise faith, who will exercise faith, and who will become 
faith-full, obedient to faith, then will be ushered in 
the great Millennial age, in which light, knowledge, will be 
granted to the remainder of mankind, to the intent that they 
may cultivate faith as well as all the elements of a proper 
character, and by restitution processes come to the attainment 
of all that was lost in Adam, or, failing to do so, be 
cut off in the Second Death. Let us hope that when the 
Millennial age shall be ushered in many in the world will 
be found ready to accept our Redeemer even without the 
special chastisements and judgments of that time to impress 
upon them the advantages of obedience to the Lord. As 
this Gentile woman could and did exercise faith in the Lord, 
so, doubtless, there are others in the world today who, if 
they knew our Savior as we know him, would be no less 
faithful than ourselves— some amongst the heathen, perhaps, 
would manifest much greater faith than some in Christendom 
today. 

"BE PATIENT, BRETHREN" 

As in dealing with this woman our Lord deferred the 
bestowment of the blessing he desired to give her, so doubtless 
he does with us at times. With us, too, he may see 
that it will be better if he should for a time ignore our petitions 
on some certain subject, that thus we may become more 
earnest, and perhaps increase our faith and our appreciation 
of the blessing we desire, just as this poor woman might 
not have appreciated so highly the Lord's favor if he had 
given it to her at once. With us also the Lord sometimes 
makes a test of humility before he responds to our requests. 
Are we of humble enough mind? Have we faith enough to 
come to the Lord at all? Can we trust him for his grace? 
Are we humble enough to accept his mercies on his conditions, 
on his terms, acknowledging ourselves nothing, that 
we have no merit to plead with him, that by grace we are 
saved and not according to any works that we could accomplish? 
If so we may be sure that the Lord will appreciate 

R3787 :page 171 

our demonstrations of such a faith by our holding on to his 
loving hand, to his gracious promises— by our confessions 
that we are nothing except as he shall give us of his mercy. 



As all the various experiences of the Gentile woman 
worked out for good to her, helping her in the development 
of a proper and acceptable faith and a spirit of humility, so, 
we may be sure, all of the delays to answers of our prayers 
that may come to us as the Lord's people are for our advantage 
if we will be exercised thereby— that we may grow in 
his grace, grow in his wisdom, grow in his love, grow in 
faith, grow in obedience, grow in humility. 

The more we study this subject of faith, the more we 
are convinced that in God's sight faith is not only indispensable 
but "very precious." We cannot come to God 
without faith, we cannot abide in his love without faith, we 
cannot receive day by day his mercies and blessings and 
leadings except by faith in his promises. We cannot realize 
ourselves as his children, begotten of the holy Spirit, and 
heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord, except 
as we exercise faith in his Word of promise to this effect. 
We cannot go on day by day following the Lord except as 
we are willing to walk by faith and not by sight, for this 
is the test which he puts upon all of his followers. We cannot 
see how the oppositions of the world, flesh and devil, 
which seem so baneful to us, are blessings in disguise except 
as we exercise faith in God's promises that it will be 
so. We cannot therefore be prepared for the heavenly Kingdom 
in its glories and blessings and privileges except as we 
now have and exercise the faith which will enable us to 
profit by various lessons given us in the school of Christ. 

"WAIT PATIENTLY FOR HIM" 

An illustration along this line comes to our mind. A 
sister living some distance from Allegheny, deeply interested 
in the Truth herself, informed us that she was earnestly 
praying for her husband that the Lord would graciously 
grant him the opening of the eyes of understanding. Having 
some acquaintance with the husband it was our opinion 
that his was rather a hopeless case. Not that he was a bad 
man, but that he seemed to be thoroughly worldly, his hours 
filled with business or hunting or lodge work, etc. And so 
we said to the sister, by way of preventing her from having 
too keen a disappointment in the matter: "Dear sister, remember 
that the Lord is making his own selection of those 
who will constitute his spiritual Bride of many members. 
It is not for us to dictate to the Lord in prayer or otherwise 
whom he shall select— it is for us to feel thankful and grateful 
that in his providence his Truth has reached our ears 
and brought us the blessing of an invitation to the nuptial 
feast. We advise that you do not set your heart upon your 
husband's acceptance of the Truth, and that you do not particularly 
pray along that line, but rather give thanks to the 
Lord that he is as noble a man as you know him to be, and, 
by your own life, your own conduct, your own example 
everyway of what constitutes righteousness and discipleship 
to Christ, set him as good an example as possible, hoping 
that this may profit him as respects the present life and also 
the future life, even though he should never come to the 



point of making a full consecration of himself to the Lord 
and his service." 

The sister's answer was, "I am trying to do all this, 
Brother Russell, but still I feel that the Lord will not be offended 
if I ask special blessings upon John— if I ask him to 
graciously grant him the opening of the eyes of his understanding. 
I am not so much requesting a miracle upon 
my husband to turn him against his will, but rather requesting 

R3788 :page 171 

that the Lord in his providence will be favorable to him, 

and make the way before him as smooth as possible consistent 

with divine wisdom." We uttered a few deprecatory 

words, thinking to ourself how sadly the poor woman would 

be disappointed as the days and years would go by, yet appreciating 

her wifely devotion and also her faith in the 

Lord's goodness. Judge of our great surprise when, about a 

year later, that husband became interested in the Truth, 

and followed up that interest by a full consecration of his 

heart and life to the Lord and in his service. We got a lesson 

from this similar to the one we get from the lesson today. 

The lesson is that God greatly appreciates faith, trust 

in his goodness, and that barring some interference with his 

plan he does, so far as possible, answer such petitions offered 

in an importunity of faith. Let us each, then, endeavor, 

more and more, to cultivate this important fruit of the Spirit, 

and correspondingly we will abound in the love and joy and 

peace, service and blessings which come from him who says, 

"According to thy faith be it unto thee." 



R3788 :page 171 

GOOD CONFESSIONS AND LATER TRIALS. 

-MATTHEW 16:13-28.-JUNE 10.- 

Golden Text:— "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.' 

IN THE VICINITY of Caesarea Philippi, on our Lord's 
most northerly journey in Palestine, just at the headwaters 
of the river Jordan, where it issues in great 
volume from a cave, our Lord put a question to his disciples 
which was full of meaning to them. This has been a 
weighty one ever since wherever his Word has gone. More 
than this, throughout the coming age, the Millennium, it will 
still be the all-important question. 

"WHAT THINK YE OF CHRIST?" 

Our Lord had been teaching the apostles and the public 
for about three years, and although he had frequently 
referred to himself as the "Son of Man," a title recognized 
among the Jews as appropriate to the Messiah, a title applied 



to Messiah by Daniel the Prophet (Dan. 7:13,14), our 
Lord had never positively declared himself to be the Messiah. 
He had allowed his words, "such as never man 
spake," and his works, such as never man performed, to 
testify for him. He merely declared that he had come forth 
from the Father to be the Savior of men, that in due time 
he would ascend up on high where he was before, that 
through faith in him eternal life was obtainable, etc. He 
had talked about his Kingdom, too, and taught the apostles 

R3788 : page 172 

to pray, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as 
it is done in heaven." Still, as already stated, he had never 
positively declared that he was the Messiah— he had left it 
to inference; if his character and works would not testify 
to the hearts of his disciples any words on the subject would 
be vain, empty, powerless. 

By way of bringing the matter gradually before their 
minds, assisting them to see the general confusion prevailing, 
our Lord first asked the apostles respecting the general 
opinions of the people regarding him— whom they thought 
him to be. The answer was that there was confusion, some 
claiming that he was Elijah, others that he was John the 
Baptist returned with greater power, others that he was one 
of the ancient prophets who had reappeared. With this 
leading of the mind up to the central thought our Lord put 
the important question directly, "Whom say ye that I am?" 
What view of me is entertained by you who are my followers, 
you who know me most intimately, you who have heard 
my teachings and seen my daily life? At once came a noble 
confession from the Apostle Peter, who, while expressing 
his own sentiments, evidently expressed the minds of the 
entire discipleship, for there was no protest on the part of 
any and their silence gave assent. 

"THOU ART THE CHRIST, THE SON OF THE LIVING GOD" 

It should be noticed that the Scriptures are consistent 
with themselves throughout, that nowhere is the Lord Jesus 
spoken of as his own Father, the Almighty, Jehovah, but appropriately 
he is recognized as in his own statements as being 
the Son of God— the offspring of the Almighty, full of 
the Father's spirit, grace and power— God manifest in the 
flesh— the best possible manifestation of the Father amongst 
men, of that heavenly Father of whom it is declared, "Who 
only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man 
can approach unto; whom no man hath seen or can see." 
(1 Tim. 6:16.) The Only Begotten of the Father, full of 
grace and truth, represent him and the glorious qualities of 
his character to humanity. The apostles discerned this, and 
honored the Son accordingly as the Father had already honored 
him. 

Our Lord promptly acknowledged Peter's confession as 
being appropriate, correct, truthful, and he added a blessing, 
saying, "Blessed art thou, Simon, son of Jonas, because flesh 



hath not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in 
heaven." Here again our Lord disclaims being the Father, 
and declares that the Father is in heaven— was not on earth 
except representatively. The same thought our Master gave 
to Mary after his resurrection, saying, "I ascend to my Father 
and to your Father, to my God and to your God." (John 20:17.) 
We honor the Lord most and have clearest views of 
the meaning of his words when we accept them simply and 
truthfully, without attempting to be wise above what is 
written or to add to the divine revelation or the honor of our 
Lord by inconsistent claims contradictory to the revelation 
which has been given us. 

"THOU ART THE CHRIST" 

This was a part of Peter's reply— "Thou art the Messiah. 
We accept you as being the one in whom center 
all the promises— the one who is to redeem and to bless 
the world." How we wish that all of the Lord's professed 
people might clearly discern what is implied by Peter's 
good confession! It implies faith in Jesus, not merely as 
the Savior of the Church which is his body, his Bride, but 
as the Savior of the world— the great Messiah, the seed of 
Abraham, through whom with his elect Bride all the families 
of the earth will be blessed with gracious opportunities 
for escape from the thraldom of sin and death to the liberties 
of the sons of God. 

"What think ye of Christ?" This question, which 
came to Peter and his fellow-apostles, has been rung down 
through the centuries from that time until now, wherever 
the knowledge of the Lord Jesus has gone. It is a question 
which each one must eventually answer for himself. Thank 
God for this: the benighted heathen shall not be left in 
darkness, in ignorance of the only name given under heaven 
and amongst men whereby we must be saved. (Acts 4:12.) 
In due time this true Light shall lighten every man that 
cometh into the world. (John 1:9.) And with the question 
and with the light which makes possible an answer to 
the question comes a responsibility which none may shirk. 
Eventually every son and daughter of Adam must decide respecting 
the great Savior whom God has provided— each 
must accept or reject him as his Redeemer, his Savior, 
his Teacher, Priest and King, if he would enter into life; 
or, rejecting him intelligently and wilfully, must die the 
Second Death— utter destruction. 

The question has come to us who are the Lord's followers, 
and we, like Peter and the apostles and all the faithful 
since, have accepted the Son of God as our Savior, realizing 
that he bought us with his precious blood, and that we have 
peace with God through a realization that the divine sentence 
against us has been met, so that God can now justly 
accept us to himself, forgiving our sins— not imputing them 
to us, but accepting satisfaction through our Surety and his 
precious sacrifice. On the strength of this faith that he was 
the Son of God, that he died for our sins, we have also accepted 
him as the great King of Glory, whose Millennial 



Kingdom is surely to bless the world by establishing the 
reign of righteousness, by binding Satan and all the powers 
of evil, by causing the knowledge of the glory of God to fill 
the whole earth and by instituting a great reign of judgment, 
of justice, in the world, under which every unrighteous 
deed shall receive a just recompense of reward, and every 
good endeavor receive encouragement and blessing, and bring 
a corresponding uplift, mental, moral and physical, to the 
obedient. 

By faith we now believe and accept the message that 
those who hear now in advance of the world have a special 
call to joint-heirship with their Redeemer in his glorious 
Kingdom, and shall share with him in his grand work of 
blessing and restoring the willing and obedient of mankind. 
What joy follows in the wake of this knowledge and its good 
confession only the elect can fully appreciate. And in proportion 
as these confess their faith that same faith grows, 
and the blessings and privileges connected with it grow, and 
gradually their joys become full to the overflowing of their 
earthly vessels in the present life and to their preparing the 
more for the glorious fulness of joy into which they will be 
ushered in their glorious resurrection change, when the Master 
himself shall say to them, "Well done, good and faithful 

R3789 : page 173 

servant; enter thou into the joys of thy Lord."— 
Matt. 25:21. 

WHAT THINK YE OF CHRIST? 

This same question confronts others who see with considerable 
clearness the mercy, the grace of God in Christ, 
and the glorious plan which centers in him, but who for the 
present are withholding a confession, who have not thus far 
taken their stand on the side of Christ, to confess him before 
men and to follow him in their daily life. To these we give 
a word of encouragement and a word of warning as well. 
They should be encouraged with the evidences they have of 
the Lord's favor, in that they have been permitted to come 
to their present position of knowledge of Christ and the gracious 
plan of God centering in him. They should realize 
that while they have already appreciated much, still there is 
more to follow of grace and joy and peace and blessing and 
knowledge to those who go on, who take the important step 
of public confession, who enter into a covenant of sacrifice 
to be followers in the footsteps of Jesus. They cannot go on 
to belong to his disciples unless they confess him; they cannot 
hope to share in the glories that belong to the faithful 
who walk in the narrow way unless they take up their cross 
to follow. 

But they should know that while the cross of the Lord 
is not a light one, nevertheless his yoke is easy and his burden 
is light because he yokes himself with us in our trials 
and difficulties of life. With him as our companion and 
burden-bearer the cross is light, the burden is easy and the 



joys and peace resulting to his faithful are indescribable, 
even as eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it 
entered into the heart of man the blessings by and by to be 
conferred on them. (1 Cor. 2:9.) The day of opportunity 
for accepting Christ under present conditions is rapidly 
speeding away. Soon the door of present privilege will 
close; and even though another door of gracious favor will 
open thereafter, its blessings and rewards cannot be considered 
with those which are now before us. Let us lay aside 
every weight and every besetting sin and enter the race and 
run patiently to its end, hoping for a share with our Redeemer 
in his glorious Kingdom work. 

ROCK-FOUNDED LIVING STONES 

Peter, the mouthpiece of the disciples, was especially 
addressed by our Lord, although the blessing spoken to him 
was in a measure shared by the others also. Our Lord here 
gave Simon his surname, Peter, which signifies a stone, declaring 
"Thou art Peter [a stone], and upon this rock [this 
great truth which you have enunciated] I will build my 
Church." Peter subsequently writing refers to the matter 
in this manner, saying of all of the Lord's true followers, 
"Ye, also, as living stones, are built up a spiritual house, an 
holy priesthood, to offer up sacrifices acceptable to God by 
Jesus Christ." (1 Pet. 2:5.) Peter and the other apostles 
are presented to us as foundation stones built upon this 
great truth, that Christ is the Redeemer, the Savior, the 
Messiah. Note how our Lord presents this matter in Revelation, 
in the picture of the New Jerusalem, representing its 
walls as having twelve foundations of precious stones, in 
which were written the names of the twelve apostles of the 
Lamb. --Rev. 21:14. 

"What think ye of Christ? is the test 

To try both your state and your scheme; 
You cannot be right in the rest, 

Unless you think rightly of him. 
Some take him a creature to be, 

A man or an angel at most; 
Sure these have not feelings like me, 

Nor know themselves wretched and lost. 



"Some style him the pearl of great price, 
And say he's the fountain of joys, 

Yet feed upon folly and vice, 

And cleave to the world and its toys. 



"If asked what of Jesus I think, 

Though still my best thoughts are but poor, 
I say, He's my meat and my drink, 

My life, and my strength, and my store; 



My Shepherd, my Husband, my Friend, 

My Savior from sin and from thrall, 
My hope from beginning to end, 

My portion, my Lord and my all." 

Of this Church whose foundation was laid by the Redeemer 
himself and which was to be built thereupon our 
Lord declares,— 

"THE GATES OF HELL SHALL NOT PREVAIL" 

This statement seems to some to favor the theory that 
eternal torment is the fate of all except the Church: yet 
such must view the text very superficially indeed, for with 
their view what picture would the words convey? In what 
sense would it be true that the gates of hell shall not prevail 
against the Church? If we suppose a fiery hell such 
as many teach, and a barred gateway leading thereto, and 
the Church on the outside of those gates, we would be 
obliged to imagine the Church trying to break through the 
gates to get into the fire, and that the gates would not be 
strong enough to hinder the rash act. Or, on the other 
hand, we should be obliged to imagine the Church on the 
fiery side of those gates and trying to burst them open and 
succeeding in so doing. Surely neither of these views represents 
properly the condition of the Church as viewed from 
any standpoint. 

But now note the reasonableness and beauty of the 
true interpretation of this language. The word hell here is 
in the Greek, hades, the same word that is elsewhere translated 
grave. For instance, in the Apostle's declaration respecting 
the resurrection and the deliverance of the Church 
from the grave, he exclaims, "O hades, where is thy victory?" 
He pictures thus the Church triumphing over hades, coming 
out of hades, out of the grave, out of the state of death. 
The same thought is connected with our Lord's resurrection: 
he is represented as bursting the bonds of death, bursting 
the restraints of sheol, of hades— by the Father's power. 
The gates of hades, the gates of the tomb, the strength of 
death which restrained him three days, was broken in his 
resurrection. This is the picture which our Lord presents. 
The Church in common with the world would go down into 
death, and this was an assurance to the apostles of the 
abundant deliverance which will be granted to the Church 
in the First Resurrection to glory, honor and immortality, to 
the conditions where the Second Death will have no power. 

R3789 : page 174 

THE KEYS OF THE KINGDOM 

A key implies a lock, and the thought here is that 
God's Kingdom was locked that none could enter it. Our 
Lord alone was able to keep the divine Law and to inherit 
the divine promise. To him alone, therefore, belonged entrance 
to the Kingdom. He was recognized as the Anointed 



from the time he received the holy Spirit at his baptism, 
and in the fullest sense in his resurrection from the dead, a 
spirit being. "With all power in heaven and in earth."— 
Matt. 28:18. 

But neither before his death nor during the forty days 
after his resurrection could our Savior open, unlock the 
Kingdom to his followers, though he promised them ultimately 
a share with him therein. He put his Spirit upon 
them, by which they in his name performed many wonderful 
works, but they could not be recognized by the Father nor 
receive the begetting power of the holy Spirit, the anointing 
of the Father, at that time. They could not then be ushered 
into the Kingdom privileges and relationship until Christ had 
ascended up on high and appeared in the presence of the 
Father on their behalf, presenting the merit of his own sacrifice 
as the condition upon which they might be accepted. 
It was after our Lord had done this that he permitted Peter 
to use the first key— to throw open the door of the Kingdom 
to all of his truly consecrated followers. 

The door thrown open at Pentecost was only to the 
Jews, not to the Gentiles. Peter preached only to the Jews 
and proselytes, inviting them and them only to become 
sharers in the Kingdom of God's dear Son. When, three 
and a half years later, the Lord's due time had come for 
throwing open the other door into the Kingdom— the door 
for the Gentiles— Peter again was given the key, the right, 
the authority, to open that door. He it was who was sent 
to Cornelius, the first Gentile convert, to explain to him the 
conditions of relationship to Christ in the Kingdom and to 
initiate him that he might receive the holy Spirit. The two 
keys having been used there is nothing further to unlock respecting 
the Kingdom, and the Jewish institutions having 
passed away there is now but the one door, and it, we are 
told, will be closed perpetually when all of the wise virgins 
shall have gone in to the wedding.— Matt. 25:1-10. 

The declaration respecting Peter's authority to bind 
and loose was a common form of expression in those days, 
to indicate forbidding and permitting. One writer declares, 
"No other terms were in so constant use in Rabbinic Canon 
Law as those of binding and loosing. They represented 
the legislative and judicial powers of the Rabbinic office." 
This authority was shared by all of the apostles (Matt. 18: 18, 19), 
and it is because of our belief in this that we hold 
to the exact presentations of the apostles as representing 
the divine will, and allow no testimony by subsequent followers 
of the Lord to have the same weight or influence. 
Respecting the apostles alone we have the assurance that 
they were divinely supervised— that whatever they forbade 
or allowed was under heavenly guidance and sanction. 

R3790 : page 174 

"THEY SHOULD TELL NO MAN" 

Our Lord enjoined upon the disciples a measure of 
secrecy respecting his Messiahship because it was not yet 



due time for this to be made generally known. Its publication 

by Jesus and his disciples would have stirred up the 

public mind and have interfered to some extent with the 

divine program respecting his crucifixion— either by hastening 

it or by hindering it. But after our Lord's death and 

resurrection this was the entire theme of all of his representatives, 

his messengers— Jesus the Redeemer of the world, 

the Messiah, whose coming at the end of this Gospel age shall 

bring in times of refreshing and restitution for the uplift of 

the groaning creation. 

Our Lord did not even pointedly draw this to the attention 
of his disciples, as we have seen, until the due time— 
until the approaching end of his career made it necessary for 
them to be forewarned that they might not be deceived, that 
they might know how his death was a part of the divine 
program. It was from this time on that Jesus began to 
explain to his close followers that he was to suffer death at 
Jerusalem at the hands of the religionists of that day, and 
that he would be raised from the dead on the third day 
thereafter. 

BLESSINGS BRING TRIALS 

The noble Peter had scored a great success in faithful 
and prompt acknowledgment of the Master, and he received 
special favors and blessings and promises as a result. Perhaps 
this helped to make him somewhat heady and self-opinionated. 
It is so with many of the Peter class (a noble 
class) from that time until now. Many admitted to the 
Lord's favor and privileged to confess him before men have 
stumbled over their own honor and exaltation. No wonder 
then the Apostle admonished, Be not many of you teachers, 
brethren, knowing that a man who is a teacher has severer 
trials, temptations.— Jas. 3:1. 

Peter, in his love for the Master, and intoxicated somewhat 
by the honors bestowed upon him already, undertook 
to be the teacher— "not holding the Head" in proper reverence. 
Alas, how many treat the Lord's Word in the same 
manner today— ignoring his own statements and distorting 
his words in a manner which they are pleased to consider 
better than his, more honoring to him and to the Father. 
What a great mistake! Let us, dear fellow students, always 
recognize the headship of our Lord, and always remember 
that we are to listen to his Word and not to attempt to correct 
him or to substitute ideas of our own as being either 
better or as good. If we consider him worthy of the 
Father's honor and confidence, let us also consider him 
worthy to be our teacher, and from this standpoint let us 
take his every word seriously, carefully, implicitly. 

Although Peter did not so intend the matter, his efforts 
were in the direction of turning the Lord aside from the fulfilment 
of his covenant. And so we think it is with some 
who, Peter-like, do not give sufficient heed to the Master's 
teaching— their influence at times upon their brethren and 
the Church is to hinder the sacrificing rather than to assist 
the sacrificers in the good way. They are stumbling-blocks 



instead of stepping-stones, and it is the duty of all who 

would be faithful footstep-followers of Jesus to kindly but 

emphatically treat the advice of such as our Master did, 

to ignore it and to press along the line according to our covenant. 

Our Lord declared Peter to be an adversary [Satan] 

a hinderer of the work. 

Thus we see how those who are good and well intentioned 
may unwisely become hinderers of that they desire to 
assist. Let us be on our guard as respects ourselves and 

R3790 : page 175 

our influence upon others. Peter reasoned from the human 
standpoint, not from the divine. Happy would it have been 
for him if he had taken this lesson very thoroughly to heart; 
but through failure so to do he was unprepared for the later 
testing, when he denied his Lord and brought upon himself 
bitter weeping. Our Lord's life was an illustration, and put 
emphasis upon the words which he then addressed to the 
apostles, "If any man will come after me let him deny himself 
and take up his cross and follow me. For whosoever 
will save his life shall lose it, and whosoever shall lose his 
life for my sake shall find it." Discipleship meant the very 
reverse of what the apostles had naturally expected. They 
thought of the Kingdom glory and honor, and were desirous 
of attaining those blessings. 

The disciples were now learning that their attainment 
meant severe testings, disciplines, trials, which would demonstrate 
their worthiness or unworthiness of a place in the 
Kingdom. Self love and earthly loves, outweighing devotion 
to the Lord, would mean unfitness for a share with him in 
the Kingdom. On the contrary, such a love for the Lord 
and the truth and the privileges of service as would lead to 
self-denials, earthly sacrifices, etc., even unto death, would 
imply the possession of the character which our Lord sought 
in those whom he would make his joint-heirs in the 
Kingdom. 

GAIN THE WORLD, LOSE HIS BEING 

Our Lord stated a general truth when he declared that 
a selfish love of life under present sinful conditions would 
signify the loss of life eternal— would signify ultimately the 
Second Death. This applies to the Church in the present time. 
We have covenanted with the Lord to leave all and follow 
him; we have exchanged our earthly hopes and aims for 
heavenly ones; and now, if we fail of the heavenly, all will 
be gone. Yes! it is a case of losing our earthly lives and 
gaining the heavenly, and no amount of earthly gain can 
compensate us for the loss of the life eternal hoped for. 

Somewhat similar principles will apply to the world 
during the Millennial age, for they also will be required to 
break away from sin and cultivate righteousness if they 
would attain to life; and those who will not forego the sins 
and not battle against the weaknesses will never attain to 
the restitution perfections and everlasting life. The matter 



then resolves itself into this, for us now and for them by and 
by: Do we prefer everlasting life in harmony with the divine 
Law and righteous requirements, or do we choose the 
contrary, with the penalty, Second Death? 

"THY KINGDOM COME" 

All this, respecting the necessity of suffering and death 
on the part of those who would be sharers with the Lord in 
his Kingdom, was evidently a new thought to the disciples. 
It had been partially stated previously, but in dark sayings 
which they did not comprehend. Evidently even yet they 
did not grasp the situation clearly, but our Lord proceeded 
to clinch the matter in their minds by assuring them that 
they would not get the Kingdom inheritance until some period 
in the future— when the Son of man shall come in the 
glory of his Father with his angels; and then he shall render 
unto every man according to his deeds. To those who 
by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory, honor 
and immortality he will render the reward of eternal life on 
the spirit plane; but chastisements, punishments, corrective 
in their nature, and purgatorial to all others whose evil deeds, 
preferences for sin, unfaithfulness to light and knowledge 
and truth, mark them as out of accord with the great principles 
of righteousness. To these will be given experiences 
in the time of trouble which will mean sorrow, disappointment, 
grief, etc. We are glad to have the assurance from 
other Scriptures that these corrective judgments of the Lord 
as they come upon the world will mean blessings in disguise, 
for, "When the judgments of the Lord are abroad in 
the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness." 
-Isa. 26:9. 

The statement of verse 28 has been the cause of considerable 
confusion. It reads, "There be some standing 
here who shall not taste of death until they see the Son 
of man coming in his Kingdom." This is what might be 
termed a "dark saying," an obscure statement. The key to 
it is found in the first nine verses of the succeeding chapter. 
The chapter division, which was not of inspiration but was 
made centuries after Matthew was dead, has served to separate 
the Lord's words from the explanation of them. 

Connecting the matter we see that our Lord meant that 
some who were there with him would see a demonstration 
of his statement about his second coming in power and great 
glory in a vision, and that vision was given a little later on 
in the Mount of Transfiguration, when the entire Kingdom 
was represented in tableaux to Peter, James and John, three 
of those who were with him at the time he uttered the words 
of our lesson. In that panoramic vision our Lord was transfigured 
so that the disciples saw him radiant with glory, and 
as nearly identical as would be possible to show them the 
glories of the Kingdom; and with the Lord in the vision 
were seen Moses, a representative of Israel, and Elijah, a 
representative of the Church. St. Peter, one of the three 
who witnessed this exhibit of the Kingdom glory in vision, 
mentions it in his epistle, saying, "For we were eyewitnesses 



of his majesty. ..when we were with him in the 
holy mount."~2 Pet. 1:16-18. 

If that vision was such a testimony to the Apostle Peter 
and his associates, and through them was applied to all of 
the early Church as an assurance of the blessing of the Lord 
which would ultimately come at the second advent of Christ 
in his Kingdom, how much more assurance have we now in 
the fact that we by the grace of God have been enabled to 
see the spiritual glories of the Lord through the opening of 
the divine Word, the breaking of the seals upon the scroll of 
divine revelation! "Wonderful things in the Bible we see." 
Wonderful love and exceeding great and precious promises 
for the Church, wonderful love and an ancient Covenant for 

R3791 :page 175 

Israel, wonderful love and a New Covenant for all the families 

of the earth. Those who see this vision of the Kingdom, 

and who discern its rapid arrangement and the preparation 

for its glorious revelation to the whole world, have the assurance 

that they are not following cunningly devised fables; 

that the Higher Critics are greatly mistaken in their judging 

of the Word of God along the lines of external testimonies 

and evolution theories. We have much advantage everyway 

over the remainder of mankind, and we may well say to ourselves, 

What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy 

conversation, living and godliness!— 2 Pet. 3:11. 



page 177 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVII JUNE 15, 1906 No. 12 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 179 

Church Union— Next, Federation 179 

The United Church of Canada 179 

Federation in Great Britain 180 

Education Makes "Fools" 180 

We Are Counted As Fools 181 

Man and Woman Under the Curse 181 

Hell Fire and Saintliness Denounced by Two 

M.E. Bishops 182 

All Things Work For Good (Poem) 182 

A Vision of the Kingdom 182 

"Never Man Spake Like This Man" 185 

Greatest in the Kingdom 186 

Some Interesting Letters 190 

page 178 



LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ASBURY PARK, N.J., CONVENTION, JULY 22-29 



(For information respecting meetings, see last page, this issue.) 

RAILROAD RATES 

We have secured fare-and-one-third rates on all lines of railroad 
east of and including Chicago and St. Louis, on "Certificate 
Plan." Ask for ticket for "Watch Tower Convention, 
Asbury Park, N.J.," for which you pay one way full fare and 
receive a Certificate in addition to your ticket. The Certificate, 
after endorsement by proper officers at the Convention and 
payment of 25 cents, entitles you to one-third fare on return 
trip. From some points cheaper rates than these may be obtainable, 
via Atlantic City or other ocean points. Enquire of your 
railroad agent. 

ACCOMMODATIONS 

Board and lodging can be procured for $1, $1.25, $1.50, $2, 
and upward to $5 per day. 
Write at once if you wish us to procure accommodations, 



stating briefly and pointedly what kind, number of persons, 
sex and color, and if married couples wish to room together. Do 
not expect any alteration of your party's location after writing. 
If others join it later they will be accommodated in the order 
of notification. Address all letters to "Convention Dept," 
WATCH TOWER B. & T. SOCIETY, Allegheny, Pa. 



R3791 :page 179 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
CHURCH UNION-NEXT, FEDERATION 



THE Presbyterian and Cumberland Presbyterian 
bodies have reunited, as per the following telegram 
in the public press columns: 

Des Moines, la., May 24. -Dr. Hunter Corbett, 
the Moderator of the Presbyterian General Assembly, 
declared the union of the Presbyterian Church of the 
United States and the Cumberland Presbyterian Church 
completed at 10.21 o'clock this morning as follows: 

"I do solemnly declare and hereby publicly announce 
that the basis of union and reunion is now in 
full force and effect, and that the Cumberland Presbyterian 
Church is now reunited with the Presbyterian 
Church in the United States of America as one Church." 

The big ecclesiastical assemblage burst into a 
storm of rejoicing. Handc lapping, cheering and waving 
of handkerchiefs gave expression of unalloyed 
pleasure. 



The spirit of union and federation prevails everywhere. 
Our readers well know that from prophecy we 
have for twenty-five years been expecting not only that 
the Federation would come soon, but that the vitality 
of it would come from the Episcopal Church. The insurmountable 
barrier thus far seems to be in the claim 
of this denomination to "Apostolic Succession," which 
asserts that none are qualified ministers except as 
"ordained" in the line of such succession. 

Now we find a movement amongst Episcopalians 
to concede something: to claim merely the Historic 
Episcopate and to drop the claim of Apostolic Succession, 
so as to promote the union of all Protestants. 
This view is set forth in a recently published book by 
Rev. E. McCrady (Episcopalian), entitled, 

"APOSTOLIC SUCCESSION AND THE PROBLEM OF UNITY" 



We quote one paragraph:— 

"When we ourselves are broad enough, catholic 
enough, to admit that the theory of the divine right of 
Episcopacy is a theory only— when we are willing to 
own, as we must, that while fitting in very well with 
historical facts, it can never be absolutely demonstrated 
—when we further are willing to recognize the fact that 
the Reformers did not believe in such a theory themselves, 
and that the Church, in spite of all the influences 
brought to bear upon her, has carefully refrained 
from officially promulgating such a doctrine— when, in 
other words, we cease to unchurch our Protestant 
brethren by insisting upon a principle logically indefensible 
and never officially set forth— we will then be 
in a position to expect some concessions on their part, 
and— we venture the further prediction— we shall then 
begin to hear some solid discussion, and see some valid 
signs of the approaching union of Christendom." 



The Bible clearly sets forth that such a federation 
of Protestants will be effected before the great final 
catastrophe which will usher in the Kingdom of God's 
dear Son and the glorification of the Church of the 
Firstborn; hence our interest in every item pointing 
to its realization. 

"THE UNITED CHURCH OF CANADA" 



"The negotiations for the union of three churches 
in Canada have attracted world-wide attention. Nearly 
all of the religious journals and many of the secular 
ones devote much space to special comment upon this 
theme. These comments are almost entirely congratulatory. 
The Toronto Globe has rendered important 
service by printing the expressions of opinion by men 
of light and leading in the three churches in various 
parts of the country. It is a surprise to find how generally 
these are favorable expressions. Of course there 
are a few doubting Thomases, a few who magnify the differences 
and overlook the great harmonies, who advise 
us to be careful and go slow; but the overwhelming concensus 
is in favor, not of federation, but of organic 
union. We have received correspondence from various 
parts of the United States, from the Atlantic to the 
Pacific, with reference to an account we wrote in The 

R3791 :page 180 

Christian Herald of this great movement, and all of 
these are of devout thanksgiving for the leading of divine 
providence. We quote from the Literary Digest 
some of the press comments on this subject: 



'"An extraordinary movement, in some respects, 
not paralleled in several centuries,' is the phrase by 
which the New York Christian Advocate (Methodist) 
characterizes the movement toward union between the 
Presbyterian, Methodist and Congregationalist churches 
in Canada. The report of the joint committee of these 
three denominations, just published, is described by 
the Toronto Globe as 'the most remarkable ecclesiastical 
document issued in Protestant Christendom since 
the Reformation.' All the indications seem to point to 
the ultimate consummation of this union, and the name 
tentatively chosen for the new Church is, 'The United 
Church of Canada.' The Interior (Presbyterian, Chicago) 
writes of the union planned as 'the most radical 
and remarkable coalition of churches that has been 
proposed since the Reformation brought in the era of 
denominational divisions,' Zion's Herald (Methodist, 
Boston), reminds us that Canada in the past has led 
the way in effecting denominational unions. 

"The Christian Advocate remarks editorially: 'This 
experiment in each of its stages should receive the concentrated 
attention of the Protestantism of the world. 
If it succeed it will make feasible the only reasonable 
plan for the diminution of the number of distinct 
communions.' 

"The Presbyterian (Toronto, Canada) thinks that 
the prospects are bright for a consummation of the 
proposed union. It says: 'There will be no unseemly 
haste; in the nature of things there cannot be. It will 
take some little time to prepare the basis and have it 
pronounced upon ultimately by the body of the people. 
Agreement as to the things that may be given up and 
the things that shall remain, will not come in a moment, 
but it will come. There is an organizing power of its 
own in a great, structural, co-ordinating movement 
like this.' 

"The Presbyterian Banner (Pittsburgh, Pa.) comments 
as follows: 'We would hardly think a union of 
these three churches possible in this country, but it 
appears to be possible only a few miles north of us, 
and it is the Lord's doing and marvellous in our eyes. 
The Spirit of the Lord, however, is not restricted by 
geographical boundaries and red and blue lines on the 
map, and what the Spirit can do there he may do here.' 

"The Methodists in Canada number 916,659, the 
Presbyterians 842,016, and the Congregationalists 28,000. 
Thus, as the Church Standard (Protestant Episcopal, 
Philadelphia) points out, the new Church will 
enter upon its work with a membership of 1,786,676, 
'nearly one-third of the population of the whole of Canada.'" 
—Onward (Methodist, Toronto). 

FEDERATION IN GREAT BRITAIN 



The London Daily Chronicle recently published a 
lengthy appeal for special prayers for the reunion of 
Christendom. It was signed by the President of the 
United Methodist Free Churches; the President of the 
Methodist New Connection Church; the President of 
the Wesleyan Methodist Conference; the Moderator-elect 
of the English Presbyterian Church; the President of 
the Baptist Union; the Moderator of the General Assembly 
of the Church of Scotland; the Moderator of 
the General Assembly of the United Free Church of 
Scotland; the Primus of the Scottish Church, and the 
Chairman of the Congregational Union of England and 
Wales. Evidently a few more years of stress will accomplish 
what they pray for,— a union of sects, a federation 
on the basis of ignoring one another's errors. 
But this will not be the heart union for which our Lord 
prayed— one in the Father and the Son and in heart 

R3792 : page 180 

fellowship with each other, because "sanctified by the 
Truth." 

EDUCATION MAKES "FOOLS" 



"The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God."— 
Psalm 14:1. 

COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY CLASS 65 PER CENT. FOOLS 



The faculty of Columbia University put the following 
questions to a class of 45 students in elementary 
psychology: 

(1) "Do you conceive of God as a personal or an 
impersonal being?" 

(2) "What difference do you make between a personal 
and an impersonal being?" 

(3) "Under what image or images do you think of 
God?" 

(4) "What difference would the non-existence of 
God make in your daily life?" 

Papers bearing these questions were distributed to 
the class, with the request that they be returned with 
their answers within a few days. Only three replies 
were received. 

The Professor then made the questions a part of 
the regular class lesson, and an entire lecture period 
was granted for the preparation of the answers. It was 
further granted that none need sign his name to his 
replies, in hope that this would bring out full responses. 

Three refused to express themselves, returning the 
question papers blank. Twenty-two said their conception 



of God was impersonal. Four expressed doubt as 

to God's personality. Sixteen only (35 per cent.) expressed 

belief in a personal God. Thirteen of the 

young men said that it would not make the least bit 

of difference in their daily lives if they had not heard 

of the existence of God. The rest said that there 

would be some difference, but no two agreed exactly 

as to the same condition of life. 

These things are hard to believe, but the facts are 
vouched for by the St. Louis Globe-Democrat. They 
remind us of the Apostle's words, "The world by wisdom 
knows not God"; and again, that "The god of this 
world hath blinded the minds of them that believe not." 

How glad we are that these blinded young men will 
yet be brought under the influence of him who died for 

R3792:page 181 

them at Calvary, to the extent that their blindness 
shall be turned away and the "knowledge of the glory 
of the Lord" shall shine into their hearts. How strange 
it seems that their Christian friends and relatives (1) 
so combat the thought of God's mercy enduring beyond 
the tomb, that these and "all the families of the 
earth may be blessed" by the Messiah (Head and body), 
the elect of this age. (2) How strange that they think 
of such young men, who say in their hearts, "There is 
no God," as being of the "elect," believers, footstep 
followers of Christ— to whom alone in this age the 
"great salvation" is promised. 

"WE ARE COUNTED AS FOOLS" 



The above words by St. Paul are still true of those 
faithful to the Word of God. Below we reprint an item 
from the Digest, re the changing meaning of the word 
heresy. The Rev. Crapsey, D.D., of the Episcopal 
Church, has recently been telling his doubts and disbeliefs, 
yet contends that he is still an orthodox Episcopalian 
and should be permitted to teach his unbeliefs 
under the prestige of "the Church," wearing its livery, 
holding its honors and receiving its pay. Some one 
not well posted on such matters thought this was 
wrong and brought the matter up in a heresy trial, 
Dr. Crapsey disbelieves the Bible, rejects its being of 
divine inspiration, thinks Jesus was born as every 
other child, that he had no prehuman existence, that 
Joseph or some man was his father. So far as 
we may be able to judge, Robert Ingersoll and Rev. 
Crapsey, D.D., would have agreed perfectly except as 
to methods of teaching the unbelief. In our opinion 
Mr. Ingersoll took the more honorable position in not 
pretending to be a minister and servant and teacher of 
the One whose words he denied. 



Dr. Crapsey, in his unbelief, has so much company 
now among ministers that his conviction was a general 
surprise. Others would doubtless feel that if they condemned 
him they would be at the same time condemning 
themselves, because the majority, apparently, are 
now "higher critics." Dr. Crapsey is surprised and 
desires a new trial. 

"THE WAY WHICH THEY CALL HERESY" 

The Apostle says, "After the way which they call 
heresy so worship I the God of my fathers." (Acts 24:14.) 
Likewise, today, if anyone will arise in any of the 
churches of Christendom and fearlessly preach the Bible's 
presentations as set forth in the MILLENNIAL DAWN 
volumes, it would not take long to decide him a heretic. 
In other words, times have so changed that those who deny 
the Bible's testimony are recognized as orthodox, while 
those who teach and expound the Bible faithfully and 
consistently are recognized at once as heretics, just as 
in Paul's day. The article follows:— 

CHANGING DEFINITIONS OF HERESY 

'"In the eighteenth century it required a radical 
philosopher like Hume to advance such arguments 
against the credibility of Christian miracles as today 
may be put forth by an Episcopal rector, with a fair 
chance of baffling the heresy-hunters at the last,' remarks 
a writer in the Evening Post, apropos of the recent 
trial of Rev. Algernon Crapsey. The churches, 
the writer asserts, are looking for a definition of heresy 
that can be generally accepted, 'for it is annoying, to 
say the least, to convene investigating bodies every 
year to define the offense anew.' Dr. Crapsey's trial, 
he points out, will leave the Episcopal Church practically 
where it was before in the matter, 'except that in 
Bishop Walker's jurisdiction it will be decided either 
that the miracles of the Bible must be accepted or that 
they may be rejected.' However, he adds, it will serve 
to show that what was heresy yesterday is not necessarily 
heresy today. We read further: 

'"As compared with the published utterances of Heber 
Newton, Dr. Crapsey's statements do not seem to be 
extreme, though they mark a distinct advance in frankness 
from the day that Bishop Gray "deposed" Bishop 
Colenso for attempting to question the Pentateuch. 
The words are much more specific, too, than those uttered 
by Dr. Charles A. Briggs in 1891, when he became 
professor of Biblical theology at the Union Theological 
Seminary, and which led to his withdrawal from the 
Presbyterian ministry. But Dr. Briggs found refuge 
with the Episcopalians, that Church called by Phillips 
Brooks "the roomiest Church in America." Whether 
the denomination that refused to consider charges 
against Heber Newton and welcomed Dr. Briggs will 



decide to retain Dr. Crapsey must depend upon the 
court's reading of history.' 

"Some years ago, when Dr. Heber Newton gave up 
his rectorship of All Souls' Church to go to Leland 
Stanford University, the New York Sun commented in 
part as follows: 

'"The religious views expressed so boldly by Dr. 
Newton which aroused so loud a protest ten or fifteen 
years ago have no longer the novelty they then had. 
The conclusions of the "higher criticism" of the Bible, 
which in general may be said to have furnished the basis 
for them, have since affected very profoundly the teachings 
of Protestant churches very extensively, and they are 
accepted if not actually propagated by professors in practically 
all their leading theological schools. Thus the religious 
public has become accustomed to views which 
provoked astonishment and resentment when they began 
to be proclaimed so frankly by Dr. Newton.'" 

MAN AND WOMAN UNDER THE CURSE 



Sin and death have long reigned. Selfishness instead 
of Love has had control of the world for centuries. 
Now God is lifting the vail of ignorance, and all 
who have been getting the worst of the bargain become 
violent for their rights. The masses of Russia have 
long been happy in ignorance and superstition. Their 
ignorance was their bliss. Now there is a general awakening; 
everybody is dissatisfied; all are clamoring 
for their rights. The nation is in revolution, and undoubtedly 
will become more unhappy yearly as the 
awakening comes, until the great catastrophe of anarchy, 
which will be the divine opportunity for rectifying 
all wrongs and establishing the social order on Love 
instead of Selfishness. It is necessary that all should 

R3792 : page 182 

be awakened, that all may see the effect of selfishness 
and learn to deprecate it. 

The men of Russia have been degraded and brutal 
because of their share of the curse; because their 
mothers knew nothing but selfishness to teach them. 
Now these mothers and sisters are awakening and crying 
out against the very conditions they assisted in creating. 
They have our sympathy; the more so because their discontent 
will for the time make them and their homes the 
more unhappy until they learn their lesson. And of 
course only a few will ever learn in this day "The 
Christian's secret of a happy life"— the peace of God, 
built on the exceeding great and precious promises of 
the Scriptures. 

HELL FIRE AND SAINTLINESS DENOUNCED BY TWO 



M.E. BISHOPS 



We clip the following from the Toledo Times, May 
24, report of the Rocky Mountain Missionary Society: 

Denver, Colo.— Hell fire, such as is preached from 
many pulpits, does not exist, declared Bishop Oldham 
of the Methodist Episcopal Diocese of Southern Asia 
yesterday before the convention of the Rocky Mountain 
Missionary Society. 

R3793 : page 182 

"Just tell me of anybody who believes we will be 
burned alive in a place filled with brimstone and fire. 
I'd hate to die if I thought I'd get a scorch for every 
sin," said the Bishop. 

"I wouldn't be a saint for anything," exhorted Bishop 
J. C. Hartzell of Africa, in taking up the discussion, 
"but at the same time I go to Church regularly, even if I 
don't do the talking. There are two extremes: the man 
who, in spite of all the help God, man or the Bible 
gives him, goes to the bad, and the man who is so tremendously 
greedy good that he is dubbed saint. I'd 
rather be a man, for a man has all the possibilities of 
right and wrong, and a saint hasn't any choice." 



CRAZED BY DR. TORREY'S SERMON ON HELL 

The Chicago Tribune, May 24, tells of a Mr. J. W. 
Griffin of Atlanta, Ga., crazed by hearing Dr. Torrey's 
sermon on hell and taken in charge by the police. 



ALL THINGS WORK FOR GOOD. 

-ROMANS 8:28.- 

If our Father's gracious promise 
Was more clearly understood, 
That his daily dealing with us 
Works together for our good; 

How the burdens that are pressing 
Hard upon us would grow light, 
And each trial prove a blessing 
Were our trust in him complete. 

If our hearts were always lightsome, 
And we knew no anxious care, 
We might overlook the sorrow 
That surrounds us everywhere. 



If our stores were overflowing, 
Then, perhaps, we never would 
Learn to sympathize with others 
Who are lacking daily food. 

Knowing he is always "for us" 
We, as children of his grace, 
Can afford to bear with patience 
"Trusting where we cannot trace." 

He will surely guard the issue 
Of each test, though it may seem 
Hard to bear; its object always 
Is to draw us close to him. 

So whatever may befall us 

We who love him always should 

Know the Lord is overruling 

All that happens us, for good. —John LaDow. 



R3793 : page 182 

A VISION OF THE KINGDOM. 

-LUKE 9:28-36. -JUNE 17.- 

Golden Text:— "This is my beloved Son. Hear him." 

THE SCENE on the Mount of Transfiguration, to be appreciated, 

must be viewed from the standpoint of our 

Lord's words. Eight days before, our Lord had 

promised his followers that some of them would not taste 

of death until they should see the Kingdom of God. He 

did not explain to them whether they would see the Kingdom 

in reality established in eight days or whether they 

would see a vision of the Kingdom. He left their minds full 

of wonder and expectancy, and then at the appropriate time 

took with him Peter, James and John, the three most prominent 

of the twelve apostles, who went up into the mountain, 

presumably Mount Hermon. 

From a comparison of the accounts some have surmised 
that possibly the Lord and the apostles remained in the 
mountain all night, as Jesus sometimes did, away from the 
multitude, in quiet, in prayer. In one of the accounts we 
are told that the apostles were heavy with sleep, and the 
inference seems to be that they were awakened at the proper 
time to see the vision; that its glorious grandeur was too 
great for them; that they fell upon their faces in fear, which 
was increased as a very dense, black cloud enveloped them, 
and when they heard a voice in the cloud saying, "This is 
my beloved Son: Hear him." One account shows that it 
was necessary for the Lord to touch the apostles, saying, 
"Arise, and be not afraid." 



JESUS SAID IT WAS A VISION 

So far as the apostles were concerned everything that 
they saw was so actual, so real, that they supposed the 
whole matter actual, just as John in the visions of Revelation 
saw, heard, spoke, etc., and just as Paul explains that 

R3793 : page 183 

in one of his visions matters were so real that he could not 
have told whether he was in the body or out of the body— 
whether he was still on earth having a vision or whether he 
had actually been taken away for a time and shown realities. 
Thus it is with all visions: their every detail is as 
actual and as perfect as though it were a fact. Our assurance 
that this transfiguration was a vision is in our Lord's 
words: "And as they were coming down from the mountain 
Jesus commanded them, saying, Tell the vision to no man 
until the Son of man be risen from the dead." When we 
have our Lord's direct statement that it was a vision it would 
be folly for us to perplex ourselves to explain it upon any 
other theory or hypothesis, such, for instance, as wondering 
how Moses and Elias could be there without a resurrection, 
especially when it is remembered that Jesus was the first to 
rise from the dead, "the firstborn from the dead."— Rom. 8:29; 
Col. 1:18. 

THE MEANING OF THE VISION 

Our Lord's words of eight days previous show clearly 
that the vision was intended to be a foreshowing of the glories 
and honors of the Kingdom in some sense of the word. 
It represented then the Son of man coming into his Kingdom 
—into his dominion. Peter, one of those who saw the vision, 
informs us that he got this lesson from it— that he was 
persuaded respecting the majesty of Jesus, of his dignity as 
the Messianic King, and the fact that all there pictured in 
vision would eventually be fulfilled. He says, "We have 
not followed cunningly devised fables when we declared unto 
you the power and coming of Jesus, but were eye-witnesses 
of his majesty [his kingly glory] when we were with 
him in the holy mount."— 2 Pet. 1:16,18. 

The central figure, therefore, of that vision was Jesus 
himself. Moses and Elias were merely accessories to fill out 
the picture. It was the Son of man who was to be honored, 
whose kingly dominion was to be represented, so that the 
disciples, who were to be so severely tried in their faith respecting 
him very shortly, might have a firm conviction respecting 
the authenticity of his claims as Messiah— that they 
might be able to witness a good confession of him to others, 
and be prepared through faith to accomplish the work of 
God to which they had been chosen as apostles of the Lamb 
—that the three who were with the Lord were representatives 
of the twelve, in whom the latter would all have 
confidence. 



"HE WAS TRANSFIGURED BEFORE THEM" 

The account is very explicit; his countenance was 
changed, his raiment became white and glistening, the heavenly 
glory fairly shining in his entire person. He was not 
changed actually. That change from human to divine, beginning 
at his baptism, when he received the anointing of 
the holy Spirit, the begetting of the holy Spirit to the divine 
nature, did indeed develop, change him from glory to glory, 
shining out in all the conduct of life; but his actual change 
did not occur until three days after Calvary, when he was 
raised from the dead by the glory of the Father. Then that 
which was sown in weakness was raised in power, that 
which was sown in dishonor of men was raised in glory, 
that which was sown in the fleshly body which knew no 
sin, but was holy, harmless, separate from sinners, was raised 
a spiritual body, filled with all the fulness of the divine 
nature. 

What the disciples saw, therefore, was not this change 
from human to divine, but a vision of it— a picture of it. 
Somewhat similar was the vision granted to Saul of Tarsus 

R3794 : page 183 

on his way to Damascus, when smitten down by the light 

above the brightness of the sun at noonday. He declares 

that the Lord appeared to him at noonday, a light shining 

above the brightness of the sun. Something of this brightness, 

this light, this transcendent grandeur was pictured 

before the three apostles in the holy mount, and no wonder 

that they fell upon their faces with fear— they were in 

trepidation in the presence of such glorious grandeur. Respecting 

the divine glory we read that Christ, "whom no man 

hath seen or can see,"— since his resurrection— "dwelleth in 

a light which no man can approach unto." 

Whenever even a vision is granted to mortals of this 
heavenly grandeur they must be specially protected of the 
Lord that the glorious brightness does not injure the mortal 
eye. In the case of Saul of Tarsus, we know that, lacking 
this protection, his sight was destroyed and he was blind for 
certain days, until by a miracle his sight was partially restored, 
though even then the defect remained a thorn in the 
flesh to his last moments— a reminder of how once he had 
been a persecutor of the just, an injurious person as respects 
the Lord's cause— reminding him also of the propriety of 
humility, and assisting in keeping him very humble, so that 
he describes himself as being one of the least of all saints. 

Indeed we may safely conclude that those of the Lord's 
people who have seen with any kind of vision the glories of 
the Lord or have had a glimpse through the eyes of their 
understanding or otherwise of the glorious character and person 
of our Lord and God, have had the opportunity of realizing 
more than ever their own littleness and insufficiency. As it 
was the three most advanced ones of the Lord's followers who 
were granted that vision of the Kingdom, so since then it is 



the most advanced of the Lord's followers, the most humble, 
the most zealous, the most faithful, who are granted the 
clearest visions, the clearest perceptions of the glories of the 
Kingdom, and these are permitted to reveal to others of the 
elect little flock more and more of the grandeurs of the divine 
arrangement as each may be able to hear and to appreciate 
and to understand the same. 

What wonderful privileges are ours at this day! Abiding 
in the Lord's love and favor, with loyalty of heart 
toward him, it is now our privilege of going up into the 
Mount of God and seeing wonderful things. Our visions 
are of a different kind. Before us are opened the glorious 
things of all the past— the divine revelations to Abraham 
and the prophets and through Jesus and the apostles— all of 
these things now are opened before us, radiant with harmonious 
beauty. Ours is a vision of Moses and the Lamb, and 
ours is a picture of Moses and the Lamb in the very highest 
and grandest sense. 

"MOSES AND ELIAS APPEARED" 

No intimation is given to us of why Moses and Elias 
were introduced into the vision. We must draw an inference. 
Since it was a vision, and as Christ was shown 
in the vision as a King, these two faithful ones of the 

R3794 : page 184 

past must be viewed in their relationship to Jesus and the 
Kingdom. These two, as will be remembered, like Jesus, 
had fasted each forty days: thus representatively they were 
one with the Lord in a remarkable devotion to the heavenly 
Father— in the practice of self-denial from a desire to be 
acceptable to the Lord and to fully acquaint themselves 
with the divine purposes. 

Moses evidently represented the Mosaic dispensation. 
He stood as a representative of Israel after the flesh, and 
possibly as a representative also of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, 
Enoch and all the faithful of the past, as we read, "Moses 
was faithful as a servant over all his house." Are they to have a 
place in the Kingdom? We answer, Yes. The divine promise 
is that when Messiah shall be glorified, the ancient worthies 
—whom Moses evidently represented in this vision- 
will be made princes in all the earth, agents or representatives 
of the heavenly Kingdom, its ministers of righteousness 
amongst men. (Psa. 45:16.) Nevertheless those ancient 
worthies, as we have previously seen, are separate and distinct 
as a class from the Church. John the Baptist, the last 
of the prophets, than whom the Lord declares no prophet 
was greater, belonged to that fleshly house of faithful servants 
of God, who instead of being the fathers shall shortly 
be the children of Christ and serve the cause they love as the 
princes of Messiah. But they without us shall not be made 
perfect: God having reserved some better thing for us.— 
Heb. 11:40. 



ELIJAH, THE CHURCH'S REPRESENTATIVE 

Elijah in the vision evidently represented the Gospel 
Church. We have already pointed out that Elijah's work 
was an attempted reformation, such as the Church has been 
commissioned to attempt throughout this Gospel age. We 
have already pointed out (see MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., chap. 
8) that Elijah typified the Gospel Church in all of his 
course; that the 1260 days of the drouth and famine while 
Elijah was in the wilderness prefigured the 1260 years of 
drouth and famine while the Church was in the wilderness 
during the "dark ages"; that the persecutor of Elijah was 
Jezebel, while the persecutor of the Church is symbolically 
called Jezebel. (Rev. 2:20.) We have seen that the emergence 
of Elijah from the wilderness and the measure of reformation 
that took place prefigured the Reformation movement 
of the sixteenth century and onward, and that his 
subsequent fleeing from Jezebel represented later persecutions, 
and that Elijah's eventual taking away in a whirlwind, in a 
chariot of fire, illustrates the ultimate gathering of the last 
members of the Gospel Church in connection with the time 
of trouble. 

Now look at the vision, the picture, and note its significance 
—Jesus glorified, transfigured, radiant like the sun as 
in Revelation (1:14-16), and with him in the Kingdom glory 
and brightness, represented by Elijah, the Elijah class, the 
Gospel Church, the little flock, his joint-heirs in the Kingdom, 
and also associated with him the ancient worthies portrayed 
by Moses. A conversation is represented as taking 
place respecting our Lord's crucifixion. And so it is that 
not only the ancient ones trusted in a sacrifice to come, 
but the Gospel Church trusts in the sacrifice already accomplished 
for her, and there is a full communion or fellowship 
between the two. Furthermore, when the Kingdom shall be 
established, assuredly all of the Lord's faithful ones will 
look to Calvary and its great sacrifice for sins as being the 
very center of the divine program or arrangement on which 
hangs all the blessings both for the Church and for the 
world through the Kingdom of God's dear Son. 

"THIS IS MY BELOVED SON: HEAR HIM" 

The essence of the entire vision was to impress upon 
the minds of the apostles the fact that Jesus was the Messiah, 
that he was worthy of being heard, that he was the 
mouthpiece of God, that he that honored him honored the 
Father also. This voice was heard from the cloud, which 
represented the darkness and trouble which would be permitted 
to come upon the Lord's followers in the midst of all 
the trials of the dark days that were coming upon them in 
connection with Jesus' rejection by the Jews, his scourging, 
dishonor, crucifixion, death, burial. In all this they were to 
remember the voice of the Father, "This is my beloved Son," 
and were not to be discouraged nor allow their faith to grow 
faint. Similarly throughout this Gospel age the Lord has 
frequently permitted the same dark cloud to come over his 



faithful ones, that they might be the better prepared also to 
listen to his Word, his message, "This is my beloved Son," 
and this vision of the Holy Mount is an assurance respecting 
the glorious Kingdom which he will establish, which 
will be the end of darkness and trouble. 

As the apostles were overpowered by the brilliancy of 
the vision and feared when they entered the cloud and heard 
the voice, so we in our weak and imperfect conditions sometimes 
find it difficult to grasp the glorious things which God 
hath set before us. The picture of the things unseen as yet 
is so wonderful as to amaze us. The fact that we have been 
invited to be heirs of God and associates with Jesus Christ 
our Lord in his Kingdom is too wonderful for us to grasp. 
We begin to fear lest we should fail in so great an undertaking. 
It is well for us to realize our own littleness and 
unworthiness, and to see that the whole matter is of the divine 
arrangement. It is well for us under the circumstances 
that the dark cloud of trouble and opposition is permitted to 
keep us very humble, that we may indeed fall on our faces 
in the dust. It is well that we should listen to the voice 
from heaven, saying, "This is my beloved Son: hear him." 
It is well that we should hear the Son assuring us that all 
things shall work together for good to those who love God. 
It is well that we should exercise faith in him that speaketh 
from heaven, lest we should become weary and faint in our 
minds. It is well that the Master teach us as he taught his 
disciples, and that looking up we should see Jesus only, 
that we should realize that in him alone is our help, that 
God hath laid help upon one who is mighty to deliver, and 
that so realizing that all of our help is in Christ Jesus we 
should hold fast to the relationship which we have already 
secured through faith in his blood and through consecration 
to him. 

MAKING THREE TABERNACLES 

The impulsive Peter cried out, "Lord, it is good for us 
to be here: let us now make three tabernacles— one for 
thee, one for Moses and one for Elias": not knowing what 
he said. How many there are who, Peter-like, want to be 

R3795 : page 185 

doing something, want to be rearing earthly tabernacles. 

How few at first catch the real spirit of the vision and realize 

that it represents things that are yet to be attained and 

not things of the present time of temporary tabernacles. All 

about us we see the disposition to rear costly temples of an 

earthly kind to the Lord, and a neglect of the vision in its 

real meaning, sentiment, teaching— that it points to the future, 

to the enduring perfect Temple condition, when everything 

imperfect and temporal shall have passed away and 

the Kingdom of God's dear Son shall have been fully established. 

Let us remember that Jesus did not accept Peter's 

proposition for earthly temporary tabernacles, but directed 

the minds of his followers to the eternal things of the Kingdom, 



which are to be brought to pass in God's due time. 

May the Master's touch ever keep us more and more awake 

to the privileges of our position, to the glorious opportunities 

that are granted to us of participating with him in his 

Kingdom. 



R3795 : page 185 

"NEVER MAN SPAKE LIKE THIS MAN. 
-JOHN 7:46.-JUNE 24.- 



AT THE END of the quarter a review is in order. We 

begin at the Mount of Beatitudes and close with 

the Mount of Transfiguration, and on the way in 

the Master's words and conduct find illustrations of the wonderful 

teachings of the Sermon on the Mount and how faithful 

obedience to the instructions there given will mean to us 

eventually a place in the Kingdom, pictured in the Transfiguration 

scene. The blessings of the meek, the merciful, 

the persecuted for righteousness' sake, etc., etc., all will find 

their fulfilment when, by the grace of God, we shall eventually 

be changed, transfigured, by the power of the First Resurrection, 

and made like to our great Redeemer and Lord— 

"Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the 

Kingdom of their Father. "-Matt. 13:43. 

How wonderful are the Lord's dealings with us and yet 
how reasonable. His appeal is, "Come let us reason together: 
though your sins be as scarlet they shall be white 
as snow; though they be red like crimson they shall be as 
wool." (Isa. 1:18.) He shows us how he has prepared 
for this: that he himself was provided, the sacrifice for sins; 
that our Lord has already died the Just for the unjust that 
he might bring us to God, and that God can be just when he 
receives us, just in his dealings with us, because the justice 
element of his Law has been fully met on our behalf. He 
gives us a glimpse of the blessings he proposes to bring to 
the world of mankind, points us to the Lamb of God, whose 
sacrifice takes away the sin of the world, and invites all 
those who have love and sympathy and appreciation to come 
now and accept not only life eternal but favor upon favor— 
joint-heirship with his Son in the glorious Kingdom which is 
to bless the world in the great uplift of "restitution, which 
God hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets 
since the world began."— Acts 3:19-23. 

This message comes to us through the Son of God, of 
whom our Golden Text declares, "Never man spake like this 
man." No wonder the apostles said to him when some were 
forsaking him, "Lord, to whom should we go? Thou hast 
the words [the message] of eternal life." Others may indeed 
think that they have eternal life in themselves— they 
may persuade themselves that by some inherent, immortal 
principle they will live forever, and that when they die it 
will merely be the appearance of dying, and actually they 



will become in that moment more alive than ever. At best 
that is a very difficult thought, and few are able to so hypnotize 
their own judgments as to believe it. We on the contrary, 
hearkening to the voice that spoke as never man 
spoke, hear his declaration that our hope is in him as the 
"resurrection and the life." (John 1 1:25.) We hear him 
telling us that the hour is coming in the which all that are 
in their graves shall hear his voice and shall come forth. 
(John 5:28,29.) It is reasonable. 

We can reason together with God when we take the 
voice of his Son and reject the voices of the "dark ages." 
From this standpoint— that a resurrection has been provided 
through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus— the whole 
matter of death and eternal life is clarified before our mental 
view. We see the condemnation through Adam, and 
how death is justly reigning throughout the whole world of 
mankind ever since. We see the death of Christ, the Just 
for the unjust; that he has bought us with his precious 
blood, that he has paid our ransom price, and that as a result, 
in God's due time, all shall come forth from the power 
of the tomb. We see the keys of death and of the grave in 
the hands of the one who has purchased all; we rejoice in 
the proclamation of the coming blessing to all the families 
of the earth, through a release from this power of sin and 
Satan and death. 

We hearken still more intently to the voice of him that 
speaketh as never man spake, and hear him assure us that 
there are two resurrections— one a life resurrection, the other 
a judgment resurrection. We hear him tell us that only 
those who through faith and obedience attain a standing 
with God under the cover of the precious sacrifice will be 
counted the good, the justified, and only they will share in 
the life resurrection, because only they will have passed 
their trial and be counted worthy of life. All others will 
come forth to the judgment resurrection to be disciplined 
under the Kingdom, to receive stripes in proportion to the 
wilfulness in which they have cooperated in their own downfall 
into mental, moral and physical degradation, but to be 
helped by the stripes, to be corrected in righteousness, if 
they will, and to be brought step by step out of the sin-and-death 
conditions, up, up, up, by resurrection power of 
Jesus, to the full perfection, to all that was lost in Adam. 

Well may we rejoice in this one who spake as never 
man spake, in him who has the words of eternal life. Respecting 
those words the Apostle Peter says, "Whereby are 
given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that 
by these we might become partakers of the divine nature." 
(2 Pet. 1:4.) Ah, yes! wonderful words of life, tell them 

R3795 : page 186 

over again, think them over again, rejoice in them more and 
more— let them fill our hearts and be in our mouths a new 
song of the loving-kindness of our God, whose tender mercies 
are over all his works. 
Of these words, which the Master spake as never man 



spake, the Apostle further declares that he spake of our salvation. 

He says, "Which salvation began to be spoken by 

our Lord and was confirmed unto us by them that heard 

him." Not only was there no eternal life in our race, and 

no hope for attaining any except through Jesus, but all of 

the promises of the past would have been powerless without 

his work of atonement, and not until he came was it known 

how our redemption was to be accomplished. True, the 

Lord had provided various types and shadows in the numerous 

sacrifices of the past which illustrated the fact that 

without the shedding of blood there can be no remission of 

sin; but they could not be understood until the antitype 

had come. Then he brought life to light and immortality 

to light— life for the world, eternal life to be conferred during 

the Millennial age— immortality for his Church, his 

Bride, his little flock, his joint-heirs. These were never 

brought to light before; they were faintly seen and vaguely 

described, but it remained for the great teacher to set forth 

before us the salvation which God had proffered through 

him. Thank God that our hearts have made our lips more 

and more tell forth the praises of him who has called us out 

of darkness into his marvellous light. Through faith in him 

we are already reckoned risen to walk in newness of life, 

and through him by and by the Father will raise us up by 

his own power, that we shall be like him and share his 

glory, honor and immortality. 



R3795 : page 186 

GREATEST IN THE KINGDOM. 

-MATTHEW 18: 1-14. -JULY 1- 

"It is not the will of your Father which is in 
heaven that one of these little ones should perish." 

AFTER the vision in the Holy Mount representing the 
coming glories of Christ there followed temptation. 
And this has not been an unusual course 
of events with the Lord's people ever since. Our highest 
and most glorious views of the heavenly things which the 
Lord has in reservation for his people are quickly followed 
by earthly trials and difficulties, which serve to test and to 
prove us whether or not we be of the Kingdom class— 
whether or not we will be submissive to the heavenly moulding 
and fashioning, that we shall be made meet, fit, for the 
Kingdom— whether or not, by full submission to the divine 
instructions in the school of Christ, we shall make our calling 
and our election sure to a place in the Kingdom to which 
he has called us. 
The disciples had the same thought that all Jews entertained 

R3796 : page 186 



respecting the Messianic Kingdom, that it would be 
established by a great Messiah, a great King, who would 
bear rule over all the earth; that God's favored people Israel 
would be his special charge and nearest to him in association 
in his Kingdom, and that through this Kingdom all 
nations, all peoples, all kindreds, would be blessed even as 
God had promised and sworn to Abraham. These sentiments 
had been quickened in the minds of the people by 
the appearance of Jesus, his wonderful words of life and his 
wonderful works witnessing that "never man spake like this 
man," and that Messiah could do no greater works than Jesus 
did. Israelites in general were in perplexity because their 
chief priests and teachers and rulers in the synagogues, etc., 
all rejected Jesus and were his opponents. The disciples, 
however, believed on him, followed him and hung upon his 
words that they and all of his followers should yet be associated 
with him in his Kingdom glory. 

Probably the disciples who were not with the Lord on 
the Mount of Transfiguration felt a little envy of those who 
had seen the vision and who subsequently told them. Could 
this mean that Peter, James and John, who were with the 
Lord on the Mount, would be more highly favored than the 
remainder of the discipleship when the Kingdom should be 
established? As they journeyed, following Jesus at a little 
distance, the dispute grew quite warm with arguments on 
the one side and on the other respecting which should be 
the greatest in the coming Kingdom. Our Lord doubtless 
knew at the time their arguments in the dispute, but instead 
of administering a personal rebuke to those most at fault, he 
chose rather to make of the matter a general lesson, profitable, 
helpful, strengthening to them all. And is not his example 
valuable to all of his followers? Is it not wise on 
our part so far as possible to avoid personalities and the 
holding up of any individual to special criticism? All mankind 
have faults and blemishes, some in one particular and 
some in another, and it is very rarely wise to single out an 
individual in the body of Christ for a special reprimand; it 
is generally better to do as our Master did in this instance 
—to give a general lesson on the subject which will be helpful 
to all, not only to those who are taking the wrong course, 
but also to those who are more nearly right in their views 
and conclusions. 

"AS A LITTLE CHILD" 

Our Lord inquired of the disciples what topic was so 
greatly absorbing their attention and leading to such warm 
discussion. It is to the credit of the apostles that they were 
ashamed to acknowledge that they had been disputing concerning 
which should be chief or greatest in the Kingdom. 
The whole matter was to be a favor to them anyway; they 
realized that they had done nothing to merit so great an 
honor, that the call to a place in the Kingdom was of grace, 
of favor. Why should they quarrel with each other respecting 
the Master's distribution of his royal favors? They felt 
abashed, and Jesus did not press the question. Knowing 



of the matter he allowed them to see that he had a knowledge, 
not only of their words, but also of their very hearts 
and intentions. Most skilfully, most gently, did he administer 
a rebuke; not in coarse, harsh terms did he berate those 

R3796 :page 187 

who were inclined to be self-seeking; he did not threaten 
them. 

A child was near— he took it and set it in their midst. 
Afterwards, says Luke, he took it in his arms. Their attention 
riveted by this peculiar proceeding, they were prepared 
for the lesson— which many today misunderstand when they 
suppose that our Lord meant that the Kingdom of heaven 
would be composed mainly of little children. No such 
words were uttered by our Lord and no such thoughts were 
communicated to his disciples. On the contrary, Jesus never 
called little children to be his disciples; he himself did not 
begin his ministry as a child, but when he was thirty years 
of age. Nothing in this, however, signifies that our Lord 
had not a deep sympathy with children, as is illustrated by 
his taking some of them into his arms and blessing them 
and saying, "Suffer the little children to come unto me and 
forbid them not, for of such [like] is the Kingdom of heaven." 
Our Lord loved the innocency and simplicity of a little 
child, and was quite willing to show his own humility in 
acceding to the wishes of the mothers that he notice their 
children and give them his blessing. Indeed we can rest 
assured that no good man or woman could be without love 
for the innocency and simplicity of childhood. 

"GREATEST IN THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN." 

Neither should we understand that because Jesus' ministry 
began at thirty, and because those whom he called to 
be his disciples were of mature years, that this would limit 
the age of any who might become the followers of Christ 
during this Gospel age. Quite to the contrary, we believe 
that some of very tender years have reached a sufficiency of 
information respecting our Lord and his work of redemption 
and his invitation to followers to intelligently take their 
stand with Jesus' disciples by full consecration of heart and 
life and every interest, with apparently quite a clear conception 
of what they were doing. Indeed, we feel like encouraging 
those of the young who are disposed to make a full 
consecration of their lives to the Lord to believe that in so 
doing they are not only acceptable, but that additionally 
they the sooner enter into the rest of faith, and are spared 
many of the unfavorable experiences which come to those 
who first seek the world and the pleasures thereof. 

In this lesson, however, we should distinctly note that 
the Lord is neither addressing little children nor discussing 
them, except as an example or illustration of simplicity, docility 
and teachableness, and freedom from pride and ambition. 
This was impressed upon the disciples as they looked 
at the little child sitting there unconscious of the great honor 



thrust upon it, unconscious of being used by the glorious 

King of kings to illustrate a lesson. The thought of our 

Lord is clearly given in the fourth verse, which says, "Whosoever 

therefore shall humble himself as this little child, 

the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven." 

Let us not lose sight of the fact that it is the Kingdom 
of heaven that the Lord is discussing and not the world. 
This was the same thought the apostles had, not which of 
them would get into the Kingdom of heaven and which 
would not get into the Kingdom, but— supposing that 
all were going to be in the Kingdom— which would be the 
greatest? The Lord's reply to this question is along this 
line, namely, that the one of them who would be the most 
childlike, most humble, most unpretentious, most willing to 
be taught and guided, would be the one who would be greatest. 
This thought applies to the Church both in its present 
and in its future conditions. At the present time, the 
Church, the Kingdom, is in an embryo condition, not glorified, 
not recognized even by the world, but recognized by 
each other and by the Lord. Humility and childlikeness 
amongst the brethren now should be esteemed as a mark of 
true greatness from the Lord's standpoint. Such as are of 
this childlike class we may know assuredly will be proportionately 
highly honored in the future, when the Kingdom 
shall be established in power and great glory as God's 
agency for the blessing of all the families of the earth. 

In harmony with this thought that the humble, the 
teachable, the simple, the unpretentious should be esteemed 
the greatest, we should expect to find in all the ecclesias, in 
all the companies of the Lord's people, that those chosen to 
the place of eldership and prominence in the Church would 
be amongst the most humble of mind and of conduct in the 
whole company. Any other condition than this would imply 
that the congregation had not rightly understood and appreciated 
and obeyed our Lord's sentiments expressed in connection 
with the incidents of our lesson. 

This does not mean, however, that the brother possessing 
five talents should be entirely unconscious and neglect 
to use them. It does not mean that he should be blind to 
the fact that some others of the brethren have fewer talents, 
but it does mean that he should have such love, such humility, 
that his only desire in connection with his talents would 
be to use them for the good of the Lord's cause— that he 
would be so humble minded, so zealous for the Lord, that 
he would not for a moment think of using his talents to 
serve personal ambitions, to vaunt himself or to in any measure 
or degree seek to suppress the talents, opportunities 
and privileges of others that his own talents might alone be 
recognized. It does mean that if he have five talents, and 
if of the right, childlike, humble spirit, he will have such 
interest in the dear brethren that he will do all reasonably 
within his power for the good of the whole cause, for the 
exercise of the various talents of the different brothers and 
sisters in such manner as will be to their upbuilding, 
strengthening and mutual edification, that the whole body 
of Christ may thus minister to its wants and necessities and 



comforts in faith and hope and love. 

"EXCEPT YE BE CONVERTED" 

The word converted signifies to turn about, to experience 
a change, but many fail to recognize this broad meaning 
of the word, and instead think of it as signifying the 
leaving of a relationship to the world and the devil and 
coming into relationship with God. The Lord did not mean 
to say to his apostles that they were not converted in this 
latter sense— that they were aliens, strangers and foreigners 
from God. He already knew them to be Israelites indeed. 
In his prayer he declares, "Thine they were and thou gavest 
them to me, and I have kept them." What he did mean was 
that they must be turned from their present attitude of mind 
in respect to ambition for place and honor in the Kingdom, 
else they would never enter into it. Already they were 

R3797 : page 188 

in his embryo Kingdom, and hence his meaning was that unless 

in the embryo Kingdom his followers should develop 

a childlike, humble spirit and turn from the selfish and ambitious 

spirit, they would utterly fail of getting into the 

Kingdom of glory, the Millennial Kingdom. 

What a lesson there is here for the Lord's followers— 
his "little ones." He shows us that while he has invited us 
to the greatest and grandest of all honors and privileges, 
nevertheless the attainment of this high calling, the making 
of this calling and election sure, will depend upon the way 
in which we receive the honors, privileges, blessings, the 
call. If it stirs up in us selfish ambition for greatness and 
power and honor amongst men, it is having the wrong, the 
undesigned effect. The effect which God designs is that we 
should realize our own insignificance and unworthiness of 
such great honors; that we should feel ourselves very little 
indeed in the sight of God, and wonder that he would so 
condescend as to take from the fallen race a little company to 
constitute the Bride, the Lamb's wife in glory, joint-heirs in 
his Kingdom. As in the school of Christ they grow in grace 
and grow in knowledge, this humility, this childlikeness, 
must not depart, but rather it must increase more and more. 
They must realize their own unfitness and unworthiness of 
such great honor, they must receive all of God's favors as of 
his bounty, his grace. 

The moving power with the proper disciples of Christ, 
who would maintain the love and favor of their Lord and 
ultimately make sure their calling and election in his Kingdom, 
must not be selfishness, love of position and power, 
name and fame. What, then, must it be? We reply, the 
moving power must be love— love for God, love for the 
brethren, and at least sympathetic love for the whole world 
of mankind, even including our enemies, many of whom are 
doubtless such because of blindness. The Apostle expresses 
this ruling, propelling power in the true followers of Jesus, 
saying, "The love of Christ constraineth us; because we 



thus judge that if one died for all then were all dead: and 
that he died for all that they which live should henceforth 
not live unto themselves but unto him which died for them 
and rose again."— 2 Cor. 5:14,15. 

"HE THAT RECEIVETH YOU RECEIVETH ME" 

Our Lord's discourse continues on the same lines when he 
says, "Whosoever receiveth one such little child in my name 
receiveth me." He is not referring to the receiving of infants 
in his name but the receiving of disciples in his name 
—the receiving of such disciples as have this child-like 
character and thus have the mark of being the true followers 
of Jesus. Whoever receives one of these humble, faithful, 
unpretentious ones, not because of worldly name or fame, 
not because of boasts of being some great one, but because 
they are the Lord's, because they give evidence that they 
have his Spirit— whoever receives such, the Lord says, 
should be considered and rewarded as though they had received 
the Master himself. 

Reversely, the Lord says that whoever will do injury to 
one of these little ones— these that are little or humble 
minded, these that are meek and loyal of heart— it were 
better that a millstone were hanged about his neck and that 
he be drowned in the depths of the sea. The word here 
rendered "offended," and in the revised version "stumbled," 
is derived from the Greek word "skandalon," and is closely 
related to our word scandal, which originally meant, "the 
stick in a trap on which the bait is placed, and which 
springs up and shuts the trap at the touch of the animal." 
Hence our Lord does not mean whosoever will anger or ill-use 
one of these little ones of my discipleship, but whosoever 
will entrap, injure, hurt one of these spiritually, etc. 

If a person were drowned in the sea it could do him no 
further harm and be no barrier in any sense of the word to 
his future life in the resurrection time; but should he entrap, 
scandalize, injure one of the Lord's little ones, to the 
spiritual damage of the latter, he will thereby subject himself 
to certain losses beyond the present life— he will suffer 
loss or injury in the resurrection life provided for all mankind 
through the great redemptive sacrifice. Our Lord does 
not state what will be the character of the loss or punishment 
or stripes that such an one will have, but does intimate 
that its bearing upon his future and eternal interests 
will be so great that it would have been far better for him 
to have had his earthly life shortened instead; and we all 
know how all mankind clings to every year of earthly life 
permitted. 

WOE UNTO THE WORLD FROM SNARES 

After telling us in verse 6 how serious a matter it will 
be for anyone to injure one of the Lord's little ones, one of 
his specially consecrated disciples, the Great Teacher in 
verse 7 applies his lesson to the world, and declares that a 
large part of the world's difficulty and woe comes to it along 



similar lines— "skandalon." These snares or traps or injurious 
misrepresentations, etc., cause a large part of the world's 
present discomfort, but they must needs be, they are a necessary 
part of the general trouble through sin, which are to 
cause mankind to ultimately hate sin and to long for the 
rule, the reign of righteousness, the Kingdom. But our Lord 
adds, while these offences or stumblings will cause special 
woes to many throughout the world, they will be specially 
injurious to the ones who started them, "To that man by 
whom the stumbling cometh." 

For this reason all who are the Lord's people are to be 
specially on guard that, whatever others may do in the way 
of injuring, scandalizing, wounding, stumbling, causing trouble 
now, they must refrain from this, and remember that 
they are the followers of the meek and lowly One who did 
harm to none, but on the contrary laid down his life in the 
interests of others. The Lord suggests as an illustration 
that the tendency to wrong doing which would prove "skandalon" 
or stumbling, an injury to others, might be a quality 
of character that would seem as close and precious to us as 
a right hand or a foot or an eye— it might be one form of 
wrong doing or injury or another form; but in every case 
those who would be followers of the Prince of Peace and 
ultimately be his joint-heirs in the Kingdom must, as good 
soldiers of righteousness, fight against all such sinful, selfish, 
injurious tendencies of the flesh. These must be mortally 
combatted, to the extent that the New Creature would be 
willing, yea anxious to utterly destroy that element of his 

R3797 : page 189 

fallen disposition which is contrary to the Master's pleasement, 
even though it be at a sacrifice that would be illustrated 
by the loss of an eye, a hand or a foot. 

We are to put away such practices, that we may be 
truly our Lord's footstep followers and be counted worthy 
to enter into and share his Kingdom. If we will not so 
do we cannot enter the Kingdom. If we will hold on to 
these tendencies of the fallen nature they will mean ultimately 
our destruction in the Second Death, for every person 
who has and who maintains an injurious character, a tendency 
to scandalize or injure others, will be esteemed of 
the Lord wholly unfit for any part in his Kingdom— yea 
unfit for eternal life at all. Hence the Lord's declaration 
that such would go into the fire or destruction eternal— the 
Second Death. No wonder, then, that our great Teacher 
urged all who would be his disciples to put away from them, 
to mortify, the deeds of the body, the selfish instincts of the 
fallen nature, at any cost, no matter how dear, that they 
might enter into life with him as participants in the Kingdom, 
as members of the Bride. 

Our Lord urges that such a loss of an eye or a hand or 
a foot, as representing earthly advantages and privileges of 
the present time, would be far better than, possessing these 
privileges, to be ultimately destroyed in Gehenna fire. Gehenna 
fire here and elsewhere, as we have pointed out, referred 



primarily to the valley outside the city of Jerusalem, 
where all the offal was destroyed (not preserved or tortured), 
and this, as we have seen, symbolized or prefigured the 
general destruction of the Second Death associated with the 
New Jerusalem government of the Millennial age— in which 
all the unworthy, all the offal, all the unfit, will be utterly 
destroyed in the Second Death, that the Lord may have a clean 
universe in which every creature would praise and honor 
him and exemplify his law and character and government 
of love. 

"DESPISE NOT THESE LITTLE ONES" 

Continuing to discuss his followers as "little ones," our 
Lord intimates that some who might not seek to entrap, ensnare 
and to "skandalon" them might nevertheless despise 
them, and so he gives a warning against this also. Amongst 
the Lord's "little ones" are not many great, not many wise, 
not many learned, and they are chiefly the poor of this 
world, rich in faith; and hence many might be disposed to 
despise them, to slight them, to evil entreat them, etc., because 
their despisers know them not, because they realize 
not that they are united to their hidden Lord— they know 
not us as they knew not him, the Forerunner and Captain.— 
1 Cor. 1:26-28; James 2:5; 1 John 3:1. 

When our Lord would intimate why his humblest followers 
should not be despised, the illustration he uses implies 
that they are the special objects of the heavenly Father's 
care and love, and that to despise them or to do anything 
demeaning toward them would surely bring some kind 
of retribution either in the present life or in a future one. 
The matter is put as though the Lord would say, You cannot 

R3798 : page 189 

even despise one of my "little ones" without the Father knowing 
it very quickly. He says, "In heaven their angels do 
always behold the face of my Father." These angels have 
no difficulty in bringing to his attention the difficulties, 
trials or persecutions of his faithful ones. Some, from this 
statement, have presumed the Lord to mean that every 
human being has a guardian angel looking after his interest, 
and that as now the world numbers 1,600,000,000, it would 
imply that there is a similar number of angelic beings 
looking after the interests of these. 

This is wholly erroneous; the Lord does not anywhere 
intimate any special guardianship of the interests of the 
world. He does tell us that he has arranged for the 
redemption and restitution of mankind in due time; but any 
special supervision intimated in the Scriptures is only over 
those who belong to the Lord in the sense that is mentioned in 
this Scripture, namely, as his "little ones." It is respecting 
these "little ones" that we read, "The angel of the Lord 
encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth 
them." (Psa. 34:7.) And again, "The angels are ministering 
spirits sent forth to minister [serve] to the heirs of 



salvation." (Heb. 1:14.) It would not at all surprise us 
if there were a guardian angel for each member of the 
Lord's little flock, the Lord's consecrated, his "little ones." 
However, we are to remember that the word angel is one of 
wide significance, and might include all the powers of God 
both animate and inanimate, by which he could take knowledge 
of and render assistance to those who are his. 

In any event, however, the thought of the picture the 
Lord here shows is that his "little ones" are never forgotten, 
and that all their trials and difficulties are speedily brought 
to the Father's attention through the angels or agencies of 
divine arrangement. What a comfort this is to those who 
are seeking to walk in the footsteps of Jesus and who find 
themselves frequently misunderstood or slandered or despised 
or neglected! Any good done to this class will never 
be forgotten by the Lord; any injury done to them will also 
be known and will not go unpunished, and the punishment 
will be in proportion to the degree of intelligence and wilfulness 
of the wrongdoer. "Vengeance is mine, I will 
repay, saith the Lord." Therefore, brethren, avenge not 
yourselves; leave all in the hands of the Lord as you suffer 
injury patiently and learn advantageous lessons therefrom; 
but at all times be careful, vigilant, that you yourself shall 
stumble, injure, none. 

THESE "LITTLE ONES" NOT TO PERISH 

Verse 1 1 is omitted from the revised version because it 
is not found in the oldest manuscripts, and this is good 
authority for omitting it. The same words do occur in Luke 19:10, 
and they represent an eternal truth. They were probably 
introduced here by some one who thought that Matthew 
had overlooked the words and that this would be an 
appropriate place for recording them. However, there are 
various diversions between this account of a hundred sheep 
and the other account of Luke 15:3-7. The one was apparently 
made to the Scribes and Pharisees; this narrative 
on the contrary was made to the disciples. We have elsewhere 
discussed the parable addressed to the Pharisees, 
showing that the hundred sheep properly represented the 
entire family of God, and that the one sheep that went 
astray represented properly enough humanity, which fell 

R3798 : page 190 

from divine likeness and favor through Adam's 
disobedience. 

The parable shows the Lord's love and mercy in pursuing 
after the lost sheep, humanity, and intimates its 
recovery in the end— not that all will be universally and 
everlastingly saved, but that all will be brought to conditions 
of salvation, to a clear knowledge of the truth and to 
a full opportunity for accepting the same, so that the rejection 
will be a just cause for their sharing the Second 
Death. 

This statement respecting the hundred sheep is applied 



in a totally different manner, as the context shows. Here it 
refers to all of the Lord's "little ones," all who become his 
followers, his sheep. Should one of them be stumbled, 
should one of them stray, the Lord in his providence will 
not abandon him, but will purify him if possibly he may be 
recovered. And all who are in harmony with the Lord 
should have this same thought and interest in one another, 
that they would be willing to spend and be spent in the 
recovery of a brother from the snare of the adversary. Verse 14 
sets the matter forth very clearly, saying, "Even so it is not 
the will of your Father which is in heaven that one of these little 
ones should perish." Hence, as the Apostle explains, he that 
recovereth a sinner from the error of his ways, saves a soul 
from death and hides a multitude of sins. (Jas. 5:20.) 
This is not referring to the souls of the world in general, 
which are still under the sentence of death, but it is referring 
to the souls of believers, who through faith have been 
justified and consecrated to the Lord. If they shall fall 
away, shall stumble by any means, all the faithful are to be 
energetic in their endeavors to recover such, to bring them 
back into full accord with the Lord. 

Its assurance further is that it is not the will of the 
Father that they should perish, and hence we may rely 
upon it that any and every reasonable and proper thing in 
their interests will be done rather than that they should be 
abandoned. This same spirit at work in the household of 
faith amongst the "little ones" would lead them, not to 
strive as to which of them would be greatest, but rather lead 
them to mutual helpfulness, that each and all might gain 
the prize of the high calling. It is in accordance with this 
thought that the Lord does not wish these to perish that he 
provides that those of his consecrated ones who do not follow 
voluntarily in the work of sacrifice shall not be abandoned, 
but shall be put through trying experiences, as 
represented in the "great company," who will wash their 
robes and make them white in the blood of the Lamb. It 
would, of course, have been better had they been so loving 
and loyal and zealous as to joyfully sacrifice earthly interests 
to gain the heavenly; but even though they do not thus 
do all in their power to fulfil their Covenant the Lord is 
merciful toward them and unwilling that any should perish. 
He will see to it that they are brought through such 
experiences as will eventually test and prove them, and, 
if they are faithful under the test, bring them off 
conquerors. 



R3798 : page 190 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

On pages 263-4 of Volume VI., MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
you express these thoughts: "Honesty to the Truth is 
a prime essential to progress in it; to oppose what one 



believes to be true and to even temporarily uphold what 
one believes to be error, for. ..any reason, will surely 
be offensive to the Lord," etc., and, "Next to the 
Lord, the Truth is the most precious thing in the world; 
it is not to be trifled with, not to be played with; and 
whoever is negligent along this line will himself sustain 
injury." 

You can imagine, dear Pastor, better than I can 
describe how happy I am, therefore, in the fact that 
God guided me not to oppose what, from the time of 
your debate with Dr. Eaton (which was my initiation 
into the study of Present Truth), appealed to me as 
the Truth. Every influence of my past religious experience 
(a happy one, because I then knew none better) 
held me to my old associations, where my pastor 
assured me I might hold your views and yet remain in 
Methodism, which opinion I for a while rejoiced in as 
correct. 

But oh, how I have since rejoiced, and continue to rejoice, 
that God led me to come out of error simply for love 
of the Truth as God's Word teaches it, and as I came to 
see plainly through your teaching. So far from there being 
anything in the past to attract, I find the love 
of the Truth increasing daily. It has taken a little 
over one year to read the full course of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN— counting "Tabernacle Shadows," TOWER, tracts 
and sermons as part of the course, and a most delightful, 
as well as inestimably profitable, course it has 
been, I acknowledge with inexpressible gratitude to 
the Father and to you. 

Your sister in Christ, 

ELIZABETH M. GILLETT,-Pa. 



MY DEAR SIR AND BROTHER:- 

Can you bear with me if I tell you a little experience 
of how the DAWNS came to my attention? 

I was visiting a relative in B , and in looking over 

their book case I saw the "Divine Plan of the Ages" and 
I took it up to see what it was. After noting some of 
the headings of chapters, I just sat down to devour as 
much of it as was possible before I had to leave. I inquired 
of the lady who bought it, "What book is this, 
and where did you get it?" She explained that she 
bought it of an agent for 35c, but had not read it and 
did not really know what it was. I only had time to 
read two or three chapters and I tried to explain to her 
what it was. 

I went from there to D , to visit an aunt, and I 

told her of the book I had seen and that I was going to 
have one as soon as possible. My description of the 
appearance of the book led her to think that she had 
bought one like it some time before, but as she could 
not understand it she had taken it to her sister. The 
latter was a good Baptist, and after a brief examination 



she pronounced it an Advent book and would not read 
it. I secured that copy and read it through, and was so 

R3799 :page 191 

taken up with it that I just had to talk about it to nearly 
everyone, and lent it to my father-in-law, who is a 
great Bible reader. He read it two or three times, but 
can hardly "fall in" with "future probation," although 
he admits it to be the most reasonable and sensible 
theory he has ever read. 

Next I brought up the subject to a brother member 
of the M.E. Church. When I was trying to explain 
the chart in the front of the book, he remembered that 
he also had purchased a book like it, but had only read 
a little of it as he could not understand it— and it was 
an Advent book anyway. I could not see how he could 
start to read it and not go on. However, he is not a 
very devout member of the Church. 

As for myself I was always in the Sunday School, 
but for 10 or 12 years I have been a railway mail clerk, 
and must confess I have hardly kept the dust off my 
Bible covers in all that time. Since reading the "Divine 
Plan" I have had the Bible in hand at every brief opportunity. 
I find a difference between reading the Bible 
and searching the Scriptures. I have read Vols. I., III., 
am reading Vol. IV. and am sending for Vol. II. 

Oh, it seems such a revelation to me, and it seems 
also very plain. I would like to see you and grasp 
your hand. There are lots of questions I would like to 
ask you, but I don't feel that I should impose upon 
your time. 

Tonight I am in M . I have attended the preaching 

service in Wesley M.E. Church this evening. 
The preacher read the book of Jude and in commenting 
on the 9th verse said that what was meant by it was a 
mystery. It never had and never would be explained 
by man. His principal theme was in verse 23, applying 
it to the Church's duty to snatch sinners out of the 
fire of hell. It all seemed so weak and childish to me. 

My Vol. I. is now in the hands of a fellow-clerk on 
the road. He is a Universalist and I am waiting patiently 
for his verdict. I assure you that I will keep 
my books in the hands of some who will read them and 
that no time will be lost. The messages which you 
wrote ten or fifteen years ago are being most remarkably 
emphasized in the last two years. 

Wishing you the fulness of the joy of his elect, I 
am, yours sincerely, 

CHARLES J. DAVIS.-N.Y. 



page 191 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 



Greetings in the Lord! I received some time ago, 
through our Brother Hemery, a little token of your love, 
together with a letter containing your greetings and 
words of encouragement. These, my dear brother, 
are very highly appreciated indeed, and be assured 
they are reciprocated by me. 

I feel, dear Brother Russell, that I owe you a real 
debt of gratitude for help and blessing which, under 
our heavenly Father's providence, by your instrumentality, 
I have received and am still receiving. The 
Truth, my beloved brother, is more precious to me today 
than ever it has been. I love it and hold it as 
priceless, and I am determined that my boast shall 
ever be in Him who is the Truth. 

I am glad of the privilege of being a Colporteur, 
even though, on account of home affairs, I cannot get 
going as far afield as I would sometimes like. However, 
the work is the Lord's, and how and by whom it 
has to be accomplished is his business, and his will be 
done. I could tell you a lot in my affairs to the praise 
of my Redeemer, of his wonderful care, of his patience, 
his mercy and his loving forbearance. Oh, when I 
think of his goodness I feel ashamed of myself, of my 
waywardness and of the very poor service I have rendered 
him. Oh, for grace to serve him better, and to 
bring every thought, word and action into subjection 
to his perfect mind and will. 

I frequently remember you, my dear brother, at the 
throne of heavenly grace, as I know your trials must 
be many. It has always been so with the prominent 
teachers of the Lord's flock; the Adversary seems to 
have a special eye to their downfall, and your case cannot 
be an exception, but he who is for you and whose 
cause you serve is greater than all that can be against 
you. 

With much love in Christ, yours in the hope of our 
calling, GEO. H. TAUBMAN,-Scotland. 



R3799 :page 191 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your very kind letter 
expressing Christian love and greetings was received. 
Thanks for all your kind remembrance of me, not only 
in this letter but during the more than four years of 
Pilgrim service in which the Father permitted me to 
engage and for which I shall ever be grateful to him. 
While these years have been full of toil and travel, and 
sometimes the flesh has grown weary, and while the 
enemy has sometimes greatly vexed the soul, yet as I 
look back over more than three score years of life, these 
four years are the best, brightest, sweetest, happiest 
years of them all, and it is with regret that I must for a 
time— I do not know how long— drop out of the regular 
work to look after some other duties that present themselves. 



While I would have greatly preferred to continue 
in the work, yet I bow obediently to what seems 
to be the Father's will, knowing that he knows best and 
that he always gives to his children what is best for 
them. I wish to say to you, dear brother, that while I 
may not be in the regular work, I will endeavor at all 
times to do what I can in a local service for the spread 
of the Truth. It is not my purpose that there shall be 
any break in the service; having closed my last Pilgrim 
service last Sunday evening, I am engaged to speak 
for the Boston Church again next Sunday p.m. I expect 

to spend the next Sunday with friends in B , and 

other places have spoken for services, so that I see no 
cause for me to be found in idleness. 

With Christian love, very sincerely yours in the 
faith, JOHN HARRISON. 



DEAR BROTHER:— I have noticed in several cases 
recently, when consecrated brethren have died, not one 
of them has seemingly expressed a wish as to burial 
according to our service, with enough force to have it 
used; (this of course applies to places where there is 
no class and elders to serve). I therefore decided to 
copy my service [see Vol. VI., p. 328] and file it away, 
as my last request, and I feel sure it will be recognized 
by my family. In copying it I see how remarkably 
clear it is, and feel as though our dear people miss a 
great opportunity for service in accomplishing our mission 
as the feet members of the body of Christ if they 
neglect it, for, as you remark, "hearts are then tender," 
and the fact that the hands lying cold before them copied 
the service while still in the earthly tabernacle 
would add force to the message. 

Your servant in the Lord, I. D. B.,— Ark. 



page 193 



SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVII JULY 1 No. 13 
A.D., 1906-A.M., 6034 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 195 

The Wail of the Russian Peasant Woman 195 

Drifting to Socialism 195 

Anger, Hatred, Strife, and Murder 195 

Sacred Relics Recovered 196 

Berean Bible Study on Love 196 

One-Day Convention Reports 197 

The God-Likeness of Forgiveness 197 

What the Unmerciful May Expect 199 

Who Is My Neighbor? 200 

The Golden Rule 202 

"Lord, Teach Us to Pray" 203 

"Ask and It Shall Be Given You" 206 

page 194 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ASBURY PARK, N.J., CONVENTION, JULY 22-29 



(For information respecting meetings, see last page, this issue.) 

RAILROAD RATES 

We have secured fare-and-one-third rates on all lines of railroad 
east of and including Chicago and St. Louis, on "Certificate 
Plan." Ask for ticket for "Watch Tower Convention, 
Asbury Park, N.J.," for which you pay one way full fare and 
receive a Certificate in addition to your ticket. The Certificate, 
after endorsement by proper officers at the Convention and 
payment of 25 cents, entitles you to one-third fare on return 
trip. From some points cheaper rates than these may be obtainable, 
via Atlantic City or other ocean points. Enquire of your 
railroad agent. 

ACCOMMODATIONS 

Board and lodging can be procured for $1, $1.25, $1.50, $2, 
and upward to $5 per day. 

Write at once if you wish us to procure accommodations, 
stating briefly and pointedly what kind, number of persons, 
sex and color, and if married couples wish to room together. Do 
not expect any alteration of your party's location after writing. 
If others join it later they will be accommodated in the order 
of notification. Address all letters to "Convention Dept," 
WATCH TOWER B. & T. SOCIETY, Allegheny, Pa. 



R3799 : page 195 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE WAIL OF RUSSIAN PEASANT WOMEN 



CZAR NICHOLAS received recently the following 
remarkable document. It is a petition from 
the peasant women of the village of Nikolskaje, 
in the government of Warquesch. It reads:— 

"For generations the women of the peasant class 
have lived without having any rights whatever. From 
birth to death they have been and are subject to the 
will of fathers, grandfathers, husbands and sons. We 
are not even considered human beings, but simply 
beasts of burden. 

"We demand to be taught to read and write; we 
demand that our daughters be given the same facilities 
for learning as our sons. 



"We will no longer be forced into marriage; we 
demand to be given land to cultivate that we may become 
independent and able to earn our own living. 

"We know that we are ignorant, but we are not to 
blame. We demand to be told what is happening in the 
world around us, and we demand the right to be represented 
in the Douma."— Cincinnati Enquirer. 



While the worldly spirit of Selfishness is goading 
on the whole world to battle for "rights," the Word of 
God directs the children of God to be not strife-breeders 
but peacemakers. It says: "Be patient, brethren; 
the coming of the Lord draweth nigh." His Kingdom 
will soon give to all absolute justice and right every 
wrong. Do all you can kindly, peaceably, lovingly to 
"follow peace with all," but expect to suffer and to bear 
considerable for righteousness' sake. "Think it not 
strange." "Rejoice in tribulation," trusting your affairs 
to him who has promised to make all your experiences 
work out for your everlasting advantage. He who takes 
to the sword will perish by the sword. He who trusts 
in the Lord will have peace now and hereafter. 

DRIFTING TO SOCIALISM 



"The revolutionary movement in Russia has been 
going on for nearly a year, and as conservative authority 
as the London Spectator predicts that it may last 
five years longer, and it further suggests that some 
young Russian lieutenant of artillery may today be 
studying the career of Napoleon Bonaparte and be qualified 
to act at the end of that time. The French revolutionists 
talked of constitutions and the rights of man. 
The Russian revolutionists are talking of these things, 
too, but they go further; they are talking of division of 
land, of equalizing the distribution of wealth, of other 
crude and half-formed ideas of economic change— in a 
word, Socialism. Tolstoi says that Russia is in better 
condition than any country in the world to attempt 
common ownership of land. 

"Should Russia in course of time and after a glut 
of horrors become a Socialist or semi-Socialist state, 
the revolutionary wave would spread, for good or ill, 
to other nations. 

"Already we read of Austrians and Hungarians 
insisting upon universal suffrage, and a delegation of 
no less than 200,000 workingmen filling the Vienna 
ringstrasse to impress parliament with their earnestness 
in making the demand. 

In Germany the Socialists, inspired by events in 
Russia, have begun an agitation for the reform of the 



R3800 : page 195 

election laws which will give them the representation 
in the reichstag, possibly a majority of that body, to 
which they are entitled.— Scranton Times. 

ANGER, HATRED, STRIFE, MURDER 



Lodz, Russian Poland.— Thirty-four girls working 
in Kindler's mills at Pabianice, near here, on refusing 
to join a strike, were poisoned by a powder that was 
strewn upon the floor of the mill. One of the girls died 
and the remainder are seriously ill, ten of them not 
being expected to recover. 



Russia is one of the newest countries to come under 
the influence of "strikes," but the above shows that 
no other nation could teach it much along the 
line of the "works of the flesh and the devil." 
What may we not expect, the world over, very shortly 
in the great "time of trouble such as was not since 
there was a nation." The veneer of civilization, miscalled 
Christianization, is quite thin, even in Churchianity. 
Then the works of the flesh and of the devil 
will show in marked contrast to the fruits of the Spirit 
of Christ— joy, peace, brotherly kindness, love. Let us 
not measure ourselves with the poor world, but with 
the perfect Lord, whose Spirit we have received and in 

R3800 : page 196 

whom we are seeking to be perfected in the Chief 
Resurrection. 

SACRED RELICS RECOVERED 



According to recent accounts the golden candlestick 
and other articles used in the Temple service, by 
the Israelites, have been recovered from the River 
Tiber, where they were thrown by the ancient Romans 
when the sacking of Rome by the Goths seemed 
imminent. 

"In the box were discovered many vessels and 
trumpets which exactly answer the descriptions in the 
Old Testament. Should the identification be accepted 
this candlestick would become one of the most valuable 
treasures in the world. 

"The value of the gold alone is more than $30,000, 
and, in addition, the rich working enhances its value, 
being of the finest. It stands nearly three feet high." 



It is claimed that the ancient Romans more or less 
worshiped the River Tiber and frequently cast valuables 
thereinto as sacrifices. A systematic effort is 
being made to recover those valuables, and the foregoing 
is the first important recovery we have learned of. 
It is hoped that the golden Ark of the Covenant from 
the Temple may yet be recovered also. 



R3800 : page 196 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY ON LOVE. 

WE are hearing good reports of blessings from the use 
of these Berean Studies in the Scriptures. We 
urge that each little group have one special session 
for these lessons and that one leader be selected for at 
least three months;— a leader who will enter into the spirit 
of the studies and who knows how to draw the answers 
from the class and then can briefly summarize at the close 
of each question. Following this course the Allegheny 
Church has adopted these studies for every Sunday evening, 
and the interest is shown by the fact that the attendance 
has about doubled during the past eight months. 

If good readers are numerous in the class, assign one 
reference to each; if few, several references to each. (The 
reading must be clear and distinct or the profit of the lesson 
will be sacrificed.) The Scripture references come first, 
then the DAWN references: the six volumes of DAWN being 
indicated by the first six letters of the alphabet, A, B, C, 
D, E, F. Similarly, T represents "Tabernacle Shadows," 
and S "Spiritism." The letter Z represents the WATCH 
TOWER, '02-152 signifying page 152 of the year 1902. The 
columns and paragraphs are indicated thus: col. 2, par. 3. 

JULY 1 

1 . What is love? Z/03-55 (2nd col. last par.); Z/03-58; 
(1st col. par. 2). 

2. How does the Apostle describe love? 
I Cor. 13:1, Z/03-56 (1st col. par. 1). 

I Cor. 13:2, Z/03-56 (1st col. par. 2). 

I Cor. 13:3, Z/03-56 (1st col. par. 3; 2nd col. par. 1). 

I Cor. 13:4, Z/03-56 (2nd col. par. 2, 3); Z. '03-57 

(1st col. par. 1, 2); Z/97-247 (1st col. par. 1-4). 

I Cor. 13:5, Z. '03-57 (1st col. par. 3 to 2nd col. par. 3); 

Z/97-247 (1st col. par. 5 and 2nd col.) 

I Cor. 13:6, Z/03-57 (2nd col. par. 4); Z/97-248 

(1st col. 1 to 3). 

I Cor. 13:7, Z/03-58 (1st col. par. 1); Z/97-248 

(2nd col. par. 1 to 3). 

I Cor. 13:8, Z/03-58 (1st col. par. 3); Z/97-248 (2nd 



col. par. 4). 

I Cor. 13:9-12, Z/03-58 (2nd col. par. 1, 2); Z/97-249 

(1st col. par. 1 to 3). 

I Cor. 13:13, Z/97-249 (2nd col. par. 1). 

JULY 8 

3. How does the illustration of the spectrum assist us 
to comprehend love? Z. '97-245 (2nd col. par. 2, 3); 
246 (1st col. par. 1). 

4. What is the distinction between natural, or human 
love, and spiritual, or divine love? Z. '00-182 (1st 

col. par. 5); Z. '03-333 (2nd col. par. 1 to 3). 

5. What is the difference between duty-love (phileo) 
and disinterested or divine love (agapee)? Z. '01-149, 
150. 

JULY 15 

6. What is the three-fold manifestation of the spirit of 
love? Z. '96-212 (1st col. par. 3); Manna, June 27. 

7. How may we distinguish between true and false 
love? Z/95-210 (1st col). 

8. What is the importance of this grace? Z. '97-244 
(1st col. par. 1 to 3; 2nd col. par. 2). 

JULY 22 

9. How is love attained? Z. '97-246 (2nd col. par. 1, 2); 
Z/00-183 (1st col. par. 1); Z.'98-8 (2nd col. par. 2). 

10. Why is an "aggressive warfare" necessary to attain 
unto love? Z/95-03 (2nd col.); Manna, Apr. 9. 

11. What is the relative importance of the early "gifts" 
of the Spirit, and the spirit of love? F.238, par. 2; 
Z/97-289 (2nd col. par. 2). 

JULY 29 

12. Why should love be the mainspring of all our actions? 
Z/03-91 (1st col. par. 2). 

13. What is the relation between love and purity of heart, 
and how may we purify our hearts? Titus 1:15,16; 
Z/99-214 (2nd col. par. 1); 215 (2nd col. par. 1) to 217; 
Z.'05-216(lstcol. par. 3, 4). 

14. How is love the seal or evidence of our begetting 
as New Creatures? E.286, par. 2; 267-270; Z/97-289 
(1st col. par. 1 to 2nd col. par. 1). 

Each one appointed for reader should have his BIBLE 
or DAWN or TOWER on hand, previously read, and should be 
prepared to respond at the leader's call without stopping to 
hunt his place. All of course have BIBLES and DAWNS, and 
some one in each company is likely to have old TOWERS and 
will be glad to loan them for the benefit of the class. 

Opportunity for discussing each question should be 
given after the references have been read and before the 



leader makes a brief closing summary of the answer and 
proceeds to read the next question. It is urged that the 
questions as printed be strictly adhered to until they have all 
been discussed. It will generally be found that all questions 
are included on the subject. The reason for care on this point 
is that if the questions are intruded that come later the 
subsequent lessons are considerably spoiled thereby. The 
leader should be expected to kindly, gently, but firmly hold 
the class to the question under discussion, and in this he 
should have the cooperation of all who recognize the value 
of order in the study of the Divine Plan of the Ages. 



R3800 : page 197 

ONE-DAY CONVENTION REPORTS 

THE failure to give reports of the One-Day Conventions 
recently held should not be understood to signify 
that they were unworthy of reporting: other matters 
claimed our attention and the WATCH TOWER space. We 
here very briefly record that in the various places, namely, 
Washington, D.C., Philadelphia, Pa., Indianapolis, Ind., 
Huntingdon, Pa., New York City, N.Y., Cleveland, O., Springfield, 
111., the dear friends of the cause put forth strenuous 
efforts, and under the Lord's blessing numbers of new 
hearers were reached with the Gospel message, and a few of 
these, we trust, were brought from darkness to greater light 
and started in the good way toward the Kingdom. Others, 
we may hope, were relieved of some measure of previous 
blindness and hindered from stumbling into infidelity and 
led to a more reasonable and appreciative view of the divine 
character and that blessed book, the Bible. 

R3801 :page 197 

As usual there was one public service at each place 
aside from the meeting specially for the interested. The latter 
were attended not only by the friends of the local 
churches, but also by representatives and delegations from 
surrounding territory within a radius of sometimes 200 miles 
or more. The impression is a growing one with these that 
these One-Day Conventions are blessed of the Lord and being 
used to the pulling down of the strongholds of error 
and misunderstanding of the Truth and to the upbuilding 
of those who are already of the Lord's consecrated flock and 
in the enjoyment of light upon his Word. 

You will all be interested in knowing that by dint of 
wisely directed and diversified forms of advertising and at 
considerable expense, large attendance was secured in all of 
the public meetings at these Conventions. The estimated 
numbers in attendance at these public services were as 
follows:— 

Washington, 2,500; Philadelphia, 1,600; Indianapolis, 
about 2,500; Huntingdon, about 450— a very large attendance 



for a wet day and a small place; New York City, 
2,000; Cleveland, O. 2,500. 



R3801 :page 197 

THE GOD-LIKENESS OF FORGIVING. 
-MATT. 18:21-35.~JULY8.~ 

"Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors."— Matt. 6:12. 

OUR last lesson forewarned us that offences, snares and 
stumblings would come to the Lord's people, and 
cautioned us against being in any sense or degree the 
causes of these offences— against any conduct which would 
prove a stumbling-block or in any way be injurious to 
others. Today's lesson takes up the matter from the opposite 
standpoint, instructing the Lord's followers how they 
should deal with the injurious persons when they are of the 
household of faith, "brethren." Feeling the great importance 
of this subject, we have heretofore repeatedly made it 
prominent in these columns and associated publications, and 
especially in DAWN, Vol. VI. This seemed the more necessary 
because the matter has been apparently so generally 
neglected by others. Now, having seen some good remarks 
on the subject by Dr. Peloubet, we take pleasure in quoting 
the same in preference to repeating our own arguments, 
which to some might become wearisome. Dr. Peloubet says:— 

"Every one receives criticisms and wrongs which try his 
temper to the utmost. Especially is this true of the ambitious 
spirits who seek to be first, as described in our last 
lesson. As Professor Bruce says, An ambitious man is sure 
to be the receiver of many offences, real or imaginary. He 
is quick to take offence and slow to forgive or forget wrong.' 
But the danger assails all classes. 

"Go to him privately and alone. If our object is to 
gain our brother and help him to do right, we will not make 
known the wrong to others, make it a matter of notoriety, 
for that makes the settlement far more difficult. The offender's 
pride, or even self-respect, will tend to keep him 
from acknowledging his fault. This is a most important 
principle. The wise head of a great asylum told me that 
in dealing with the insane it was of the utmost importance 
to keep away the audience, and that almost every one was 
influenced by the presence of others. The wisest teacher of 
my acquaintance deals in the same way with his boys. Deal 
with them alone whenever it is possible. Thus thy brother 
will be more likely to hear thee, and thou hast gained thy 
brother, gained him for righteousness, for salvation, for a 
Christian life, and probably as a friend. 

"If this fails then the next step is to get help from one 
or two others; and if this fails, from the larger community. 
If this fails, he is to be to you as a heathen and a publican, 
outside of your religious and social company, but not outside 



of your love and care and desire to help. (See Rom. 12: 19,20.) 
In all cases the object is not revenge, but to 
save and help the offender. Henry Ward Beecher used to 
say that he looked upon those who maligned him and said 
bitter things against him as sick people whom he must try 
to cure of their moral disease." 

"SEVENTY TIMES SEVEN" 

After explaining to his followers how best to avoid taking 
offence from the brethren and how best to help brethren 
out of the wrong position of being offenders and being injurious, 
the matter is brought up afresh by Peter's question regarding 
the number of times that we should be willing to 
receive injuries from another and take them patiently, and, 
exercising a forgiving spirit, should try to have the injuries 
discontinued. It will be noticed that the Lord is not laying 
down any rule by which we may deal with the world, but 
merely the rules which should govern amongst his followers. 
As respects the world we are to expect opposition, misrepresentation, 
slander, opposition of every kind. "Marvel 
not if the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before 
it hated you"— "Whosoever will live godly in this present 
life shall suffer persecution."— John 15:18; 2 Tim. 3:12. 

Such oppositions from the world we are to take as a 
matter of course, and not be surprised at the fiery trials that 
will try us, but to consider that the Lord is wise in permitting 
such experiences and able to make them all work 
out for our good. It is within the household of faith that 
the special trials sometimes come, from the very quarter 
whence we least expect them, but these also must be taken 
patiently; we must not render evil for evil nor railing for 

R3801 :page 198 

railing toward the Lord's members nor toward the world; 
we must, as the Apostle says, be patient toward all. 

Notice that Peter's query is, If my brother trespass 
against me how often shall I forgive him? Seven times? 
Peter no doubt had in mind the thought that seven was the 
symbol of perfection, and that this might mark the reasonable 
limit of mercy and forgiveness. He did not, of course, 
consider that if that were a divine law it would mean that 
he himself might be forgiven of the Lord not more than 
seven times for imperfections, shortcomings, etc. Our Lord's 
answer is broad and sweeping— "I say not unto thee until 
seven times, but until seventy times seven." Some are disposed 
to translate this until seventy and seven times, but 
evidently the Lord's intention was to imply that forgiveness 
should be granted as often as it is sought with any manifestation 
whatever of sincerity. 

This is not merely advice from the Master to his followers 
—it is a command. It is not optional with us how we 
shall do toward our brother, for the great Teacher has assured 
us that if we have not the forgiving spirit we cannot 
be his disciples. His words are, "If ye do not from the 



heart forgive men their trespasses neither will your heavenly 
Father forgive your trespasses." All, then, who realize their 
need of divine mercy and forgiveness and who receive the 
great Teacher's instruction on this point will be careful to 
cultivate in their hearts in every sense a forgiving spirit, a 
loving, generous disposition. And by this all men may know 
the disciples of the Lord of mercy. We quote Dr. Peloubet 
again:— 

"Our hearts are like reservoirs, and outward occasions 
draw out whatever is within and only that. If they are full 
of love and forgiveness, kindness and desire to help, then no 
matter how often— seventy times or seventy times seven- 
some act of others call forth the feelings of the heart, it will 
be met by love and forgiveness and help. As all need to be 
forgiven, so all need to forgive. There are enemies who injure 
us by word and deed. There are others who say evil 
things about us carelessly and attribute wrong motives, pervert 
what we do and say. 'They speak daggers.' Insults are 
offered, even friends sometimes do the most annoying and 
trying things, that are apt to remain in the memory and 
fester like a thorn in the flesh." 

"The kindest and the happiest pair 
Will find occasion to forbear; 
And something every day they live 
To pity— and perhaps forgive." 

Dr. Hale refers to people who "have given a new turn 
to an old text. In their own private 'R. V.' of the New 
Testament they read: 'Whosoever speaketh a word or committeth 
a wrong against God, it shall be forgiven him; but 
whosoever speaketh a word or committeth a wrong against 
me, it shall not be forgiven him.'" 

"The forgiving spirit seeks to do all the good possible 
to the one who has wronged us. It yearns to help him and 
to save him from his sin. It proves this feeling of forgiveness 
and love by doing good, as God sends the rain and 
sunshine on the evil and on the good." 

"Always and under all circumstances we must have a 
forgiving heart, whatever the offence against us or the attitude 
of the offender. We must never have the spirit of hatred 
or revenge or retaliation. We must never brood over wrongs, 
but must make all possible allowances and excuses. If thou 

R3802 : page 198 

canst not make thyself such an one as thou wouldst, how 
canst thou expect to have another in all things to thy 
liking?'" 

"Heir of the same inheritance, 
Child of the selfsame God, 
He has but stumbled in the path 
We have in weakness trod." 
"An old Spanish writer says, 'To return evil for good 
is devilish; to return good for good is human; but to return 
good for evil is Godlike.'"— Archbishop Whately. 

"I have known a man to nurse the tiny cocatrice egg of 
unforgiveness till it has burst into the fiery serpent of 



crime."— Farrar. 

THE DEBT OF A KING'S OFFICER 

By way of impressing this lesson our Lord gave a parable 
to his disciples. This parable represented a great 
king who, making an accounting with his officers charged 
with the collection of taxes, found one of them short in his 
accounts in a very large sum, ten thousand talents, estimated 
to represent nine million dollars. Justice laid hold upon the 
debtor and was about to execute its penalty when he appealed 
for mercy and extension of time in which to make 
good the deficiency. The king was compassionate, forbore 
the collection of the debt and let the servant go free. 

This is our Lord's illustration of the proper exercise of 
mercy. The one thus dealt with does not represent the world 
of sinners, Adam and his race, for whose deliverance 
from the penalty a ransom price is demanded from justice. 
This parable is often thus used improperly against the 
Bible argument of the teaching of the ransom, that the death 
penalty against Adam and his race could not be lifted or set 
aside except by the payment of the ransom price, the corresponding 
price, our Lord's death. That this is not the teaching 
is clearly shown by the statement, "The Kingdom of 
Heaven is likened unto a certain king which would make a 
reckoning with his servants," etc. This declaration respecting 
the Kingdom of Heaven lifts the parable entirely out of 
connection with the world in general, which is not either in 
embryo or otherwise the Kingdom of Heaven: it definitely 
locates the parable in the Church, and these servants of the 
king as amongst those who have already been justified 
through faith in Christ and who have already made consecration 
of themselves to the Lord and become thus his 
servants entrusted with his goods. The signification of this 
feature of the parable, then, is that if any of the Lord's people, 
his disciples, come short they have a throne of grace 
and mercy to which they may approach that they may 
"obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need."— 
Heb. 4:16. 

THE DEBT OF A FELLOW-SERVANT 

As representing the wrong course, the reprehensible 
course of some, the Lord in the parable before us pictures 
the forgiven officer as going forth from his king's presence 
with the latter's kind words still ringing in his ears and in 
the exercise of his unmerited freedom, and, finding a fellow-servant 
who owed him an hundred pence— a small bet 

probably representing not more than a hundred dollars proportionately 
in our money and time. Instead of a proper and 
generous feeling toward his fellow-servant, instead of sympathy 
and love for him corresponding to that which had 

R3802 : page 199 

been bestowed by the king upon himself, this servant caught 



the lesser debtor by the throat saying, "Pay me that thou 

owest." The fellow-servant used toward him the very same 

words that he had used to the king, saying, "Have mercy 

upon me and I will pay thee all." But he did not, but cast 

him into a prison. He was hardhearted, not at all after the 

likeness of his generous master, the king. Even his fellow-servants 

recognized this; they felt a pity for the unfortunate 

one and told it unto their lord. They knew well enough the 

king's generous disposition to be sure that he would not 

favor such an intemperate exercise of justice. 

The king sent for his officer and upbraided him for the 
matter, saying, I remitted thy debt because thou besoughtest 
me; I showed mercy to you. Should you not also have 
shown mercy to your fellow-servant? The question was left 
without an answer— the answer was clearly enough implied. 
He who had received so great mercy should have been 
moved with compassion toward a fellow-servant in a small 
affair. The king was wroth, was angry, with that servant, 
justly so. He had proven himself unworthy of the mercy 
bestowed upon him. Nor was it too late yet to punish him 
for the matter, for his debt had merely been remitted or set 
aside and not blotted out. Thus it is with all of the Lord's 
people; we are dealt with on the basis of faith; God is in earnest 
if we are in earnest. Our blemishes and shortcomings will 
not be permitted to stand between us and the glorious things to 
which we have been called if we are faithful to the extent 
of our ability, and if as a part of that faithfulness we have 
the Spirit of Christ, for if we have not the Spirit of Christ, 
the spirit of love, the spirit of forgiveness, gentleness, etc., 
we are none of his. 

It is in line with this that the Apostle writes that sins 
shall be blotted out at the second coming of Christ. (Acts 3:19.) 
They will be blotted out when in the resurrection 
we come forth as New Creatures, sown in weakness, raised 
in power; sown in dishonor, raised in glory; sown natural or 
human bodies, raised spiritual bodies, glorious. Then that 
which is perfect having come, all the imperfections and 
blemishes will be fully blotted out, never to be revived either 
by the Lord or others. But meantime, while we have our 
standing of faith, our blemishes are merely covered while 
we are permitted to give a demonstration of the loyalty and 
sincerity of our consecration and earnestness of desire to 
walk in the footsteps of the Lord. 

WHAT THE UNMERCIFUL MAY EXPECT 

Our Lord, after concluding the parable, makes a direct 
application of it to his disciples, not to the world, although 
in a certain sense or degree there is a general principle 
expressed which is applicable to the world in proportion as 
each comes under enlightenment and instruction. Our Lord 
says, "So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you if 
you from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their 
trespasses." How solemn these words, how clear cut, how 
unmistakable their import. In no uncertain terms they assure 
us that whatever our faith, whatever our works, they 



all amount to nothing if we do not attain to that spirit of 

love which is merciful, generous, long suffering, patient toward 

those who do injury to us, whether they be brethren 

of whom we might expect the more, or whether they be 

enemies of the world from whom we must expect less, consideration. 

Mercy is an element of love, and Love is the 

fulfilling of the whole law of God. 

The propriety of the Lord in thus dealing with us is 
evident. He is seeking a special class for the Kingdom— 
to be associates with our Lord Jesus in the great work of 
ruling and blessing the world. Only those who possess the 
divine character of patience, forbearance, sympathy, compassion, 
mercy, love, could possibly be suited to the divine 
purpose in respect to the great work of blessing all the families 
of the earth. We are accepted in Christ because of 
our profession that we love these qualities in him and desire 
to be copies of God's dear Son. If we fail to improve 
the various lessons and opportunities afforded by the Lord, 
to cultivate this character, then in the same proportion we 
fail to make our calling and election sure. 

The king delivered the unmerciful servant to the tormentors. 
Such was the custom of oriental countries at that 
time and to some extent still. We are not to understand 
that our Lord had sympathy with those barbarous customs, 
but that he was speaking to the people from the standpoint 
of custom which they would understand. Elsewhere the 
Scriptures assure us that any who are the true servants of 
the Lord and who fail to come into accord with his Spirit 
willingly, will be turned over to Satan, to tribulation, to hard 
experience, that by these they may be profited and learn to appreciate 
things from the Lord's standpoint. (1 Cor. 5:4,6.) For 
instance, Revelation 7 first speaks of the little flock, the 
Bride class, as composed of 144,000— the nucleus of which 
were Natural Israelites, in whom was no guile, and who became 
the nucleus of spiritual Israel, and to whose numbers 
since throughout the Gospel age the Lord is gathering those 
from amongst the Gentiles who enter into covenant relationship 
with himself and manifest his Spirit. Aside from 
these so selected, the same symbolical picture shows us a 
great company whose number is known to no man— whose 
number was not predestinated— these are out of every nation, 
people, kindred and tongue. These, unlike the 144,000, do 
not sit with Christ in the throne, but are pictured as being 
before the throne. These have not, like the others, kept 
their garments unspotted from the world, have not had the 
Spirit of Christ dwelling in them richly, so that his merit constituted 
the robe of forgiveness for them without blemish, that 
by a wrong spirit and a wrong course they have bedraggled 
their robes, and therefore, we are told, they must wash them 
and make them white in the blood of the Lamb, and this 
washing is represented as being done in "great tribulation." 
These tribulations correspond to the torments of the parable 
upon the servant who did not exercise toward his fellows 
the spirit of mercy. As again it is stated, "Blessed are the 
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy."— Matt. 5:7. 



"FORGIVE US AS WE FORGIVE OTHERS" 

It will be remembered that in our Lord's prayer he 
sets forth this principle for our instruction and guidance, 
that we must not expect of the heavenly Father mercy for 
our shortcomings and blemishes and continuance in his favor 
and ultimately join t-heirship in his Kingdom, unless we 
cultivate in ourselves the same spirit. How beautifully and 
how simply the Lord states this matter in the prayer, "Forgive 

R3803 : page 200 

us our debts as we forgive our debtors." (Matt. 6:12.) 

How emphatically the Lord states it again, saying, 

"If ye forgive men their trespasses your heavenly Father 

will also forgive you, but if ye forgive not men their trespasses 

neither will your Father forgive your trespasses." 

(Matt. 6:14,15.) These trespasses, be it noted again, do 

not refer to the one original sin on account of which condemnation 

of death passed upon the whole human family 

and on account of which Christ died and on account of 

which the curse is ultimately to be rolled from every member 

of the race so that there shall be no more curse. (Rev. 22:3.) 

These trespasses are our own individual shortcomings 

and blemishes which we have inherited and which the 

Lord is very willing to overlook and excuse for those who 

will comply with the conditions of their Covenant and be 

followers of the Lord Jesus, filled with his Spirit and striving 

to walk in his steps. 

Archbishop Hare has represented the attitude of the 
unforgiving many as implying their prayer to the Lord 
thus,— 

"O, Lord, I have sinned against thee many times; I have 
been often forgetful of thy goodness; I have broken thy law; 
I have committed many secret sins. Deal with me, I beseech 
thee, O Lord, even as I deal with my neighbor. He hath not 
offended me one hundredth part as much as I have offended 
thee, but I cannot forgive him. He has been very ungrateful 
to me, but not one hundredth part as ungrateful as 
I have been to thee, yet I cannot overlook such base ingratitude. 
Deal with me, O Lord, I beseech thee, as I deal with 
him. I remember and treasure up every little trifle which 
shows how ill he has behaved to me. Deal with me, I 
beseech thee, O Lord, as I deal with him." 



R3803 : page 200 

WHO IS MY NEIGHBOR? 

-LUKE 10:25-37.~JULY 15.- 

"Golden Text:— "Blessed are the merciful, 
for they shall obtain mercy."— Matt. 5:7. 



JESUS was a teacher and expounder of the Law to the 
common people, but he did not class himself with the 
Scribes and Doctors of the Law amongst the Jews. 
He had a different view of the Law from theirs and taught 
in a different manner. The common people heard him 
gladly, whereas the Jewish Doctors of the Law did not appeal 
to the common people at all or attempt to teach them, 
but merely discussed the great problems of divine law 
amongst themselves and with the more ascetic of the people 
—the Pharisees. 

The common people, although they heard the Lord 
gladly, did not clearly comprehend his teachings, for he 
spoke to them in parables and dark sayings to the intent 
that the mass might not understand, but that the specially 
zealous Israelites indeed might be attracted to closer study 
and inquiry. To these he explained the parables, saying, 
"To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom, 
but to all those without [outsiders, not specially interested 
followers] these things are spoken in parables." (Mark 4:11.) 
Nevertheless, there was something very attractive in 
the Master's style, so that even those who did not fully comprehend 
his teachings said, "Never man spake like this 
man"; and again we read, "They wondered at the gracious 
words that proceeded out of his mouth," "For he taught 
them as one having authority [as one who understood his 
subject thoroughly] and not as the Scribes [not doubtfully]." 
-John 7:46; Luke 4:22; Matt. 7:29. 

For this reason jealousy of Jesus sprang up amongst 
the Doctors of the Law. To them he was a rival teacher, 
and accordingly they sought to entrap him, with a view to 
exposing him to ridicule before his followers, whom they 
recognized as "unlearned men." But in no case did they succeed; 
in every instance recorded the Lord's wisdom was too 
great for them— he entrapped them in their own arguments. 
The present lesson is an illustration of this. One of the 
Doctors of the Law, evidently thinking that our Lord's 
teachings along the lines of love and mercy were contrary 
to the rigid lines of justice as laid down in the Law, thought 
to entrap our Lord by a question. He would ask him upon 
what terms he could have eternal life. He expected Jesus 
to answer, "Eternal life will be given to all who manifest a 
God-like, loving, generous character," or that he would say, 
"You can have eternal life by becoming my disciple and 
practising my teachings." Thereupon this Doctor of the 
Law would at once call attention to the fact that the teachings 
of Jesus abrogated the Law, made it null and void- 
that he ignored the Law. 

"WISE AS A SERPENT, HARMLESS AS A DOVE" 

Our Lord answered this Scribe thoroughly out of his 
own mouth: he said to him, "You are a teacher of the Law; 
give us your statement of what the Law says respecting how 
eternal life may be obtained?" This was a pointed reply, 
and the lawyer was fully prepared to answer it, for, What 
saith the Law? was a common question amongst the Jews 



who quoted from the Law. (Deut. 6:5; Lev. 19:18.) This 

was the very definition which our Lord a short time before 

quoted to the rich young ruler who came to him on one occasion. 

The lawyer evidently repeated a well-known formula 

of the Law, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with 

all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy strength, and 

thy neighbor as thyself." Jesus replied, "Thou has answered 

right: this do and thou shalt live"— have eternal 

life. 

THE LAW VERSUS THE GOSPEL 

Why did Jesus thus refer to the Law? Why did he 
not avail himself of this opportunity for preaching the Gospel? 
Why did he not say to the lawyer— "The only way to 
obtain eternal life is through faith in me, followed by a 
full consecration to walk in my footsteps as my disciple"? 
Why did he not tell the lawyer, "There is no other name 
given under heaven whereby men must be saved but the 
name of Jesus"? Why did he not tell him, "He that hath 
the Son hath life; he that hath not the Son shall not see 
life" ?-Acts 4:12; 1 John 5:12. 

We answer that this would have been too strong meat 
for the lawyer in his condition of mind. It was necessary 
that first he should realize his own inability to keep the 
full letter of the divine Law, so that he might be prepared 

R3803 : page 201 

to look for divine mercy through Jesus. The difficulty with 

the Pharisees and Scribes was that they were pretending 

to keep the Law, pretending that they were justified by it, 

pretending to gain eternal life by it, although they very 

well knew that they all died like other men, and knew also, 

when they would reflect upon the subject, that the divine 

Law was so high, so grand, so complete, that in their weak 

and fallen condition they were unable to meet all of its requirements 

perfectly. 

There are some people of the same kind today, who 
are ready to acknowledge that God has a perfect standard 
and that none can expect eternal life except as they harmonize 
with that standard; and many today, as well as 
formerly amongst the Jews, believe that they are sufficiently 
near the divine standard to have eternal life, and are therefore 
not looking for any Savior— not looking for a Redeemer 
to pay a ransom price for them and to grant them immunity 
and forgiveness of sin and reconciliation through him to 
the Father— the covering of their blemishes. It is necessary 
for all such to learn first the lesson that divine justice has 
but one standard and that is a very high one. When they 
find how high God's standard is and how imperfect are 
their best endeavors to measure up to their requirements, 
then and not until then do they begin to look for help from 
the Lord in the attainment of life eternal. The Lord wished 
the lawyer to learn this lesson, and therefore exacted from 
him a statement of what the Law required. 



The lawyer did not stop to haggle over what would be 
included in loving God with his entire heart, soul, strength and 
mind. Some one might claim to be loving and serving God and 
others might doubt the truthfulness of the claim, though unable 
to prove anything, since only the Lord and the man's own 
heart could judge perfectly in this matter. The lawyer 
passed over that great question as though it were nothing, 
as though it were settled, but had he sought to critically examine 
what such a complete consecration to the Lord would 
signify he would doubtless have found himself far short of 
its standard. 

Let us not pass the question too quickly or too lightly 
—let us know that to love the Lord with all our heart 
would mean that the sum of all our affections would center 
upon the Lord, so that our love for him would far excel all 
of our love for the dear ones of the home and the family and 
of the whole world. To love the Lord with all our soul 
would signify with all our being— to manifest our love not 
only by our words and looks, by our praises, but by our services 
and all of our conduct in life, everything testifying 
that God is first in our affections and in all of life's interests. 
Thirdly, to love him with all our strength would signify 
that time and talent and influence would all be at the service 

R3804: page 201 

of our God, that in everything we would be ready to be 
used, spent, in glorifying his name, in serving his cause as we 
might understand it to be his will. Fourth, to love our 
Lord with all our mind would seem to imply that we are to 
intellectually attempt to appreciate the Lord, to understand 
his divine laws and to enter into heart sympathy with them, 
so that our service and worship would be the more intelligent, 
after the kind described by our Lord when he said, 
"They that worship him must worship him in spirit and in 
truth"— intelligently. 

"LOVE THY NEIGHBOR AS THYSELF" 

The Scribe, passing over the obligations to the Lord, 
seemed to realize that his daily conduct would condemn him 
as a violator of the latter part of his own definition of the 
Law, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." He apparently 
recognized this as his most vulnerable point, and 
that the Lord had entrapped him in his own answer. He 
knew how in his daily life he was not loving his neighbor as 
himself— that he was making a wide discrimination between 
those of his own class and the common people, the publicans 
and the sinners; and that even in his present endeavor to entrap 
Jesus he was not loving him as himself, as his neighbor, but 
treating him as an opponent. He felt that, like others of his 
class, he had a haughty, disdainful attitude toward the lower 
classes of his own race. He was skilled in the Law, however, 
and this was not a new point for him to evade. He had the 
same explanation of the matter that was common to others 
of the Scribes and Pharisees, namely, that their neighbors 



whom they were, according to the Law, to love as themselves, 
were those who belonged to their class, to their set, to their 
station in life. Apparently, therefore, with considerable 
confidence he replied to Jesus, "But who is my neighbor?" 
as though he would say, "That is a point, I presume, upon 
which we might possibly differ. I think that I keep the 
Law when I love and respect and fellowship those of my 
own class, and treat others with more or less of disdain. 
How could you apply the Law of Moses differently? I feel 
sure that you will agree that the Law meant that each person 
was to consider those of his own class as his neighbors, 
and to love them and cooperate with them and not with others 
of the outside world." 

With marvellous wisdom the Lord framed a parable, 
such as the Scribe of the Law well knew might take place 
any day. He pictured the road between Jerusalem and Jericho, 
a bridle-path, in some places quite steep, passing 
through a gorge in the mountain— a vicinity infested with 
robbers, who lived in the numerous caves, and who not infrequently 
attacked passengers. Even today it is the custom 
for travelers to have an armed escort of Arabs on this journey 
to Jericho. Our Lord pictured a traveler on this road 
beset by the robbers, beaten into helplessness, stripped of 
his clothing. He pictured a priest passing by, seeing the 
man and hastening on, lest he also might be beset by the 
robbers; similarly a Levite passes by, unwilling to spend 
the time necessary to render assistance. Then a man of 
Samaria comes along, and, moved with sympathy, assists the 
injured one, binding up his wounds; and finally, taking 
him on his own beast to the nearest inn, he cared for him 
over night and made some provision for his further care. 

The force of our Lord's illustration is only seen when 
it is remembered that the Levites were specially set apart 
for holy service to the Lord as instructors of the people, to 
guide them by word and by example in the ways of the 
Lord, and when it is further remembered that the priests, 
also belonging to this tribe, were a special family chosen of 
the Lord for the very highest service toward himself and 
toward the people of Israel. The picture is still further 
heightened when we recall that the Samaritans were a mixed 
people, whom the Jews despised and with whom they would 
have no dealings.— John 4:9. 

R3804 : page 202 

With these things in mind mark the Master's question, 
"Which of these three was neighbor of the man who fell 
amongst thieves?" There was only one answer for the lawyer 
to make. He himself belonged to the Levite class condemned 
by the parable. The reply was, "He that showed 
mercy on him." Our Lord approved of that answer and 
responded, "Go thou and do likewise"— go and show mercy, 
go and understand that any man in the world, friend or 
foe, is your neighbor and is to be loved and served by you 
as you may have opportunity. As you would have him do 
for you do even so for him; love him and serve him as 



yourself, as you would have him love and serve you under 
reversed conditions. 

THE GOLDEN RULE 

We have found some of the Lord's people disposed to 
evade the force of this requirement of the Law and its illustration 
by the Lord's parable by saying, "Yes, the Samaritan 
who showed mercy to the wounded man was indeed his 
neighbor, while the priest and the Levite who did not show 
mercy to him he should not consider to be his neighbors; 
hence the wounded upon recovery, should he ever have any 
dealings with that Samaritan who assisted him, should love 
him as himself, should be willing to lay down his life in his 
service. Whereas the other two who did not do neighborly 
acts ought not to be considered as his neighbors, and he 
should not try to love them as himself. 

We answer that this is a distortion of our Lord's language. 
Indeed, he was seeking to counteract this very 
thought, which was common to the Jews, for it was a proverb 
amongst them that they should be loyal to neighbors but 
bitter to enemies. The word neighbors signifies those who are 
near, and the Scribes and Pharisees were in the habit of applying 
this to those who were near in sympathy, in sentiment, 
in faith, in sectarian relationship. Thus a Pharisee 
would gladly serve another Pharisee, and a Scribe would 
gladly serve another Scribe, from a clannish, selfish spirit, 
regarding each other as neighbors in the sense of the Law, 
and that others of a different class were more or less 
opponents, either to go unloved or, if they oppose themselves, 
to be hated. 

As Christians we must take a much higher view of the 
matter than this. We remember our Lord's words in opposition 
to this very thought. He said, "Ye have heard that it 
hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor and hate thine 
enemy. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them 
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for 
them which despitefully use you, and persecute you; that 
ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven." 
(Matt. 5:43-45.) Any who will not come to this standard 
of love, not only for friends but also for enemies, cannot 
long be recognized by God as his children. 

Our Lord originated the Golden Rule as a full statement 
of the divine will, which must govern all who would 
be his disciples. That Golden Rule does not say that we 
shall love as brethren those who have done kindness for us. 
Our Lord condemned that selfish kind of love when he said, 
"If ye love them that love you what thank have you? Do 
not even the publicans and sinners the same?" Such an interpretation, 
therefore, as would make this parable to teach 
that we should love as our neighbors those who have hazarded 
their lives for us would be far beneath the teachings 
of our Master, and, he says, would be on a parity with the 
usual sentiments of sinners. 

As followers of the Redeemer we are to have the much 
higher standard; we are to recognize every one who is in 



adversity and needing our help as our neighbor, whom we 
should love sympathetically to the extent of being ready to 
do for him or her whatever service we might be able to 
render, to the extent that we should wish that person to do 
for us if we were in his difficulty. To whatever extent we 
can get this high standard of love, sympathy, cooperation, 
generosity, kindly feeling in control of our hearts and to be 
the rule of our conduct, in that proportion surely we will be 
the more Godlike, the more Christlike, for, as our dear Redeemer 
remarked, God is kind even to the unthankful. 

LOVE YOUR ENEMIES 

Our Lord's requirements of us as his disciples go beyond 
merely the loving of a neighbor. We must have at 
least a sympathetic love for our enemies, so that we would 
not only not endeavor to injure them by word or deed, but 
that we would be ready and glad to assist them as might be 
in our power. No one, however, is to suppose that the Lord 
means that we are to love our enemies as we love the Lord 
himself, nor even as we love our brethren. Our love for the 
Lord and for the brethren is love of the very highest type- 
love which appreciates the principles represented in our 
heavenly Father's character, which all who are truly his are 
seeking to copy. 

Our love for our enemies and for many of our neighbors 
must necessarily be along lines of their characters: their 
hopes and their plans are very different from those which 
we have adopted. As is our Lord's, so our love for them 
must be of the sympathetic kind, even as is the love of God— 
"God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, 
that whosoever believeth on him might not perish." God 
does not love the world with a love of fellowship, nor are 
we to do so. Like him we are to have the love of sympathy 
for the world. Realizing its fallen and depraved condition 
we are to be glad to do all in our power for its rescue, for 
its comfort along lines of justice and mercy. 

There seems to be a limitation to the love commanded 
by the Law, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself"— not 
better than thyself. Hence if it came to the place where a 
neighbor's life was in jeopardy, and we could assist him only 
by the sacrifice of our own life, it would not be a requirement 
of the divine law of love that we should sacrifice our 
life for his— that would be loving him better than ourselves, 
and therefore more than the divine requirement. Neither 
should we expect a neighbor to love us better than himself, 
so that he would sacrifice his life for us. Should he attempt 
to do so it would be our proper attitude of mind to 
hinder it, not to allow him to work a permanent disadvantage 
to himself, more than we would have been willing 
and glad to have done for him. It is in this particular that 
our Lord's course in the sacrifice of his life on our behalf 
transcends anything that was required of the Law— in giving 
his life a ransom for many, he did more than was required 
by the Law. It is for this reason that it is denominated a 



R3805 : page 203 

sacrifice. To do the whole Law was his duty, but when he 
went beyond this, and gave his life a ransom price for mankind, 
that was a sacrifice, and as a sacrifice it was appreciated 
by the Father and specially rewarded with more than 
everlasting life. And the same rule applies to us, for as he 
was so are we in this world— we are to walk in his footsteps. 
-1 John 4:17. 

The demands of the Law are still to do to our neighbor 
as we would have him do to us. We are to do nothing less 
than this to anybody; but as followers of the Lord, imbued 
with his spirit of sacrifice, we are joyfully to lay down our 
lives for the brethren— in harmony with the divine program 
which is now selecting the little flock, the household of 
faith, as sacrificers with Jesus, to be by and by joint-heirs 
with him in his Kingdom and in its great work of blessing 
and rejuvenating the world. It is very necessary that we 
have clear views respecting this subject of the demands of 
the Law, the demands of justice upon us toward any creature, 
and also as respects what would properly come in as a 
part of our sacrifice. 

"THE LAW IS FULFILLED IN US" 

We noticed in the beginning of this lesson that our 
Lord gave the Scribe instruction in the Law instead of 
preaching to him the gospel of grace. Now let us note 
that the Lord applies to his followers both the Law and the 
Gospel. God has but one standard, but one Law, and never 
will abolish it. The Law Covenant indeed, after serving its 
purpose, ceased; but the Law of God, upon which that Covenant 
was based, will never fail. We as well as the Jews 
are commanded to love the Lord with all our heart, soul, 
mind and strength, and our neighbor as ourselves. This is 
the standard before us as well as before the Jew. The Jew 
could not keep it— he found himself deficient not only in 
respect to his treatment of his neighbor, but deficient also in 
the fulness of his love for his Creator, which must overbalance 
all other loves and manifest itself in all the conduct of 
life. 

Only our Lord Jesus could or did keep that love in the 
absolute perfection of its very letter and spirit. However 
much a Jew living before our Lord's time might have had 
the right disposition of heart as respects the Law, because 
unable to come up to its requirements he could not have 
eternal life. Our position is different. Our Lord Jesus, 
having kept the Law, gave his life a sacrifice for Adam and 
for all of his race; and we who now come to a knowledge 
of this fact, and by faith accept it, have a standing with 
God in Christ, so that our best endeavors to keep the Law 
are supplemented by the merits of Christ and thus made acceptable 
to God. In other words, if we do our best in the 
matter of loving God supremely with our hearts, with our 
whole being, with our strength, with our minds, and our 
neighbors to the extent of our ability as ourselves, God will 



accept that good endeavor as though it were perfection, 
making up for its defects through the merit of Christ's sacrifice. 
Thus the Apostle tells us, "The righteousness of the 
Law is fulfilled in us who are walking not after the flesh 
[not seeking to please ourselves and our fallen dispositions 
and attributes] but after the Spirit [to the best of our ability 
seeking to be in accord with the very spirit of the divine 
Law]." 

THE GOLDEN TEXT 

Our Golden Text reminds us of the Apostle's statement, 
"He who loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can 
he love God whom he hath not seen?" (1 John 4:20.) In 
other words, the measure of the love which fills our hearts 
will find expression toward our fellow-creatures who have 
need of our sympathy and attention, and if we show ourselves 
deficient here it will imply a deficiency of our love 
for our Creator. If, on the contrary, we are merciful to others, 
generous, kind, taking pleasure in doing what we can for the 
relief of our fellow-creatures, especially to the household of 
faith, this will be an indication of the spirit which our Lord 
will appreciate and own if it be accompanied by a trust in 
the precious blood of Christ. Such merciful ones of the 
Lord's followers shall obtain mercy at the Lord's hands. He 
will deal gently with them, forgiving their blemishes and 
weaknesses in proportion as they have this spirit of generosity, 
forgiveness, toward those who trespass against them. 



R3805 : page 203 

"LORD, TEACH US TO PRAY." 

-LUKE 11:1-13.-JULY 22.- 

MANY are the unscriptural views respecting 

prayer. It is well that we notice that our 

Lord never taught the multitudes to pray, 

nor intimated that they should pray— even though the 

multitudes with whom he was in contact were nominally 

people of God. Even with his consecrated disciples 

the Lord waited until they asked him for instruction 

on the subject. Our Lord's declaration to the 

woman of Samaria was, "God is a spirit, and they who 

worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth." 

Any other worship, any other prayer, is a mockery 

which God not only does not invite but especially reprimands, 

saying to those who are not desirous of doing 

his will, "What hast thou to do to declare my statutes, 

or that thou shouldst take my covenant in thy mouth? 

Seeing thou hatest instruction and castest my 

words behind thee." (Psa. 50:16,17.) And again, "Forasmuch 

as this people draw nigh me with their mouth, 

and with their lips do honor me, but have removed 



their heart far from me. ..Therefore, behold, I will 
proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, 
even a marvellous work and a wonder."— Isa. 29:13,14. 

From this standpoint the privilege of prayer is a 
very wonderful one: it implies that the suppliant is on 
terms of intimate acquaintance with the great Creator 
of the universe, so that he is welcomed into the divine 
presence and heart. In accord with this the symbolical 
representation is that the prayers of the saints of God 
ascend before him as a sweet incense— the heavenly 
Father is pleased to receive the humblest worship and 
reverent petitions of his child adopted into his family 
through Jesus Christ. 

R3805 : page 204 

OUR FATHER IN HEAVEN 

Only those who have become God's children by forsaking 
sin and laying hold upon Christ as their Savior 
are accorded the privilege of approaching the throne 
of grace that "they may obtain mercy and find grace to 
help in time of need." (Heb. 4:16.) In the world, therefore, 
only those who are accepted in the Beloved are 
privileged to call Jehovah God by the endearing name, 
"Our Father who art in heaven." The attempt to thus 
approach God implies (1) a faith in the divine being; 
(2) a realization of dependence upon him; (3) a faith 
that a way of reconciliation with the Father has been 
effected through the Redeemer; (4) a realization that 
the great Creator no longer condemns the suppliant, 
but accepts him as his son. More than this, it implies 
that the suppliant recognizes the fact that there are 
other sons of God who, like himself, have fled from 
sin and been adopted into God's family— the petition is 
not "My Father," but "Our Father in heaven." Therefore, 
whoever thus prays intelligently must have interest 
in and concern for all the interests of the family of 
God. Whatever of selfishness he might have had formerly 
he must divest himself of when he comes to the 
Father, and must realize himself as merely one of the 
favored class of sons thus privileged. It is in harmony 
with this thought that all of the Lord's truly consecrated 
people have special pleasure when permitted to 
approach the throne of grace together, whether but 
two or three or in larger numbers. 

In proportion as the Lord's people grow in grace, 
in knowledge and in love, they will grow in appreciation 
of the great privilege of prayer. Not that prayer 
will take the place of the study of the divine Word, but 
that realizing more and more from the Word something 
of the lengths and breadths and heights and depths of 
divine mercy and provision, the true children of God 
have comfort of heart and joy in going to the throne of 
grace to give thanks unto the Lord for all his mercies, 
to commune with him respecting their trials and difficulties, 



and to assure him of their loving confidence in 

the gracious promises of his Word, in the exceeding 

riches of his grace, and in his wisdom, love and power 

to fulfil toward them and in them all his gracious 

promises. 

The more the Lord's people advance in knowledge 
of him the more they will appreciate the fact that the 
divine arrangement is broader and deeper and higher 
than anything they could suggest, so that such are 
granted liberty to ask what they will with the assurance 
that it will be done. The Lord well knows that this 
class will ask that his will be done; hence the promise 
is made only to those who abide in Christ and who have 
his Word of promise abiding richly in them. All such 
learn, before attaining this station and liberty, that as 
the heavens are higher than the earth so are the 

R3806 : page 204 

Lord's ways and provisions higher than our conceptions 
and every way to be preferred. Hence, while 
praying to the best of their ability in harmony with the 
promises of the Word, these would always include the 
sentiment expressed by our Redeemer, "Nevertheless, 
not my will but thine be done." 

"PRAY WITHOUT CEASING" 

"Pray without ceasing. In everything give thanks." 
(I Thess. 5:17,18.) The advanced Christian is to be 
so fully in accord with the Father and the Son and the 
divine program, The Plan of the Ages, that his entire 
life will be a prayer and a song in respect to every affair 
of life. He will have in his mind primarily, What 
is the will of God in this matter? "whether we eat or 
drink or whatsoever we do let us do all to the glory of 
God." The heart that is thus continually in all of life's 
affairs looking for divine direction is thus continuously 
in a prayer attitude, and no other condition is proper 
to the Christian— "In all thy ways acknowledge him, 
and he shall direct thy paths;" "Delight thyself also in 
the Lord and he shall give thee the desires of thine 
heart."— Prov. 3:6; Psa. 37:4. 

But while thus in the prayer attitude continuously 
we must not neglect the privilege of a more formal approach 
to the throne of grace— on bended knee, privately 
and alone. Whoever does not embrace this 
privilege misses a portion of the great blessing which 
the Lord has arranged for his benefit and assistance in 
walking in the narrow way. Our Master spent seasons 
in prayer alone, and surely all of his disciples may 
well follow his example in this as well as in other matters 
to advantage. As our Lord sometimes prayed in 
the presence of his disciples, as is evidenced by their 
recording his words, so all of his followers are to realize 
that they have a special privilege of fellowship in 



prayer, praying to one another, speaking to one another 
in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, and in petitions 
to the throne of grace.— Eph. 5:19; 
I Cor. 14:14-17. 

While family prayer is not specifically taught in 
the Scriptures we cannot doubt its appropriateness under 
some conditions. True, the natural family is separate 
and distinct from the family of the Lord, but 
where the natural family has been reared in the "nurture 
and admonition of the Lord" it is scarcely supposable 
that the minor children would be so lacking of 
reverence as not to have pleasure in bowing with their 
parents for the worship of the Creator. Where the 
children are grown so that they have discretion for 
themselves, if they be not pleased to join in the worship, 
in our opinion the Lord will be all the better 
pleased that they be not coerced, for he seeketh such 
to worship him as worship him in spirit and in truth. 
Where the husband or wife is not a child of God, unbegotten 
of the Spirit, it would be inappropriate that 
he or she should lead in the worship, addressing the 
throne of grace. The more we recognize the divine 
limitations on this subject the more will we and those 
with whom we are in contact appreciate prayer as a 
great privilege, which is accorded only to those who 
can with sincere hearts address Jehovah as our Father, 
and these can be only such as have accepted the Lord 
Jesus as their Savior, for "No man cometh unto the 
Father but by me."— John 14:6. 

As in the type none but the priests offered incense 
before the Lord, the teaching would seem to be that 
only the Royal Priesthood, the members of the body of 

R3806 : page 205 

Christ, have this privilege in the present time. Nevertheless, 
we might reasonably suppose that the children 
of believers, who have not yet reached the deciding 
point of loyalty or disloyalty to the Lord, would properly 
enough be privileged to approach the throne of 
grace through the relationship of their consecrated 
parents. We might even suppose that justified believers, 
who have not reached the point of making a consecration 
of themselves to the Lord, would have the 
right, the privilege, of addressing the Redeemer in 
prayer: and yet we know of no Scripture that positively 
says or indirectly implies that an unconsecrated believer 
has any acceptance at the throne of grace, or any 
standing whatever before the Father as amongst those 
who may address him in the petition, "Our Father 
which art in heaven." 

"HALLOWED BE THY NAME" 

The more it is recognized that the privilege of 
prayer is an exclusive one the more those enjoying the 



privilege will be inclined to use it in a most reverent 
manner. The kings of earth make resolutions respecting 
times, seasons, dress, etc., regulating those ushered 
into their presence; and all who have a proper appreciation 
of the majesty of the King Eternal, invisible, 
the only true God, will approach in a worshipful, 
reverent spirit, implied in the expression, "Hallowed 
be thy name." Holy and to be reverenced is our God; 
his name stands for everything that is just and wise 
and loving. 

"THY KINGDOM COME" 

"Thy will be done, as in heaven so in earth." These 
words, not found in the older MS. in Luke, are found 
in the Matthew MS., and are, therefore, properly to be 
considered a part of the petition. Be it noted, however, 
that while this petition as it stands is appropriate 
enough as a prayer, it was evidently not the Lord's 
intention that it should be continually used as the only 
petition at the throne of grace, but rather he gave it as 
a sample. The various items of the Lord's prayer 
should therefore be to the Lord's people a suggestion 
of the general character of their petitions, and not be 
understood as binding their terms, their expressions, 
their words. 

The thoughts of the true disciples are directed to 
the fact that the present condition of sin and death is 
not to be everlasting, that God has provided for and 
promised a glorious kingdom through his Son, and the 
Church his Bride, under which evil will be conquered 
and brought under complete subjection to righteousness. 
Those who are in proper relationship of heart to the 
Lord must recognize this fact, and be so separated from 
the spirit of this world that they will long for the installation 
of the reign of righteousness, even though 
they will know that this will imply the overthrow of 
present institutions. Their hearts are so in accord 
with the Lord that they are out of accord with every 
form and institution and vine not of the Father's right-hand 
planting. (Isa. 60:21.) Longing for the Kingdom 
that will bless the world, they also long for the promised 
privilege of being joint-heirs with their Redeemer 
as members of that Kingdom class which shall bless 
the world and uplift it out of sin-and-death conditions. 

GIVE US OUR DAILY BREAD 

"Give us day by day our daily bread," or "our 
needful bread" [Am. Rev.]. There is no attempt here 
to supplicate delicacies, but merely an expression of 
trust in the Lord and confidence that he will provide, 
in harmony with his promises that our bread and water 
shall be sure. Indeed when we remember our Master's 
words, that the heathen have in mind what they shall 
eat, what they shall drink and wherewithal they shall 



be clothed, but the heavenly Father knoweth what 

things we have need of, we perceive that to the Spirit-begotten 

and advanced Christian these words respecting 

daily bread imply more particularly the spiritual 

than the earthly food. Provision for all our necessities, 

both temporal and spiritual, according to divine 

wisdom, is briefly summed up in this expression. 

To suppose that the Lord here is merely referring 
to the natural food would imply that the petitioners 
were merely natural men, whereas we have seen that 
the prayer was taught only to those who were reckonedly 
New Creatures in Christ by a covenant to walk in his 
steps in the narrow way. It must be understood, therefore, 
that it is the New Creature that is offering the petition, 
and this will imply that it is the nourishment of 
the New Creature that is chiefly under consideration— 
with whatever provision for temporal necessities the 
heavenly Father may see best. This is distinctly 
brought to our attention in the last verse of this lesson, 
wherein the heavenly Father is represented as dispensing 
the holy Spirit— the spiritual blessings and experiences 
which develop in his children his own holy Spirit, 
the Spirit of the Truth, the Spirit of the Lord. 

GOD'S MERCY PROPORTIONATE TO OURS 

"Forgive us our sins; for we also forgive everyone 
that is indebted to us." The sins here referred to, 
or as in Matthew, "debts," are in no way related to 
original sin, which we are not to pray to have forgiven, 
but which the Father has already made provision to 
forgive unconditionally to those who accept Christ. 
Original sin is not forgivable, but God in his mercy 
provided a Redeemer, and we read, "Christ died for our 
sins according to the Scriptures." He is a propitiation 
for our sins, the Just for the unjust, to bring us to God. 
This prayer relates not, therefore, to that sin whose 
forgiveness permits us to approach God, and by 
covenant through Jesus to call him our Father. The 
sins mentioned in this prayer, or the "debts," are those 
which are ours after we have become New Creatures in 
Christ, children of the Highest. Because of our imperfections 
we cannot do the things which we would, 
the things which we know to be the perfect will of our 
Father in heaven. 

In a certain sense these are our debts or obligations 
to the Father from the time we start to walk in 
newness of life— not after the flesh but after the Spirit. 
Walking after the flesh we find that we cannot come up 
to the Spirit, hence the "debts." It is for the forgiveness 
of these that we are privileged to petition— matters 

R3807 : page 206 

of omission and commission not wilfully done, not 
intentionally omitted. In the divine arrangement the 



merit of Christ not only covered the sins that are past, 
but made provision for our weaknesses and blemishes 
en route for the Kingdom. God could indeed apply the 
merit of Christ to these debts and excuse us from them, 
and not require us to mention them at all, but for our 
advantage he has arranged it otherwise, that we must 
make application for the covering of these debts, for 
exoneration in the name of Jesus, and so doing we 
learn three lessons: (1) We learn to keep track of our 
blemishes, and are the better assisted, therefore, in 
the future in warring a good fight against them; (2) 
We are thus continually reminded of our dependence 
upon the merit of our Savior, the merit of the precious 
blood. (3) We are thereby assisted in being merciful, 
compassionate and generous toward others who may 
be our debtors in matters great or small. 

How just and how wise is the divine arrangement 
which requires of us, in applying for mercy, to pledge 
ourselves to the Lord that we also are merciful, forgiving 
to others, not attempting to exact justice from 
those with whom we have contact and who are under 
some obligation to us. This is a wise provision, in that 
it will assist us in the right direction, assist us in the 
development of character which the Lord can approve, 
and which would be meet for those who would be inheritors 
of the Kingdom. It will assist us in our 
endeavors to be copies of God's dear Son, and like 
unto our Father in heaven in the sentiments of our 
hearts at least. It is just, because it is not God's arrangement 
to simply show us favors above the remainder 
of mankind, except as we shall receive his mercies 
with proper appreciation, and with a desire to attain 
the condition which would be pleasing to him and 
which he would be pleased to reward with the everlasting 
life and the Kingdom glories. 

"DELIVER US FROM EVIL" 

These words are not in the original in Luke's account 
of the prayer, but they are found in Matthew's 
account, and hence are properly a part of the prayer. 
"Bring us not into temptation, but deliver us from the 
evil one." (R.V., Matt. 6:13.) This statement is a little 
confusing, for we have the assurance that "God 
tempteth no man." (Jas. 1:13.) The thought then 
seems to be that there is an evil one ever ready to attack 
the Lord's people to the extent that the Lord will 
grant the privilege, the opportunity, as in the case of 
Job. 

We remember, too, that trials, testings and temptations 
are necessary for our development as New Creatures, 
and since these are necessary and of divine 
arrangement or permission, it would not be appropriate 
for us to pray that the Lord would spare us from 
all trials and temptations, for, says the Apostle, "If 
ye be without chastisements then are ye not sons." 



(Heb. 12:8.) We must, therefore, paraphrase this 
statement in our thoughts and suppose it to mean, 
"Bring us not into temptation that would be too severe 
for us, or abandon us not in temptation; but deliver 
us from the evil one." This thought is in full accord 
with the entire testimony of the Word of God. The 
promise is, "He will not suffer us to be tempted above 
that we are able, but will with the temptation provide 
a way of escape." (I Cor. 10:13.) The evil one would 
indeed utterly destroy the Lord's consecrated ones, 
but he will not be permitted so to do. Thus far he 
may go but no farther. If God be thus for us who or 
what power can prevail against us— nothing shall by 
any means separate us from the love of God in Christ. 

"ASK AND IT SHALL BE GIVEN YOU" 

Although our Lord did not teach his disciples to 
pray until they requested instruction, this was evidently 
not because he was unwilling to assist them, but because 
he wished them to realize and desire further 
teaching. It may be argued by some that no one needs 
instruction in how to pray, but that thought is not 
borne out by this lesson. Evidently there are proper 
and improper prayers. We might as well say that no 
one needs instruction in singing or in playing music. 
We do sometimes say that singers and players are 
born with the talent, nevertheless the most talented 
musicians by instruction reach their proficiency. 

And so with prayer. We have already seen that 
great mistakes have been made as to who may pray 
and as to what may be properly prayed for, and we 
have already considered the Lord's outline respecting 
a proper form of prayer, beginning with ascriptions of 
praise and thanks and proceeding to expressions of 
confidence in God and the promises of his Kingdom, 
continuing with acknowledgments of our dependence 
upon his provisions day by day, and ending with expressions 
of confidence in his power and goodness to 
protect us and ultimately to deliver us. This is the 
general form which our Lord commends to us as proper 
in approaching the throne of grace. On the other 
hand, however, it is interesting for us to note that the 
Lord does not wait until we have become proficient in 
the use of language and in the form of expressing our 
petitions to him, but that so gracious and broad are his 
arrangements that we may come in imperfection and 
with stammering tongues to tell him of our devotion, 
our appreciation, our confidence, etc., in any manner 
that we please. The suggestion is, however, that in 
proportion as we appreciate the privilege of prayer, we 
will desire to use the privilege in the manner most acceptable 
to the great One whom we thus approach. 

Why should the Lord wish us to ask before he 
would give his blessing? For a wise purpose, we may 
be sure! He would have us feel our need, he would 



have us appreciate the privilege, he would have 
us look for the response, and in all these experiences 
he would develop us as his sons of the New Creation. 
Therefore we are to ask and seek and knock if 
we would find the riches of God's grace, and have 
opened to us more and more the wonderful privileges 
and mercies and blessings which he is so willing to 
give to us as we develop in character and in preparation 
for his mercies. 

R3807 : page 207 

It was to illustrate this that the Lord gave the parable 
of this lesson respecting the householder who was 
short of food for the entertainment of his visitors. He 
was represented as importunately urging upon his neighbor 
the necessities of the case, and ultimately thus succeeding. 
Our Lord instructs us that we should be so 
earnest in our desires for the Kingdom, for the honor 
of the Father's name, for the daily portion of the bread 
of life, for deliverance from the evil one, and for God's 
keeping power in every trouble, and in all of life's affairs 
his supervision, that we continually go to him 
day by day, hourly and momentarily, watching and 
praying without ceasing, and in everything giving 
thanks, accepting by faith the promises of his Word that 
all things shall work together for our good. To such 
the blessings are on the way, sometimes coming in one 
form and sometimes in another, but generally in ways 
not anticipated and generally larger by far than anything 
we had asked. 

"YE BEING EVIL KNOW HOW" 

Choosing an illustration from life our Lord reminded 
the disciples that few if any earthly parents, if their 
children cried to them for blessings, would give them 
injurious things instead. What kind of a father if 
asked for bread would give his child a stone, if asked 
for fish would give him a serpent, if asked for an egg 
would give him a scorpion? Certainly such parents 
would be few, if any. The force of our Lord's language 
is seen if we remember that the bread of oriental countries 
very much resembles a stone, being about the 
size of a large hand and baked in an oven provided 
with stones and whitened with the ashes. Some kinds 
of serpents resemble certain kinds of fish, too. And 
there is a small white scorpion which rolls itself up in 
the shape of an egg. Basing his argument upon these 
illustrations, which would commend themselves to his 
hearers, our Lord proceeds to institute a comparison as 
between the dealings of earthly parents with their children 
and the dealings of God with his children. His 
words are, If ye being evil, being imperfect through the 
fall, more or less selfish in all of your thoughts and words 
and dealings, still would be disposed to give good gifts 



to your children, how much more would your heavenly 
Father give the good gift of all gifts, the holy Spirit, to 
them that ask him for it. 

The clear intimation is that this should be the essence 
of our petitions to our heavenly Father, for more 
of his holy Spirit, and that we should look to the experiences 
of life, its trials, disappointments, discouragements, 
oppositions, not as being really injurious 
to us, not as being stones, scorpions and serpents, 
but as being blessings in disguise, if we 
receive them in the proper spirit. The Lord is able to 
make all things abound in the interest of his children, 
the New Creatures in Christ Jesus. These know from 
experience that some of their severest trials and disappointments 
of an earthly kind have worked out for 
them development of character, elements of the holy 
Spirit, which they probably could not have so well received 
in any other manner. Hence, when we pray to 
the Lord for his blessings, we are with patience to wait 
for them, and to seek them and to find them in the various 
circumstances of life which his providences will 
permit. Remembering that the holy Spirit is the spirit 

R3808 : page 207 

of meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly kindness, love, we may well ask ourselves 
how else could the Lord work out for us these elements 
of character which we desire did he not permit to come 
upon us the trials and difficulties of life necessary to 
their development. 

We know not the author of the following, but consider 
it worthy of reproduction as an illustration of 
earthly kindness and a reminder of the gracious message 
from Jehovah:— 

"LIKE AS A FATHER PITIETH HIS CHILDREN, SO THE LORD 
PITIETH THEM THAT REVERENCE HIM."-PSA. 103:13 

The life of a beautiful girl was nearing its close. 
The busy father, active in legal and political life, made 
short visits to his office to perform the most necessary 
duties, and hurried home again day by day to be near 
her in her last days. He spent every possible moment 
in granting her every wish, and it was a comfort to him 
that his daughter was finding in her religion a 
source of strength that robbed approaching death of 
its terror. He was an upright man, but one from whose 
busy life religion had been crowded out. 

One day as he sat by the bedside, his daughter 
asked him to read to her. He found a magazine, and 
read some bright bits of poetry and fiction. It pleased 
her, but she wanted something else. 

"Father," she asked, "will you get my Bible and 
read from that?" 

"Certainly, my dear," he answered, and was rather 



glad than otherwise. 

He was a strong man with a clear voice and a good 
degree of self-control. He had mastered his own feelings 
in these days of patient and affectionate ministration, 
that he might bring to the sick-room every element 
of cheer that was possible. And now he began, calmly 
and quietly, to read the Sermon on the Mount. He 
knew where to find it, and he knew that it was good, 
and he read it with a growing appreciation of its beauty 
and sublimity. 

But the daughter grew more and more restless. 

"Don't you like it?" he asked. 

"O, father," she exclaimed, "it isn't that I want, 
about our righteousness exceeding that of the Scribes 
and Pharisees! Can't you find the place where it says, 
'Like as a father pitieth his children so the Lord pitieth 
them that fear him?'" 

His voice trembled a little, but he said, "I will find 
it," and he turned to the concordance in the back of the 
Bible. But when he found the place and began to read, 
Like as a father,' he could bear no more. 

"O, my child," he cried, "if God cares for you as I 
do-" 

He bent over the bed and wept. 

"It is the verse we both need," she said softly, 
after a few minutes. 

And he knelt beside the bed, and said: 

"Yes, my dear— that is the verse we both need." 



page 209 



SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVII JULY 15 No. 14 
A.D., 1906-A.M., 6034 



CONTENTS. 

"Truth is Stranger Than Fiction" 21 1 

"All the Way My Savior Leads Me" 213 

"The Cup Which My Father Hath Poured, Shall 

I Not Drink It?" 224 

Samples of Interesting Letters 225 

Resolutions of the Allegheny Congregation and 

Others 226 

"Harvest Sittings" 228 

Perils Amongst False Brethren 228 

A Sketch of the Development of Present Truth 229 

Woman's Rights and Wrongs 237 

page 210 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ASBURY PARK, N.J., CONVENTION, JULY 22-29 



(For information respecting meetings, see last page, this issue.) 

RAILROAD RATES 

We have secured fare-and-one-third rates on all lines of railroad 
east of and including Chicago and St. Louis, on "Certificate 
Plan." Ask for ticket for "Watch Tower Convention, 
Asbury Park, N.J.," for which you pay one way full fare and 
receive a Certificate in addition to your ticket. The Certificate, 
after endorsement by proper officers at the Convention and 
payment of 25 cents, entitles you to one-third fare on return 
trip. From some points cheaper rates than these may be obtainable, 
via Atlantic City or other ocean points. Enquire of your 
railroad agent. 

ACCOMMODATIONS 

Board and lodging can be procured for $1, $1.25, $1.50, $2, 
and upward to $5 per day. 

Write at once if you wish us to procure accommodations, 
stating briefly and pointedly what kind, number of persons, 



sex and color, and if married couples wish to room together. Do 
not expect any alteration of your party's location after writing. 
If others join it later they will be accommodated in the order 
of notification. Address all letters to "Convention Dept," 
WATCH TOWER B. & T. SOCIETY, Allegheny, Pa. 



R3808 : page 211 

"TRUTH IS STRANGER THAN FICTION" 



A CONFIDENTIAL EXPLANATION BY THE EDITOR OF 
HIS PECULIAR TRIALS--THE WIDE SPREADING OF 
UNTRUTH MAKES NECESSARY THIS STATEMENT OF THE TRUTH 



"LET NOT YOUR GOOD BE EVIL SPOKEN OF" 



It is requested that this issue be not 
loaned or otherwise publicly circulated. 

DEAR FRIENDS:-As your letters indicate, you 
have rightly judged that I have recently passed 
through the most trying experience of my checkered 
career as a servant of the Lord. And I may add that 
one of the chief features of my present distress arises from 
my conviction that my tribulations are by no means confined 
to myself, but pain and afflict all the dear "Household 
of Faith" walking in the narrow way and in the light 
of "Present Truth." I am grieved, indeed, that those for 
whom I have pleasure in laying down my life daily 
should be caused any measure of pain, hardship or other 
bitter experience on my account. And yet I know that 
fiery trials must necessarily come to us all, to prove us, 
to test us, to refine us, to make us ready for the glorious 
things to which we have been called of the Lord. 

I may further add that one of the chief consolations 
of my time of sorrow has been your letters assuring me 
of your sympathy, confidence and love. I was pleasantly 
astonished to find that many of these letters were 
written by friends who only recently came into the 
knowledge of the harvest message. I felt confident 
from the first that the well-established ones, who had 
learned from past experiences to endure hardness as 
good soldiers, would falter not in the presence of this 
attack, but I did greatly fear for the new recruits among 
the soldiers of the Cross, those who knew nothing of my 
past trials and difficulties from false brethren and who 
had less opportunity for personal acquaintance. 

It appears to be my duty toward the Truth to give 



as briefly as possible an outline of the facts of the 

case leading up to the present denouement. Gladly 

would I have kept silence before the Church as I have 

opened not my mouth to the world; but I find my personal 

affairs so closely linked with the "harvest work," 

that it becomes duty to let all the members of the body 

of Christ with whom I am so closely riveted know something 

of the facts, for their relief and comfort and 

strengthening;— "that the ministry [of the good tidings 

of great joy] be not blamed." This seems to be in 

accord with the Apostle's injunction, "Let not your 

good be evil spoken of": Let the search-light of truth 

disclose the fact that the Lord's people seek in everything 

to practise what they teach! In a very special 

sense WATCH TOWER subscribers look to its Editor as 

their Pastor; hence the propriety of making known to 

them everything necessary to their peace. 

There are some irregular readers who may not 
have come in contact with the slanderous reports 
who may, just as well as not, remain in ignorance 
of the whole matter. It has been my effort to hide my 
troubles; but now this much seems due to my friends. 
For these reasons it has seemed to be the Lord's guidance 
that a rehearsal of matters should appear in this form 
intended only for friends, for private use amongst 
those whose minds have been so poisoned as to need 
these details as an antidote. Moreover, instead of giving 
full details I am herein confining myself to those features 
of this trouble seemingly necessary to a reasonable comprehension 
of the facts. Be assured that every word 
has been carefully and prayerfully weighed, to the 
intent that so far as possible not a word shall be uttered 
in criticism of my wife that does not appear to me to be 
absolutely necessary to even a brief outline of the difficulty. 
Further, I have endeavored to use only kindly 
and moderate language. 

THE NECESSITY FOR THIS ISSUE 

It was the receipt of the following (two) letters 
that decided the Editor that it is his duty to the cause 

R3808 : page 212 

of the Lord to make the statements of this Special 

Issue: 

May 10, 1906. 

My Beloved Brother Russell: 

My heart aches for you as I read your letter of May 
8th and note that you still love and cherish the memory 
of the one you have lost, in spite of all the suffering 
which her blindness has brought upon you. May God 
bless and help you, dear brother. It ought to be a 
comfort to you at a time like this to know that there 
are probably not less than 10,000 of the Lord's saints 
who daily make mention of you in their prayers at the 



throne of grace. I have not failed to do this daily for 
the last 1 1 years, and how much more just now when 
you are passing through such deep waters. I doubt if 
in the entire history of Christ's Church there has ever 
been any one person who has continually had so many 
saints to remember him daily in prayer as yourself. 

In humility of heart, and realizing keenly my own 
littleness and unworthiness, I now suggest to you what 
it seems to me to be the Lord's will that you ought to 
do regarding this matter, and will first point to the Word 
of God to sustain the opinion I shall express. 

God rebuked Miriam, that there might be no question 
in the mind of fleshly Israel regarding the one at 
fault; God reproved Job's friends that they and others 
might know whom God approved; our Father has explained 
particularly the circumstances which led to the 

R3809 : page 212 

imprisonment of Daniel and Jeremiah, that their good 
names might not be evil spoken of. 

With what particular care are all the facts stated 
regarding our Lord's apprehension and condemnation! 
The possession of the two swords, Pilate's admission of 
the Lord's innocence, and the bribing of the soldiers 
who watched the tomb, have all been helps to many in 
accepting the crucified One. Our Lord, himself, at all 
times, made it plain that neither his motives nor his 
conduct were to be lightly impugned, as in his inquiry, 
"Which of you convinceth me of sin?" and in his severe 
reproof of those who accused him of casting out demons 
by the power of Beelzebub. It is true that he was 
silent at the time when to have spoken might have interfered 
with his payment of the ransom, but he was never 
silent where his silence could cast a cloud upon his mission 
or his message. One of the first things he did after 
he arose from the dead was to remove the doubts of 
some as to the real cause of his death. 

Paul's defense of himself on many occasions will instantly 
recur to your mind; his writings are full of explanations 
and assertions of innocence, all made solely 
with a view to helping the feeble-minded ones. Does he 
not set forth a principle in this matter when he says, 
"Let not your good be evil spoken of"? Peter also 
seems to me to include the same principle in the following 
texts: "For so is the will of God, that with well doing 
ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men," 
and also, "But and if ye suffer for righteousness' sake, 
happy are ye: and be not afraid of their terror, neither 
be troubled; but sanctify the Lord God in your hearts: 
and be ready to give an answer to every man that asketh 
you a reason [whether doctrinal or practical] of the hope 
that is in you with meekness and fear: having a good 
conscience; that, whereas they speak evil of you, as of 
evildoers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your 
good conversation in Christ." 



I believe that the force of Luther's message has been 
weakened by the false statements made regarding his 
domestic life, which a few words of explanation might 
have avoided. In the case of Mr. Dowie, I know that 
most people take the view that the reason he makes no 
more defense of the charges made by his wife is because 
he cannot. As this is not the case with you, it seems to 
me that your duty in the matter is quite plain, even 
though it will surely add to your suffering. O! how 
sorry I feel for you, and how eager I am to do anything 
I can to help you, and yet I cannot avoid the conviction 
that it is your duty to shoulder the additional burden 
of setting this matter right in the eyes of the Lord's 
brethren. Here is a case in point: 
May 8, 1906. 
To Dear Brother Woodworth, 

"Perplexed, but not in despair; cast down, but not 
destroyed." As one among the household of faith, I 
am constrained to address you for personal information, 
because of your more active service, facilities and 
knowledge of matters at Scranton, or Allegheny. Coming 
to the subject: Have you seen the damaging, I 
had almost said damning, publication in the Inter-Ocean, 
of April 25th, wherein in contempt as "Russellites" 
is exposed the scandal relating to Bro. Russell? 
Right here, though I do not pose for others, but for 
myself, the Editor deserves to be prosecuted for slander 
in publishing such an article without further investigation, 
and I hope he will be! But now, dear friend, what 
do you know, or think of it? Have you any information 
that will throw any negative light upon this terrible 
question? Incidentally, there has come to me indefinite 
information of some past agreement between Brother 
Russell and his wife, as mentioned in I Cor. 7:1, wherein, 
in marital relations, Brother Russell had resolved to an 
entire consecration of soul and body to the work to 
which he was called. I can well believe it of such a 
man, and if true, how absurd even the thought that he 
would be guilty of the charge preferred against him. 
If it were possible to admit the charge, David fell 
a thousand times lower, but in repentance became the 
"Sweet Psalmist of Israel." Peter fell and Jesus prayed 
for him, and he became the strength of the brethren, and 
was privileged to feed Christ's lambs. Knowing as we 
do the consecration, the labor, self-renunciation, the 
Christ-like spirit, nothing short of an angel from heaven 
or his own admission would convince us. If guilty, he 
would well know that a mere social ostracism to himself 
alone would not be the result, but a public ostracism 
of his teachings and a lapsing of his influence. That the 
direst denunciation of Babylon even now, true or not, 
will fall upon his work is to be expected. And yet the 
monumental work of MILLENNIAL DAWN, establishing from 
the prophecies the God-given "Plan of the Ages," will go 
down to posterity as certainly as the epistles of Paul! 

Looking at it in its best light, the question will come 



up, Why is it permitted that after such a life consecration, 
its last stages should be embittered and cast down? 
But what are we when we remember that Paul and Peter 
were the victims of martyrdom, and our dear Redeemer 
was crucified? Perjury, if not detected in a civil court of 
justice, may convict any one, and it will undoubtedly be 
that, if the divorce comes to trial! I thoroughly believe 
in Brother Russell's entire innocence, and I sincerely 
hope and pray that our faithful followers may stand by 

R3809 : page 213 

him, and that God may so overrule that the true Zion 
may be sustained and the "New Creation" be more 
firmly established than ever. Please write me soon. 
Yours truly, in M. DAWN bonds, 
DR. C. ALEX. GARNSEY. 

Now, Dear Brother Russell, no tongue can tell how 
I love my dear old brother, Dr. Garnsey. You may remember 
that he is the dear old saint who came fully and 
gloriously into the Truth at 85 years of age, through 
reading the set of 3 vols, of the DAWN which I sold him 
8 or 9 years ago, when I was carrying an advertisement 
in several religious papers. He is now nearly or quite 
95 years old, and you can see from his letter how great 
a trial this matter is to him. It will not "sift" him out, 
for his heart is far too full of love for the Lord and his 
Truth, and his brethren; but surely a statement of the 
salient facts in this case could only prove helpful to a 
dear brother situated as is Dr. Garnsey. 

He should at least know that Mrs. R. has over her 
own signature condemned in the most unsparing manner 
those who made some years ago the very charge 
which has now been brought against you; he should 
know that she has admitted that her only real grievance 
against you is that you would not permit her to run the 
WATCH TOWER, but that you guarded it as your stewardship; 
and he would be helped additionally if he 
could see a connected statement of the whole history of 
her defection, somewhat after the manner of that which 
you furnished me some years ago, and of which I still have 
a copy. And what is true of Dr. Garnsey is true of 
many others. 

My advice would be that you prepare at once a new 
edition of "Harvest Sittings" and advertise it on the 
inside front cover of the "WATCH TOWER" at say 10 
cents per copy. In the notice in the "TOWER" you 
would only need to say a few brief words about the siftings 
and testings which are to be expected in our day, 
and something like this, "This little book gives a brief 
resume of the more important siftings which have taken 
place in the past, including our experiences down to the 
month of April, 1906." 

Such a book will reach automatically all who ought 
to have it, and will reach the hands of very few others. 



It will be a tower of strength to many now, and will 
disarm many of the foes of the Truth after our work here 
is finished. And it would be a timely contribution to 
the literature of the harvest period, anyway. 

I have in my possession a large lot of correspondence 
which would be valuable to you if you think of getting 
out such a book. Your Brother in Christ, 

CLAYTON J. WOODWORTH. 

"ALL THE WAY MY SAVIOR LEADS ME" 

THIRTEEN BLISSFUL YEARS 

From 1871-1879, while engaged in mercantile business, 
I was also engaged in promulgating "Present 
Truth." My earliest efforts were in connection with 
Bible Classes in Pittsburgh and Allegheny. Later I 
published a paper in New York State, to whose columns 
others as well as myself were contributors. During 1877 
and 1878 I travelled extensively throughout New England, 
New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Michigan, 
West Virginia and Kentucky, leaving my several stores 
in the hands of trusted representatives, visiting them for 
supervision occasionally. 

In 1878 my associate who had been attending to the 
paper fell from faith in the redemptive work of Christ, 
which led to a controversy in the columns of the paper, 
he denying the ransom and I affirming it, until it became 
evident that a paper divided against itself could not 
stand. My associate seized and appropriated to himself 
the office outfit, type, etc., which I had paid for. 
This led me to project our present journal, ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER AND HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE, as a defense 
of the great foundation doctrine of the Ransom and in 
general promulgation of the "meat in due season." The 
starting of the paper was delayed until July, 1879, and 
this left me for several months continuously at Allegheny, 
where, in addition to the usual meetings, I conducted 
several series of meetings in the interest of the public in 

R3810 : page 213 

this vicinity. Considerable numbers were brought in 
contact with the Truth at this time. Amongst others 
was a Maria Frances Ackley, who became my wife 
within three months of her first attendance at these 
meetings, which was the beginning of our acquaintance. 
The Truth seemingly appealed to her heart, and she 
assured me it was what she had been seeking for many 
years— the solution of perplexities of long standing. 
For thirteen years she was a most devoted and loyal 
wife in every sense of the word. 

THE LEAVENING INFLUENCE. 

It was shortly after our return from a trip to the 



Holy Land and the Pyramids, via Great Britain, Germany, 
Italy, Switzerland and France, which was a most 
enjoyable and profitable experience to us both, that Mrs. 
Russell seemed to come under a baneful influence of 
which I had no knowledge at the time. During our absence 
on that trip the Adversary seemed to have stirred 
up a spirit of strife, ambition and vain-glory amongst 
some who had previously given every evidence of loyalty 
to the Truth. It appears that "woman's rights" literature 
and anarchistic ideas were connected with the 
matter. The bad fruit did not show itself at once. The 
leaven worked, and resulted, as some of the older readers 
remember, in a conspiracy on the part of several to 
injure the work, to overthrow it— apparently hoping to 
gather from the wreck some fragments— to "draw away 
disciples after them." The entire matter came upon me 
like an explosion, being carefully planned to this end. 

I was not aware of it at the time, but learned subsequently 
that the conspirators endeavored to sow seeds 
of discord in my wife's heart by flattery, "woman's 
rights" arguments, etc. However, when the shock 
came, in the Lord's providence I was spared the humiliation 
of seeing my wife amongst those conspirators. Indeed, 
when she got a proper view of the situation, their 
perfidy quickened much of the loyalty in her which she 
had felt during the preceding thirteen years. She was 
aroused and proved herself a heroine in her defense of 
her husband and of the Truth, as many of you will 
remember. 

COPY OF MRS. RUSSELL'S LETTER, PUBLISHED IN A SPECIAL 
ISSUE OF "ZION'S WATCH TOWER,"-"A CONSPIRACY 
EXPOSED," APRIL 25, 1894-NOW OUT 
OF PRINT. 

A letter by Mrs. Russell in answer to the slanderers 
was published at that time at her wish. It read thus: 
To the Church of Christ, Greetings! 

I take this opportunity to speak in defense of my 

R3810 : page 214 

husband against the bold attack of our enemies in 

maligning his character and misrepresenting our 

domestic relations. Our household is composed only 

of ourselves and our esteemed and beloved helpers in 

the WATCH TOWER Office, all of whom gladly bear witness 

to the tranquillity and happiness of our home, save 

as intrusions of false brethren and busybodies occasionally 

disturb it. 

Our home, so far from being a discordant one, is the 
very reverse,— most happy. I could, indeed, pray for 
no greater earthly blessing upon all of the dear saints 
than that their home-life might be as peaceful and happy 
as ours. The liberty wherewith Christ makes free is 
enjoyed by all who are of our household or in any way 



connected with the work; not the liberty of anarchy, 
however, but of subjection to the Spirit and Word of 
God. 

To the above answers of my beloved husband to the 
charges of his slanderers I give my unqualified endorsement 
in every particular. Although such calumnies 
are severe, and doubly hard to bear when they come 
from those whom we had supposed to be friends, but 
who, we now find, have been plotting these wicked deeds 
for several years, I assure you all that God has sustained 
us and given us his peace through it all. At 
first it came with almost the force and suddenness of an 
avalanche, both upon us and upon the Allegheny Church; 
and although we feared for the stability of some, we 
felt sure that it was permitted of the Lord for the purpose 
of what he saw to be necessary sifting. But, thank God, 
the Church here has weathered the storm well; and 
now letters from some of the stronger ones abroad, who 
have received the libelous circulars, are coming in, expressing 
continued confidence, and showing that Satan's 
arts are recognized; and these are further encouraging 
our hearts and answering our prayers, though we are 
still solicitous for many who are yet young in the Truth, 
and who may be unprepared to withstand such a shock; 
for we well know that the time intervening between 
receiving the slanderous report and this reply is one of 
suspense and severe trial to all. 

We reflect, however, that "The Lord knoweth them 
that are his," and that he is able and willing to keep 
them from falling; and that, as with Gideon's band, some 
must needs be turned back. Who is on the Lord's side? 
—the Truth's side? "Who shall be able to stand?"— 
"Who shall ascend into the hill [the Kingdom] of the 
Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place?" "He that 
hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted 
up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn [a solemn covenant] 
deceitfully." 

Having committed our way unto the Lord, we are 
not fretting ourselves because of the evil doers, whose 
time is short, but we are trusting in the Lord, whose 
promises will in due time be fulfilled— "He shall bring 
forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment 
as the noonday" (Psa. 37); and until such time we will 
try to be patient, and will count it all joy to be esteemed 
worthy to suffer reproaches and afflictions for the name 
and cause of our beloved Lord. 

"Oh! what are all earth's gilded toys, 
Compared with heaven's eternal joys, 
Or even to the feast now spread 
For pilgrims through the desert led?" 

In Christian love and fellowship with all who love 
our Lord Jesus Christ and his Truth in truth and sincerity, 
and who have no disposition to make merchandise 
of either the Truth or the character of any of God's 
chosen instruments, I am 

Yours in the faith and hope of the Gospel, 



MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 

EXTRACT FROM AN OPEN LETTER TO THE CHURCH BY 

MRS. RUSSELL, 
Published in ZION'S WATCH TOWER, June 1894, relating 
to this same conspiracy: 

"Mr. Adamson also told that my husband forbids 
people to marry, and as a proof of this related how he 
once sent Mr. Bryan a three days' journey into the 
country at an expense of twelve dollars, in order 
to prevent a wedding. I answered that this statement 
is as untrue as the others; that Mr. Russell 
never forbade any one to marry, and that not a living 
being could truthfully say that he or she had been forbidden; 
but that I knew that when his opinion was 
specially asked he gave the Apostle Paul's advice, and 
as nearly as possible in his words, citing them. (1 Cor. 7:25-35.) 
And when I had given a truthful explanation 
of his proof, above referred to, all saw that it was to my 
husband's credit that he spared neither trouble nor expense 
in order to let a sister in Christ know something 
of what he knew of the character of the man she was 
about to marry; that, thus informed, she might the better 
judge for herself whether or not he would make a 
desirable husband. Mr. Bryan, who took that letter, 
and who brought it back undelivered, because too late 
to be of service to the sister, knows the truth of the 
matter, while conniving with Mr. A. at its misrepresentation 
of my husband's character and teachings. Anything 
to down Mr. Russell's influence,— seems to be their 
motto. 

"In the same connection, Mr. Adamson is telling 
that Mr. Russell wrote to him shortly after he was married, 
telling him that he should make his will so as to 
give what money he had to the Tract Fund, and to be 
sure not to let Mrs. A. see that letter. They affirmed 
this story in my presence, and said they had the letter 
in hand. I denied it emphatically, well knowing my husband's 
disposition to the contrary. I asked them to read 
the letter aloud to us all, but they refused to do so, 
and this clearly showed to all present that the statement 
was not worthy of credence. Only since my return 
home have I learned the truth on the subject, as follows: 

"Shortly after Mr. A.'s marriage, Mrs. A., it seems, 
declared that she 'was not going to race over the country 
after him, like a mad dog.' In writing to Mr. Russell 
on the subject, Mr. A. said in substance, 
'What money I have was all consecrated to the Lord 
before I married; and in the event of my death I do not 
intend that any of it shall go to Mrs. Adamson or her 
folks: it shall go to the Tract Fund.' 

"In his reply to that letter, my husband urged that 
Mrs. Adamson be not ignored; that as a wife she had a 
just claim upon him; that on general principles any 
woman he would call his 'wife' deserved consideration 
as such, even if out of harmony on religious subjects, 



as Mrs. A. then was, according to his representation. 
But he advised that if Mr. A. decided to will any portion 
of his effects to the Tract Fund, it would be wise, under 
the circumstances he described, and to the interest of 
his domestic happiness, not to inform Mrs. A. respecting 

R3811 : page 215 

it. That is probably the letter they had in hand, 
and were afraid to read lest their misrepresentations 
should be made manifest. Thus do falsehoods force 
the truth to view. --Matt. 10:26. 

"As illustrating the depth of wickedness to which 
these men would stoop, under the influence of envy and 
ambition. I told the Church how Mr. Adamson had 
written to Brother Wright (and we know not to how 
many others), citing 1 Cor. 5:1-6 without comment, as 
applicable to my husband. Mr. Adamson could not 
deny the fact, under the evidence, but protested that he 
had not intended any reflection upon Mr. Russell's 
moral character. Some of the brethren present remarked 
that such a charge would have no weight with 
anyone who knew Mr. Russell or who had ever looked into 
his face. In telling what inference he did wish to give 
by the citation named, Mr. Adamson replied that he 
meant to say that Mr. Russell is a "railer." But since 
railers are not mentioned at all in the citation, but five 
verses further down in the chapter, I showed that this 
is only one of the many cunning methods of misrepresentation 
resorted to by these wicked men— because they 
do not know any real crimes to lay to his charge. I mention 
these items here, because no doubt they have been 
similarly misstated orally or by letter to others; and to 
show that the same spirit that prompted the misrepresentations 
of their first attack still controls them, and 
that reconciliation with such people, under such conditions, 
would neither be possible nor desirable, nor right, 
nor scriptural." 

THE BAD SEED GERMINATED 

The excitement connected with the conspiracy 
against me above referred to temporarily hindered the 
sprouting of the bad seed of so-called "woman's rights" 
and ambition, and temporarily Mrs. Russell became 
very enthusiastic in my support. It was she who first 
called attention to Matt. 24:45-47, applying it to me in 
a meeting at Allegheny and subsequently in another 
meeting with the New York Church. I demurred that 
I had not thought of the passage thus, and declined to 
make any personal application of it, although I could not 
deny the force of the argument that it pointed out "that 
servant," and "fellow servants" and "the household," 
apparently clearly and designedly distinguishing between 
these terms. Some little objection was aroused by her 
interpretation and I urged great moderation in the making 



of any personal application, suggesting that the WATCH 
TOWER rather than its editor might be considered "that 
servant." As an evidence of Mrs. Russell's position on 
the question I give a copy of a letter she wrote in defense 
of her statement of the matter before the New 
York Church, as follows:— 
ALLEGHENY, Pa., Dec. 31, 1895. 
Mr. Geo. D. Woolsey, 

Dear Brother in Christ:— Husband has shown me 
your kind letter of Dec. 18, the spirit of which was much 
appreciated by both of us. I am glad to note your 
frankly stated opinion as to the interpretation of Matt. 24:45-51, 
and I have carefully examined the arguments 
and Scriptures you have set forth. Thinking you will 
be glad to know how I view the Scriptures you mention, 
I will proceed to tell you. I fully agree with the interpretation 
of Isaiah 52:7, presented in the TOWER of Oct., 
1881, which you endorse, the one in that case being the 
Christ, Head and body, of which the living members constitute 
"the feet." 

I also agree that Rev. 16:15 refers to any one of the 
Church who complies with the conditions. The entire 
statement gives evidence to this effect. It could not be 
understood otherwise. I also agree that in the parables 
of the talents and pounds, as in all parables, the thing 
said is not the thing meant, and that each one here mentioned, 
as in the parable of the rich man and Lazarus, 
represents a class. 

But when we come to Matt. 24:45-51 it appears to 
me to be a totally different case. Here are brought to our 
attention— "that servant," "his fellow servants" and 
"the household." Now, if the Lord wished to indicate 
a chief servant of the Truth, and fellow servants assisting 
in serving the meat in due season to the household of 
faith, he could not have chosen more precise language 
to convey such a thought. And, on the contrary, to 
ignore such an order and reasonableness in the account, 
to my mind throws the entire narrative into confusion, 
making the "servants" (plural) and "that servant" 
interchangeable terms. 

If we should handle all Scriptures thus loosely, it 
seems to me we could either prove or disprove anything 
according to our preconceived ideas. It does not seem 
to me reasonable, nor a justifiable interpretation of our 
Lord's testimony, to say that the entire household fed 
itself, and that the Lord gave the meat in season to all 
together without using any of the number as his agents 
or servants in the distribution. And if it be conceded 
that there is a difference between "the household" and 
"the servants" who minister the meat in due season to 
the household, then it cannot be denied that our Lord's 
words also point out one of those servants as specially 
intrusted with the meat in season and used in dispensing 
it to the fellow servants and the household in general. 

I notice that you do not analyze the text as I do. 
If you see any way for making these three expressions, 



viz., "that servant," "his fellow servants" and "the 
household," all mean the same thing without making 
nonsense out of the entire statement, I hope you will 
favor me by pointing out how it can be done. 

It seems to me, further, that the interpretation which 
I suggest is the one, and the only one, which corresponds 
to the fulfilment. We agree in the belief that the Lord 
is now present, that he assumed his office of King in 1878, 
and that since that time his household has been richly 
fed with meat in due season. It seems to me that in 
dispensing the food to the household the Lord has not 
given it personally to each member, but from among 
them he has chosen and used a number of servants, and 
that all of these servants have been supplied with the 
meat in due season through one particular servant— 
"that servant." So, both from the construction of the 
Lord's language, and from the facts before us which 
constitute their fulfilment at the time indicated, viz., in 
these days of his presence, I can, so far, reach no other 
conclusions than those I have stated. 

However, my object in writing is not to urge my 
convictions upon you. I merely state them for your 
consideration, believing you will be interested in examining 
them, and that you will agree with me that 
whatever God has expressed in his Word is worthy of 

R3811 : page 216 

our most careful consideration, and is for our instruction 
and profiting. 

With the greetings of the season, in which Bro. Russell 
joins, Your Sister in Christ, 

MARIA F. RUSSELL. 

Letter from Mr. Joseph L. Russell (now deceased), 
father of the Editor, relating to the same trouble:— 

My Dear Son:— It is with love and sympathy in 
my heart that I write you at this time, after having read 
the full account of your trials and troubles amongst 
those whom you accepted as brethren in Christ. It 
does seem almost incredible that those people could be 
guilty of such mean and despicable conduct toward you, 
from whom they had received so many marks of kindness. 
But, my dear son, these are some of the trials we 
all may expect— especially those engaged in the "harvest" 
work. I am proud of the noble defense you 
make in vindication of your conduct, and especially in 
the cause of the Truth we all love so dearly. I feel confident 
that you will come out of this trial brighter and 
more appreciated in your character and works than you 
ever were before. The good Lord, who has been testing 
your works, will promote you to still higher honors in his 
Kingdom. I pray that he may bless you always and 
sustain you in every good word and work; and to him 
we will ascribe all the praise forever. Amen. 

But while confident that the outcome will be a final 



victory for the Truth, it is very trying for one who has 
labored late and early for the last twenty years for the 
cause of Truth, to have his supposed friends turn against 
him and brand him as a liar and a hypocrite. Oh! it is 
terrible! I often think of you and your many trials, 
which you seem to meet very courageously. But with 
an approving conscience a man can stand considerable, 
especially if the Lord is on his side to help and strengthen. 
Please extend to your dear wife my hearty congratulations 
on her noble defense of her husband and the cause 
of Truth during this trying ordeal. With love and congratulations 
from us all, I remain, your loving father. 
JOSEPH L. RUSSELL." 



As matters began to settle down, the "woman's 
rights" ideas and personal ambition began again to 
come to the top, and I perceived that Mrs. Russell's 
active campaign in my defense, and the very cordial 
reception given her by the dear friends at that time 
throughout a journey (which she volunteered at that 
time to take, for the express purpose of defending and 
vindicating me amongst those friends who had been 
disturbed by the slanders circulated by those involved 
in the conspiracy), had done her injury by increasing 
her self-appreciation. Instead of considering 
the kind expressions of the friends as applying to her 
as a representative of the WATCH TOWER, a representative 
of the truths it promulgates, and a representative 
of her husband, as well as for her personal worth, the 
lady appeared to credit all the demonstrations to the 
latter— as acknowledgments of her personal abilities. 
Gradually she seemed to reach the conclusion that 
nothing was just proper for the WATCH TOWER columns 

R3812: page 216 

except what she had written, and I was continually 
harassed with suggestions of alterations of my writings. 
I was pained to note this growing disposition, so foreign 
to the humble mind which characterized her for the first 
thirteen happy years. 

Gradually her interpretation of "that servant" 
worked upon her mind. First she suggested that as in 
the human body there are two eyes, two ears, two hands, 
two feet, etc., this might properly enough represent the 
twain one— she and I as necessarily one in marriage and 
in spirit and in the Lord. But the ambition did not 
stop here— (it is a plant of thrifty growth). Within a 
year Mrs. Russell had concluded that the latter part of 
the statement (viz., Matt. 24:48-51) was not merely a 
warning, but that it would have actual fulfilment— that 
it meant that her husband would fulfil this description, 
and that she in consequence would take his place as 
"that servant" in dispensing meat in due season. This 



was in 1896. In harmony with this thought she concluded 
that her individuality was not sufficiently prominent 
in the WATCH TOWER announcements that she 
was the Associate Editor. She requested that her name 
thereafter appear with each article that she wrote. I 
told her that this would imply the erasure of her name 
as Associate Editor. She assented, saying that that 
did not amount to much anyway, as nobody knew her 
articles. She also at this time notified me that her 
articles must appear just as she would write them, without 
corrections or emendations on my part. 

To all these requests I agreed, telling her, however, 
that I was afraid the WATCH TOWER readers would consider 
that I was demeaning my wife in dropping her as 
Associate Editor, placing her instead as a mere correspondent. 
Furthermore, I suggested that if I could 
make no editorial corrections to her articles it would 
imply that some of them would not appear in the WATCH 
TOWER, because where many corrections would be necessary 
it would be easier to write the article myself. Those 
possessing back numbers of the WATCH TOWER upon 
examination will find that Mrs. Russell's name as Associate 
Editor first disappeared from the 2nd page of the 
TOWER in the issue of Nov. 1st, 1896. Fearing that 
this might be understood as some indignity to my wife 
I referred to the matter in the Dec. 15th issue, page 301, 
the "Tract Society's Annual Report," in these words: 
"The withdrawal of our 'associate editor' has been 
noted by some, so we explain now to all that this was 
granted at her own urgent request. She prefers to 
appear as a correspondent over her own signature, 
MRS. M. F. RUSSELL." 

HELP -MATE CHANGED TO OPPONENT 

Prior to this time my Sunday topics constituted a 
considerable portion of the matter for the WATCH TOWER. 
Mrs. Russell took notes of my Sunday afternoon discourses 
and later on wrote these out as TOWER articles. 
This was, of course, a great saving of my time, and permitted 
me to attend to other parts of the work, and 
justified my denominating her "Associate Editor" of the 
paper. She notified me that I must not expect such 
assistance further, that whatever she wrote would be 
for publication over her own name. Apparently her 
thought was to impede the work, and to force me to call 
upon her for larger and still larger contributions to the 
columns of the paper— contributions which she had 
already stipulated must be taken just as she wrote them, 
without the alteration of a word. Had this program 

R3812: page 217 

carried out as she evidently intended it would have 

made her virtually the Editor of ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 

and would have opened its columns to matter to which 



I could not assent. Furthermore, I saw that this would 
be fostering in my wife an ambition which sooner or 
later would work to her very serious injury and perhaps 
to the entire cause of "Present Truth." 

After making the matter a subject of prayer I adopted 
the method of dictating my articles direct to a stenographer, 
and enlarged the size of the WATCH TOWER from a 
12-page to a 16-page journal. The trend of events led 
me to see that in at least one instance in the past, yielding 
to Mrs. Russell's importunity, I had failed in my 
duty in allowing an article written by her, with which I 
did not agree, to appear in the WATCH TOWER, thinking 
that it would do no harm and at the same time gratify 
her wishes. In the WATCH TOWER issue for Feby. 1st, 
1897, page 38, 1 corrected the error in the "Question and 
Answer Column," item "Concerning the Epistle of 
James." I quote from my answer as follows:— "The 
article to which you refer last, as being in conflict with 
our general presentations, was not an editorial article; 
nevertheless the Editor does not claim that his negligence 
in the matter is a sufficient excuse. It is a part of his 
duty to be critical, and to exclude whatever his judgment 
does not approve; and he now promises that by 
the Lord's grace he will hereafter be still more careful 
of his stewardship, to the end that ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
may ever speak as 'an oracle of God.'" 

Despite this distressing situation of antagonism on 
the part of my wife the work continued to progress. 
Mrs. Russell's next move was to so harass me as to 
make it almost impossible for me to proceed with the 
work. I appointed a desk drawer in which I requested 
that she place any articles she had to offer me. From 
this I made selections. That I might have no choice 
in the selection of her articles, in Feby. '97 she removed 
all of those articles except two. Neither of those 
two being acceptable, no articles of hers appeared in the 
February 15th and March 1st issues. Mrs. Russell was 
indignant at this, but I explained the situation. 

It was at this time that she took ill of a troublesome 
disease and required much of my attention, which was 
cheerfully given at the expense of every other consideration, 
and with the hope that what I believed was a 
discipline from the Lord might work out for her profit. 
I thought, too, that my kind and incessant attentions 
would touch her heart and restore it to its former tender 
and loving condition. I was mistaken, however. Just 
as soon as she recovered health she called a Committee 
along the lines of Matt. 18:15-17, specially with the 
object of having the brethren instruct me that she had 
an equal right with myself in the WATCH TOWER columns, 
and that I was doing her wrong in not according her 
the liberties she desired. 

The Committee consisted of Bro. W. E. Page, of 
Milwaukee, Wis., and Bro. M. M. Tuttle, of Pittsburgh, 
Pa. Mrs. Russell, with them as her Committee, met 
me in my study. The entire matter was a great surprise 



to me, for I had kept my troubles secret even from 
those nearest to me in the home. I assured Mrs. Russell 
and the brethren that I was very glad matters had 
taken this turn, and that my hope was that it would 
solve some of my difficulties, because I had no doubt as 
to what their advice would be. Not to center the difficulty 
exclusively upon the WATCH TOWER question, 
Mrs. Russell had two other charges against me which 
were read first. One was that a will I had drawn for my 
father at his request, and which expressed his wishes 
fully, was not acceptable to my wife and her sister. 

I explained to the brethren the kind of a will I had 
drawn, and they told Mrs. Russell that it was such a will 
as most people would consider excellent. She disagreed 
with them. I explained further that I had advised my 
father to destroy the will and to make one that would 
suit his wife's ideas, that his declining years might be 
as peaceful as possible. The brethren were surprised 
that they should be asked to discuss a will no longer in 
existence and the character of which was considered 
excellent. 

Mrs. Russell's second charge was that I had not 
treated her with sufficient consideration at a certain 
meeting in the Bible House Chapel. I explained the 
affair to all: that the lesson for the Bible study that 
evening was in Jude, respecting the Second Death, 
"twice dead plucked up by the roots;" that Mrs. Russell 
had been granted more time by far than any other 
person in the meeting to express her views respecting 
the text, but that she took offense because I intimated 
that she was taking more than her share of the time. 
I confessed that at heart I was solicitous lest she should 
succeed in making clear her views on the subject, which 
I considered unscriptural, and to which I feared she 
would be wedded more than ever after expressing her 
opinion; but that I had no unkind intent respecting the 
matter. I told them how Mrs. Russell had appeared 
ill-humored after the meeting, and I had inquired the 
trouble and found that she felt offended, and that I then 
assured her that I had no unkind intention in the matter, 
and that I was sorry if I had offended her, and that if 
she would prefer to have it so I would make the same 
expression to the Class on the following Sunday night. 
I explained that she finally forgave whatever there was 
wrong in the matter that night; but that she had 
brought it up four times subsequently, and I said, "Now, 
brethren, this is the sixth time that Mrs. Russell has 
brought this matter up, having forgiven it five times: 
I now ask her in your presence, the sixth time, to forgive 
whatever she considered wrong in respect to that 
matter." The brethren looked at Mrs. Russell in amazement, 
and she again said that she forgave the matter. 

Then came the real question for which they had been 
called, one of them a journey of nearly 1,200 miles. 
When the brethren caught the idea of the real object 
of their visit they were astonished, and told Mrs. Russell 



kindly, but very plainly, that neither they nor any 
other persons in the world had a right to interfere with 
Bro. Russell's management of the WATCH TOWER: 
that it was his stewardship only, and that he alone was 
accountable to the Lord for its management. Further, 
they suggested that they considered Mrs. Russell had 
the grandest of all opportunities in the world as my 
associate and co-laborer in the harvest work; they told 
her that personally they could think of no higher honor, 
and advised her to take this same view, that evidently 
was at one time her own view of the situation. 

Mrs. Russell was chagrined, broke down and wept, 
and left the room. Subsequently she was prevailed 
upon to see that since the Committee had come at her 
request it was her duty to treat them with greater respect 

R3813 : page 218 

and to give some heed at least to their counsel. 
She returned to the study and there stated herself in 
substance that she could not agree with their decision, 
that she still had her own views, but that in deference 
to their advice she would endeavor to look at matters 
from their standpoint. I then asked her in their presence 
if she would shake hands. She hesitated, but finally 
gave me her hand. I then said, "Now, will you kiss me, 
dear, as a token of the degree of change of mind which 
you have indicated?" Again she hesitated, but finally 
did kiss me and otherwise manifested a renewal of affection 
in the presence of her Committee. It was hoped 
that this would be the end of the matter. The crisis 
had been reached at about the Memorial season, but 
seemingly through wise counsel the storm had passed 
without breaking in any public manner. 

BAD COUNSELLORS-FRESH DIFFICULTIES 

Following this conference Mrs. Russell's articles again 
appeared in the WATCH TOWER of March 15th, 1897, 
indicating my own good faith in the adjustment of the 
difficulties, and earnest desire to make use of my wife's 
co-operation as fully as possible. Some of Mrs. Russell's 
relatives were evidently "evil counsellors," and the 
fruit quickly began to manifest itself. At Mrs. Russell's 
request I appointed a weekly meeting of "The 
Sisters of the Allegheny Church," with herself as its 
leader, little thinking that this was to be a new method 
of attack upon me and the interests of the work which 
I represented. A systematic endeavor was now made to 
work up a spirit of opposition to me amongst the Sisters 
of the Church. For months thereafter I could see that 
an evil influence was at work, but could see no honorable 
way of correcting it, so secretly was everything done. 

In the meantime I had some very trying experiences 
with my greatly changed wife. I could see that herself 
and relatives were working up some kind of a figurative 



"bomb" intended for my destruction. My confidence 
was in the Lord, however, and I said nothing to others 
until, on August 30th, I learned definitely that there 
was a movement on foot amongst Mrs. Russell's party 
which was to culminate in some kind of explosion on 
Sept. 12th. I acted promptly, but quietly, so that on 
Saturday night, Sept. 4th, about 50 brethren gathered 
in the Bible House Chapel, none of them knowing in 
advance that a meeting was to be held. I explained 
the situation to all and found that some of them had 
more knowledge of the business than I possessed. As 
the matter had passed from an individual affair to a 
Church affair, I suggested that it would be the duty of 
the elders of the Church to act, and that I was too closely 
identified with the matter to take any active part in the 
investigation. Upon the unanimous expression of all 
present it was decided that the proper procedure would 
be that a private meeting of the consecrated believers 
of the Church should be announced for the next evening, 
Sunday, Sept. 5th, at which the two sisters who had been 
circulating slanderous and false statements (presumably 
received from Mrs. Russell) should be charged with 
slander and false witness and asked to clear themselves 
by substantiating their statements if they could. 

One of these sisters had stated that they had the 
women of the congregation already committed, and were 
wanting now to get a few men into the matter, so that 
it would not appear so completely a woman's affair. 
Her tale was that Bro. Russell was treating Sister Russell 
shamefully. The other indicted sister had made 
similar charges. Without going into particulars they 
had given the strongest kind of inferences, and the Church 
eldership determined that it was time that such slanders 
should cease, or that if they continued all of the 
congregation should know that they were wholly without 
foundation or justification. 

At the evening Church meeting Bro. M. M. Tuttle 
presided, and the board of Church elders served as jury. 
The accused sisters were asked specifically whether or not 
they had said such things. At first they were disposed 
to deny the matter entirely, but witnesses to whom they 
had talked were present and, called upon, gave their 
testimony. Neither could offer any explanation or defense 
—neither had any foundation whatever for the 
charges. 

This is the meeting from which Mrs. Russell and her 
sisters were excluded— because they had ignored the 
Church, declared they were not of it, and did not attend 
its meetings for several months prior to this meeting. 
It was a strictly private meeting of the consecrated believers 
of the Church, and hence they had no right to be 
present. They were excluded because it was recognized 
by the elders of the Church that had they been present 
they would have created a scene, and would have hindered 
the investigation for which the meeting was called. 
The two sisters who at that meeting were shown to have 



been guilty of false witness and slander as charged were, 

at my request, not condemned; the board of elders 

holding the matter over pending a possible later apology 

to the Church for their wrong course. I took this opportunity 

to briefly explain to the congregation present a 

little of the trouble that surrounded me, as an explanation 

of the slanders which I knew had been circulated. 

I took particular care to shield my wife as much as possible, 

laying the principal blame on one of her sisters, 

whose evil influence I could note at almost every turn 

of my affairs. 

Following this I sought to separate my wife from 
her evil counsellors in hope of recovering her. I sent 
those false friends letters, warning them not to come 
to see my wife, etc., and gave my wife the following 
letter which she put into the court record of the case: 

ALLEGHENY, September 6, 1897. 

My Dear Wife:— I send you a copy each of three 
letters just sent as legal notices. [Accompanying were 
notices to Mr. J. L. Russell, Mrs. J. L. Russell and Mrs. 
L. J. Raynor, "not to receive, harbor or entertain my 
wife under your roof under any pretext whatsoever."] 
I wish you, my dear, to know that these steps now being 
taken are in your interest as well as in the interest of the 
Lord's cause. I desire to shield you from what I believe 
has been a very pernicious influence upon you for some 
time past. I do this in the hope that under favorable 
influences, and by divine blessing, you may free your 
heart of the slime of misrepresentation which others have 
poured over it, and that thus relieved you may realize 
your first love for me, and that no one on earth so really 
loves you, or so genuinely desires your advancement in 
all the graces of the spirit of Christ and in the service 
of our dear Redeemer. 

Come back to me, my dear! I promise that I will do 
all in my power to make you as happy as you ever were, 

R3813 : page 219 

and as much more so as lies in my power. Think, my 
dear, that God has already favored you with a position 
as my queen and associate and helper that, in some respects 
at least, is second to that of no lady in the world. 
And do, my dear, remember that ambition is one of the 
foes of the people of God, that has snared more of the 
bright ones than perhaps any other. Consider, I pray 
you, in time, ere it be too late to retrace your steps, 
whether or not your present condition of heart may not 
be a seduction of the great adversary. 

Is not the situation sufficiently critical to make you 
go very cautiously and prayerfully? Stop, I entreat you, 
and join me in humble heart to seek afresh to know the 
will of our Lord and Master. Remember how Satan fell 
and how our Lord proved himself worthy of his high exaltation, 
and remember the Apostle's words: "Humble 



yourselves, therefore, brethren, under the mighty hand 
of God, that he may exalt you in due time." Remember 
Miriam, and Korah, and remember the various conspirators, 
and how they all have not only left Brother Russell, 
but also the Lord and the Truth. Remember that the 
present matter is as humiliating for me as for you, because 
if a wife is the glory of her husband, so any reflection, 
even against her, is to his injury and shame. Remember, 
also, that I will be anxious to lift up your head 
and influence in every proper manner, and will not glory 
over you as a foe, but as one who has recovered a lost 
and highly-prized treasure. 

And now, my dear wife, all that I could wish for as 
respects my earthly life is that I may serve the Lord, his 
cause and his people, amongst whom no one can hold so 
near and dear a place as you have held and may again 
hold if you will. And next to my effort to serve and 
please the Lord shall be my effort to serve and please you 
as my wife, if you will permit it and co-operate to that 
end. 

Finally, not in anger, nor in any other spirit than 
that of love, and as my final move in your favor, and to 
help pull you out of the fire of the present trial, I give 
this legal and formal notice, which I shall be only too 

R3814: page 219 

glad to rescind absolutely. 

Done in love, and as a despairing effort to separate 
you from evil influences, and with a hope for speedy reconciliation 
and annulment of this limitation, at Allegheny, 
Pa., this 6th of September, 1897. 

C. T. RUSSELL. 

NIPPED IN THE BUD 

As a result, the entire conspiracy dissolved like 
a pricked bubble. The Sisters of the congregation and 
others realized how sadly they had been deceived in the 
name of the Lord and in the name of righteousness. Mrs. 
Russell was completely overwhelmed with the defeat of 
her scheme. I hoped the crisis had been reached and 
that the tide might turn in her favor, in my favor, and in 
the favor of the Truth. I pointed out to my wife the 
error of her course carefully, kindly, gently. I told her 
how wrong it was for her to plot to do me injury, and 
pointed out that if, as she thought, the Lord wished that 
she should supplant me as the Editor of the WATCH 
TOWER and general overseer in this harvest work, he 
was abundantly able to carry out his purposes and 
needed no evil assistance from her. I suggested that he 
could easily permit me to be mangled or killed in an 
accident; that he could smite me with paralysis or other 
disease; or by the merest touch of the brain he could disorder 
my mind; and that thus he could cause everything 
connected with his work to drop into her hands, for, as I 



assured her, my confidence in her had been so great that 

in my will everything had been left to her care and supervision. 

(This is so no longer. I have already transferred 

everything I possess except my personal clothing to the 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY.) 

Mrs. Russell afterward denied that she had authorized 
any of the slanders or that any were uttered; but I 
pointed out that the slanderers had confessed; and that 
if she were truly on my side, instead of being angry 
with the fact of their exposure she would have manifested 
righteous indignation for their false accusations. 
But still my hope was the recovering of my wife to her former 
condition, and accordingly I forbade her relatives 
to visit her, hoping that she would be benefited thereby. 
I invited to the home a Sister Jones, her friend, 
a woman of great kindness and large experience, whose 
influence I knew would be favorable. I opened to Mrs. 
Russell's mind a door of hope by suggesting that if I could 
come to accept her declaration that she had no sympathy 
with the slanders I would know well how to bring order 
out of the confusion and restore her to the love and 
fellowship of the dear friends. She demurred that since 
the exposure of Sunday night, Sept. 5th, it would be 
impossible to heal the breach. I told her that it was 
only necessary for her to convince me, and that I could 
do the rest; but that whatever we would do should be 
done before Sunday, so that if harmony were effected 
we could at the following Sunday meeting make an announcement 
of the fact to the dear friends of the Church, 
which would set their hearts at rest. 

On Friday night I drew up a paper representing the 
re-established harmony, wording it as favorably as possible 
for Mrs. Russell and her misguided friends. On 
Saturday morning she and Mrs. Jones, her friend, were 
quite enthusiastic over the paper. We got several copies 
typewritten and Mrs. Russell and I signed the paper, and 
she and Sister Jones went out and got the other signatures. 
Mrs. Russell's two sisters and one of the 
two persons who on the previous Sunday night 
had been convicted of slander and false witness 
signed it with us, and on Sunday afternoon I requested 
the consecrated ones to remain for a special 
service, and to them I read the said letter, asking them 
that as many as desired to do so would signify their participation 
in the spirit of the letter by a rising vote. 
The dear friends were overjoyed and arose as one person, 
praising God for his mercy in thus bringing order out of 
confusion. Here is 

A COPY OF THE SAID LETTER 

To the Allegheny Church, Bible House. 

Dear Brethren and Sisters:— It is with praise to God 
and with thankfulness of heart that we unite in a joint 
note to you all. Since last Sunday we have sought 
earnestly through prayer divine aid in respect to some 



matters which grieved us all, and have obtained help in 
time of need. 

Investigation revealed the fact that our troubles 
arose largely through the too free use of the tongue and 
the neglect of the Scriptural rule of Matt. 18: 15. Many 
things had grown out of all semblance to their originals; 
and many of the originals upon close investigation 

R3814: page 220 

proved to be mere fears which had no foundation in 
fact. 

We are happy to tell you that all misstatements and 
misapprehensions are mutually rescinded and forgiven, 
and supposed grievances are all forever blotted out, 
while mutual love fills all our hearts for our Lord and 
for all his Church. 

Although the trial has been a severe one, we trust 
that its present happy outcome may prove to be everlasting; 
and that some lessons have been learned by us 
all respecting the need of charity, and the close following 
of the Scripture rules laid down in Matt. 18:15 by our 
Master. 

We hope (D.V.) to meet with you next Sunday; and 
are all resolved by the grace of God to more zealously 
strive to act and speak kindly to one and all, especially 
to God's children; and if we know nothing favorable 
to tell of one another we will abstain from such personalities 
altogether. 

(Original was signed by) 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, 

MARIA F. RUSSELL, 

LENA GUIBERT, 

EMMA H. RUSSELL, 

LAURA J. RAYNOR. 

On the following day, Sept. 13, 1897, a copy of that 
letter was sent to friends from nearby towns who had 
been present at the meeting of September 4th, with the 
following one: 

To the Friends who kindly visited us at Allegheny 
on September fourth and fifth, 

Greetings:— It gives us great pleasure to inform you 
that our Heavenly Father has very graciously heard 
your prayers and ours in the interest of all the parties 
concerned in the matters which caused us so much distress. 
It appears that certain features of difficulty in 
the case, which eluded our every effort to grasp, prove 
to have been in many respects fears and misunderstandings 
and the results of these. In an altogether unexpected 
manner the Lord has straightened out these troubles. 
The letter following is a copy of the one in which 
the various parties interested have joined heartily and 
gladly. I send it to you realizing that it will help to 
bring rest and peace to your hearts as it has done to ours 



at Allegheny. The entire Church here has been greatly 
troubled, not only for the past week but previously, and 
after the reading to them of this letter yesterday all their 
hearts rejoiced, and they unanimously joined in as parties 
to the letter as a congregation. Many expressed the 
sentiment that the matter, although very grievous, will 
prove a lesson of great value to us all. 
"God moves in a mysterious way 
His wonders to perform." 
Individually I feel as though I had received a great 
fortune, and appreciate each of the signatures more than 
I would $5,000, and the second one many times that. 
Join with us all in giving thanks to our heavenly Father 
for having delivered us out of so great a trial. 
Your brother and servant in Him, 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL. 

Our hope was short lived. On the following Sunday, 
when all was to have been harmony, the storm broke 
out afresh. One of Mrs. Russell's sisters came in late 
and went out early, and Mrs. Russell herself posed as 
wounded innocence, refusing to shake hands with some, 
calling others traitors, etc. I made no further effort 
to secure her attendance at the meetings, believing it 
would be better for all concerned for her to be absent. 

THE DEPARTURE NOVEMBER 9, 1897 

I put in two months more trying in every way to 
recover my wife to her former condition. On November 
9th, being called from the city, I made arrangements for 
her to have a Sister's company until my return. She 
accepted this, but subsequently left for Chicago without 
leaving me the slightest information. I had no knowledge 
of her whereabouts for two weeks. 

Chicago had then the largest congregation in 
the "Present Truth" outside of Allegheny, and Mrs. 
Russell sought every way to enlist the friends there by 
slanderous statements. So far as we are aware only 
three came under the influence, as about eight had done 
in the Allegheny Church. 

Later on, finding that she accomplished nothing 
there, she proposed to return to me at Allegheny. I 
refused to accept her return unless she would acknowledge 
the error of her former course and pledge herself 
to reasonable, proper, wifely conduct. I wrote her that 
in her departure the Lord had granted me great deliverance, 
and that I felt that I must require this guarantee 
for the future, otherwise it would seem to be tempting 
Providence. In January, 1898, Mrs. Russell returned 
to Allegheny, to the home of her sister; and herself, sisters 
and friends began a campaign of vilification of every 
kind, regardless of the truth, going hither and thither 
wherever they could find any one willing to hear them, 
bound on injuring me in some manner. This lasted for 
about a year, at the end of which time my wife gave me 



R3815 : page 220 

her solemn assurance that she had ceased to bear false 

witness against me before others, whereupon I gave her 

possession of a house which I owned facing the parks, 

and furnished it for her in good style— a better home 

than she ever before had— thinking to myself, I will overcome 

her evil with good; she shall yet see the wrong of 

her course and appreciate my loving intentions. She 

manifested some appreciation, sat on my knee and kissed 

me, and knelt with me in prayer in that house. The 

house contains ten rooms, and she had considerable income 

from renting some of these to lodgers. In hope 

that a change of sentiment was in sight I visited her 

every Thursday evening for some five times, when she 

said, "Husband, I have been fearful that the neighbors 

and lodgers would think it strange to see you come here 

every Thursday." The hint was sufficient; I discontinued 

attentions. The puerility of the situation was 

ludicrous. The neighbors would see lodgers, men, going 

to and from the house daily, hourly, but would be surprised 

to see the woman's husband come once a week. 

I perceived that further quest for her affection was useless. 

Afterward she merely requested me to come to see 

her when she desired some repairs or additional furniture. 

A FRESH ATTACK IN 1903 

By 1903 Mrs. Russell had laid by in bank a little 
sum of money which evidently was consecrated to the 
injury of her husband. The opportune time for its use 
came, and with it she published a new kind of tract— not 

R3815 : page 221 

to stir up the pure minds of God's people, but the very reverse. 
It was an endeavor to misrepresent me, to slander 
me. It purported to give letters which I had written to 
Mrs. Russell and copies of her replies. It was declared 
therein that I ill-used her, would not speak to her, and 
wrote her these unpleasant epistles. I remembered well 
the time when she was with me when she would not speak 
despite my every effort, and I remembered another time 
in which she did everything to hinder my work, when I 
was obliged to tell her that my time could not be used 
continually "discussing affairs." To save time I wrote 
her several replies on my common manuscript paper. 

The tract as a whole was a gross perversion of the facts, 
and written expressly to injure the interests of the cause 
which I represented. These were sent to all the WATCH 
TOWER addresses she could secure, and bundles of them 
were sent to ministers in different towns where Pilgrim 
services were announced in the WATCH TOWER columns, 
and a letter accompanying each bundle requested ministers 
receiving it to get the tracts, to look up the meeting 



of the MILLENNIAL DAWN people, and to have some person 
circulate these tracts at those meetings. It was expected 
that ministers of various denominations would be so 
antagonistic to MILLENNIAL DAWN and their author that 
they would take pleasure in this scurrilous work; but to 
their credit be it noted that not many of them accepted 
the proposition. Some wrote back declining the service 
and characterizing the request as mean, despicable, insulting 
to their manhood. 

This was in the beginning of 1903, and led me to 
conclude that my endeavor to help my wife was being 
taken advantage of by the adversary as a means to do 
injury to the Truth to which I have consecrated life and 
all. I concluded that assistance from me must stop, and 
put my sister in charge of the residence, reserving however 
a room for Mrs. Russell and arranging for her boarding. 
The result was a commotion, Mrs. Russell, her relatives 
and roomers, created such a disturbance that my sister 
was obliged to call for the protection of the police, while 
Mrs. Russell and her friends misrepresented matters 
through the public press to the extent of their ability. 

Since then, under the direction of the court, Mrs. 
Russell has received from me $40.00 per month for her 
maintainance, and her suit for divorce from bed and 
board with alimony has just come off. She has been as 
separate from me as could possibly be imagined for 
years. No advantage could accrue to her from a monetary 
standpoint that she did not already possess. I must 
presume therefore that the motive back of this suit is 
revenge: to have an opportunity of defaming me and 
scandalizing the Truth, as a retaliation for my refusal 
to permit her all the liberties she desired in the columns 
of ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

THE COURT RECORDS 

Mrs. Russell's bill of complaint admitted that there 
had been no cohabitation between herself and her husband, 
and her attorney attempted to make out of this 
that she was deprived of one of the chief pleasures of 
life. The Court would not permit this. The fact is 
that the matter was in Mrs. Russell's own control. 
She did understand that her husband preferred 
to live a celibate life, but she agreed and expressed the 
same as her preference. She knew his teachings on 
the subject, as now expressed in DAWN, VOL. VI., chap. 
12— that neither the husband nor the wife may "defraud" 
the other of reasonable marital rights. 

Notwithstanding the foregoing, Mrs. Russell on the 
witness stand and through her attorney attempted to 
give the impression that her husband was very amorously 
inclined, "like a jelly-fish floating around," "embracing 
all who would respond." She said that some 
one had told her this thirteen years ago. Hear-say 
testimony is not admissible in Court, but the precious 
object to be obtained was the public branding of her 



husband as a "scalawag," so her attorney smuggled 
this in by having Mrs. Russell swear that she had told it 
to her husband ten years ago. 

When the next day the husband took the witness stand 
and swore that he had never used the language (and never 
had heard of it before) all reasonable people concluded 
that only an idiotic person would make such an uncomplimentary 
remark about himself. They concluded, 
too, that even an ordinary woman, seeking a charge 
against her husband for thirteen years, could imagine 
wonders and create the living and real in her own mind. 
This is the most charitable view possible of such an 
oath. The Court ruled that the testimony be stricken 
from the Court records. 

Mrs. Russell charged an improper intimacy between 
her husband and "Rose," who became a member 
of the Russell household in 1888. The attempt of Mrs. 
Russell and her attorney to give the inference of criminal 
intimacy was so manifest that the Court interrupted 
to inquire, if criminal intimacy were charged, why it 
had not been made part of the plea and why "Rose" 
had not been made co-respondent in the suit? Then 
both Mrs. Russell and her attorney disclaimed any 
charge of criminal intimacy, but meant that "Rose" had 
sat on Mr. Russell's knee and he had kissed her. Mrs. 
Russell also swore that one night she entered "Rose's" 
room and found Mr. Russell sitting near her bed and 
holding her hand. The attempt of Mrs. Russell was 
not to state "the truth, the whole truth and nothing but 
the truth," but conversely, to state a part of the truth 
in order to give seeming foundation for evil surmisings, 
that would injure her husband's influence among those 
who do not know him. 

The next day Mr. Russell on the witness stand explained 
that "Rose" and her brother "Charles" were members 
of the family and office assistants— the former at 
Mrs. Russell's request. "Rose" was quite childish in appearance, 
wore short dresses, and looked to Mr. Russell 
to be about 13 years old. He did not know her age, 
but another who knew her guessed that she was then 
only 10 years old. She may have been older than 13 in 
1888. The brother came first, and shortly after "Rose's" 
coming he died. 

It was some months later that Mr. Russell in the 
WATCH TOWER office, hearing sobbing, turned to find 
"Rose" in tears. Inquiring the cause, "Rose," still 
weeping, came over and sat on his knee, and complained 
that Mrs. Russell had worked her too hard before 
she started for the office; and that she felt weary and 
friendless. He told her that all that was a mistake. 
He defended Mrs. Russell as not intentionally unkind or 
unreasonable, and told "Rose" to do what she was able 
to do, cheerfully, and then to explain her weariness, 
and that he was sure nothing unreasonable would be 
asked. Then, suddenly drying her tears, "Rose" kissed 



R3815 : page 222 

Mr. Russell. Although surprised at all this Mr. R. did 
not resent it nor reprove it; but rather reproved himself 
for not having been previously more fatherly. That 
very night he talked with his wife about "Rose," and 
pointed out that she was surely lonely since her brother's 
death, and that it would be a duty to look after her 
interests more carefully. 

Mrs. Russell agreed, and it was mutually arranged 
that "Rose" thereafter should be considered and treated 
as an adopted daughter. "Rose" was so informed in 
the presence of the three, and invited to spend her 
evenings in the large study and reading room with the 
Russells. This course was followed; and when "Rose" 
retired, usually at 9 p.m., Mrs. Russell kissed her 
good-night and told her to "pass the kiss along" to 
Mr. R. also. This custom continued several years, until 
Mr. R. said to "Rose": "I think it best that I should 
discontinue kissing you; you are now wearing long 
dresses and looking more womanly, and Mrs. R. might 
get to feel jealous;— although she has never said a 
word to that effect, I would not wish to give her the 
slightest reason for so feeling." Mr. Russell declared 
that it was quite a while after his discontinuance of his 
proper fatherly conduct toward "Rose" that Mrs. Russell 
(having become alienated on account of not getting 
all the liberty she desired in the WATCH TOWER columns) 
upbraided him for kissing "Rose." As for Mrs. 
R.'s claim that she found her husband in "Rose's" room 

R3816 : page 222 

one night, sitting near her bed and holding her hand, 
Mr. R. said that he had no recollection of the occurrence, 
but that as he has a slight knowledge of medicine 
he was called on by all the members of the family 
in cases of illness: Mrs. R., her mother, her sisters and 
her sisters' children all were accustomed to apply to 
Mr. R., who kept a free medicine chest, referring serious 
cases to a regular practitioner. Mr. R. presumed 
the case in question was an emergency call, and that 
he was counting "Rose's" pulse. The entire "Rose" 
matter had a different appearance when the light of 
truth was turned on it. The Court ruled out the "Rose" 
testimony, and ordered it stricken from the Court 
records. 

Mrs. Russell mentioned a person named "Emily," 
a sister in Christ, who served as house-help in the Russell 
family about 14 years ago. With her attorney's 
assistance Mrs. R. brought out with dramatic effect 
that, Once she found Mr. R. in "Emily's" room with the 
door locked! Again the whole truth was sacrificed under 
oath, and a partial truth with false inferences went 
to the public. 

On the witness stand next day Mr. R. explained 



the entire matter. One morning "Emily" was sick, and 
he was called on to see her and prescribe medicine. 
"Emily's" room contained a sink and a pump used for 
the second floor refuse and water. The noise from the 
pump made it difficult to hear, and Mr. R. turned the 
key in the door to prevent confusion until he could hear 
what "Emily" had to say about her condition— certainly 
less than a minute, probably not half a minute. 
"Emily," now married, put upon the witness stand, 
swore that she had no knowledge that the door was 
locked even for a moment, and that then and at all 
times Mr. R.'s conduct toward her had been most 
exemplary. 

Mr. Russell declared that he had no knowledge of 
his wife's notice of the matter until years afterward 
(when endeavoring to coerce him to grant her all the 
liberty she desired in the columns of the WATCH TOWER) 
she mentioned it, saying that it would not sound 
well if told. Even then, however, Mr. R. could not believe 
that at heart she meant it, or that she would lend 
herself to so diabolical a misrepresentation, falsification, 
of "the whole truth." 

Mrs. R. claimed bad treatment from her husband, 
but produced no evidence to substantiate her claim. 
Her husband's principal crime was that on one occasion 
(during 18 years of married life) when he was going 
to Denver he neglected and refused to kiss her 
"good bye." Next day, on the witness stand, Mr. R. 
corrected the statement, saying that his journey was to 
New York City instead of Denver, and that he had explained 
to his wife that her conduct at the time did not 
justify any special exhibition of affection, and that he 
did not believe in giving hypocritical caresses. 

Mrs. R. also claimed that her husband had opened 
her mail. Mr. R. explained that by mutual consent 
this had been so for years— their mail had been treated 
as common property, until (about six months before 
she deserted him) Mrs. R. requested that she receive 
mail addressed to her unopened. Her request was 
promptly thereafter complied with, much to her inconvenience; 
for many TOWER readers used to write to 
Mrs. R., thinking to save the Editor's time, their letters 
containing questions that needed to come to him 
in the end. 

Another of Mrs. R.'s complaints was that she was 
asked to give an account of her use of moneys. Mr. R. 
explained that for eighteen years he had asked no reports 
or explanations regarding money matters, until 
about six months before Mrs. R. left him, when he 
asked her what she was doing with moneys received 
from him other than for usual expenses. Was she 
starting a bank account, or what? When she refused 
to tell him, he told her that if she refused to report 
after using the money his only recourse would be to 
inquire what she wanted the money for when she asked 
for it. 



Another complaint was that Mr. R. had treated 
Mrs. R. unkindly during a spell of sickness in the 
Spring of 1897; and that he had cruelly told her that she 
was suffering a chastisement from the Lord. Mr. R. explained 
that he surely did so consider her illness; but 
that knowing Mrs. R.'s general opposition to him and 
anything he might say, he did not mention it to her. 
However, fearing that Mrs. R. might miss a blessing 
from the illness, he did hint his thought to her very special 
lady friend and confidant who assisted in caring for 
her. As for his treatment of his wife during that sickness, 
Mr. R. assured the Court that it could not have 
been more kind and considerate. He explained that 
Mrs. R. had a contagious erysipelas that covered every 
inch of her body from head to foot; that this required 
the aid of an assistant in the day time to perform three 
processes of dressing the eruptions (and who caught 
the disease); but that at night the ailment was much 
worse, and, others being afraid, he himself performed 
the three-process treatment twice every night. He 
thus spent four to five hours each night, and handled 
his wife with extremest tenderness, hoping to win back 
the affection which her ambition had crowded out. 

R3816 : page 223 

Another fault charged by Mrs. R. against her husband 
was that he would not speak to her for weeks at 
a time, but wrote her letters. Some of those letters 
were put in evidence. Mr. R. explained that his conduct 
was wholly misrepresented— that he uniformly 
treated his wife with the utmost courtesy— that no wife 
in the world could have been better treated. He explained 
that about the time Mrs. R. stopped reporting 
his discourses for the WATCH TOWER she seemed bent 
on hindering him in his editorial work, and would 
have wasted his entire time "discussing" her ideas, etc., 
if he had permitted it: that to save his time he was 
obliged to write, because her discussions were so unreasonable 
and interminable. One of these letters, 
selected by Mrs. R. as the strongest against her husband, 
we quote below from the Court record. 

THE OBJECTIONABLE LETTER 

Mrs. Russell's attorneys introduced a number 
of letters which were really against her case, for they 
proved that Mr. R. had tried in a variety of ways, as 
before stated, to recover her to her former good self. 
The first of these which is here quoted is one from which 
Mrs. R. extracted a few sentences for the pamphlet which 
she sent out in 1903. The portion she quoted then is 
italicized here, that it may be seen how grossly the quotation 
misrepresented the letter as a whole. It was written 
without the slightest thought of it ever being used 
again, and no copy was kept by Mr. R. The following is 



a copy of the original put in evidence in court:— 
July 8, 1896. 

My Dear Wife:— In reply to your proposition for "a 
further discussion" of the matters which have recently 
been alienating our affections, I reply: I must decline 
such a discussion, for two reasons, (1) It probably would 
only lead to a still wider breach, and (2) As I told you 
before, I have no wish to discuss new grievances with 
one whose judgment after 17 years of acquaintance is— 
"a lack of confidence," and that I am devoid of love and 
justice. 

For the past three years you have been gradually 
forcing upon me the evidence that we both erred in 
judgment when we married— that we are not adapted 
to each other, not capable of making each other happy, 
as we agreed to do, and supposed we could do. The last 
month has fastened this conviction upon me much 
against my will. I am convinced that our difficulty is a 
growing one generally— that it is a great mistake for 
strong-minded men and women to marry. If they will 
marry, the strong-minded would far better marry such 
as are not too intellectual and high spirited, for there 
never can, in the nature of things, be peace, under present-time 
conditions, where the two are on an equality. This 
all the more convinces me of the wisdom of God's Book. 

The convictions forced upon me during the past 
month have been an extremely severe trial to me, for I 
have enough manhood to make me crave the sympathy 
and love of true womanhood, which in many respects 
you well represent, but by God's grace I feel strengthened 
to continue in the "good fight of faith," upheld by 
his sufficiency. 

You need not fear a transfer of my heart to any 
other woman! As I have often told you, I never met as 
near my ideal as yourself, and I never expect to. I conclude 
that I am adapted to no one, and that no one is 
adapted to me— except the Lord! I am so thankful that 
He and I understand each other and have confidence in 
each other. 

This letter is not meant to be unkind. If anything 
in it seems unkind please excuse it as not so intended. 
By and by we will know each other better. Let us hope 
that it will reveal fewer rather than more blemishes that 
now vex each other. With fond remembrance of every 
kindness, and with very best wishes for your temporal 
and eternal future, I remain 

Yours truly, C. T. RUSSELL. 

Another charge made by Mrs. R. against her husband 
was, that he had isolated her from her sisters and 
friends and had sent them insulting letters. Mr. R. 
explained that this prohibition was made in Mrs. R.'s 
interest, when she had become his active enemy in 
cooperation with them, in hope thus to reclaim her 
from her wrong course. He sent such letters on two 
occasions: the first set in September were negatived 



by the reconciliation. The second set, also filed by 

Mrs. R. as part of the Court's record, we quote 

below:— 

ALLEGHENY, Pa., Nov. 9, 1897. 

My Dear Wife:— I think it but duty toward you to 
give you a copy of a letter sent (yesterday) to four of 
your friends who clearly manifest that they are my 
enemies. No one has knowledge of the matter except 

R3817 : page 223 

Brother Bohnet, who knows confidentially— because he 
prepared the letters on typewriter. 

As I have prohibited these persons from having intercourse 
with you, I must, and now do, prohibit you from 
having intercourse with them in any manner. 

My hope, Dear, is that freed from this bad influence 
you may "come to yourself" and take right and sensible 
views of matters; peradventure the Lord may bless us 
again with happiness which we once enjoyed together 
in our home life, and in our Christian fellowship and cooperation 
in God's service. It gives me great pain to 
deprive you of what seems to be your only pleasure, but 
my hope is that you may become weaned from the love 
of those who hate me; and that not only to my comfort, 
but also to your own present and everlasting welfare. 
Should these later manifest a change of heart, I shall 
be very glad to have former relationship restored all 
around, but until then it cannot be otherwise than mischievous, 
and cannot be permitted. I have carefully 
weighed this matter for now about a month, and believe 
that my course is the wise one, and in conformity with 
the Lord's will and Word; as I will show you if you 
desire. 

Permit me to add for your comfort that your conduct 
last night and this morning is much more kind than formerly, 
and had this manner been commenced sooner I 
would have waited still longer before writing to your 
friends— my enemies. 

With sincere love and sympathy, 
Your husband, C. T. RUSSELL. 

ALLEGHENY, Pa., November 8, 1897. 

Mrs. :— Some time ago I addressed you in regard 

to your influence upon my wife. I have since had some 
ground for hope that both you and she had come to 
view matters in a different light, and that your mutual 
conspiracy to do me injury had been repented of and 

R3817 : page 224 

abandoned. And acting in good faith I made no further 
objection to your intercourse. 

For a month past, however, I am reluctantly forced 
to the conclusion that the great adversary is deluding 
your clique to take some other lines for mischief— hoping 



for better success than last time. I have been praying 

for you each and all, earnestly, that the Lord would 

open your eyes to the enormity of your course; but I 

now conclude that it is my duty toward my dear wife 

to isolate her from your pernicious influence; for such 

it is, whether you are aware of it or not; and I hope and 

incline to believe that you are not wilful, but blinded, 

in the matter; but that there be no chance for misunderstanding, 

and that this notice shall be in every way a 

legal notice, I must use great plainness of speech, and 

tell you that your influence, however intended, is a 

wicked influence; for it has a wicked effect upon my 

dear wife. So far from being a "peacemaker," as all 

who bear the name of Christ should be, you are a mischief 

maker— a disturber of the peace. You have 

already alienated from me the affections of my dear 

companion, who I believe was given me by the Lord, 

so that she bears no resemblance to her former loving, 

generous self. You have incited, or helped to incite in 

her, an evil, selfish disposition, as contrary to the Scriptural 

definition of the spirit of love and the character of 

our Lord, as it is contrary to her former beautiful character 

under the influence of Divine grace. The laws of 

our State, not to mention the higher laws of God, deprecate 

all such conduct and pernicious influence as seeks 

to alienate and separate between husbands and wives.— 

"What God hath joined let no man (nor woman) put 

asunder"— either actually or in spirit of mind. 

Very reluctantly, therefore, I hereby give you notice 
that you must not continue this baneful influence; and 
that to this end you henceforth abstain from all intercourse 
with my dear wife— either personal or otherwise— 
that you shall not receive her into your home, nor visit 
her at my home, nor meet her elsewhere, nor correspond 
with her either directly or by proxy through others. 

As it is with pain and reluctance that I thus write 
to you— and only as a last resort in the defense of my 
home and in hope that under Divine blessing my dear 
wife, being freed from such false sympathy and evil encouragements, 
shall regain "the spirit of a sound mind" 
—the holy spirit of love,— so, I shall be most glad to 
recall the restrictions here placed upon you with reference 
to my wife. But nothing shall be construed as 
revoking this notice except it be given in writing over 
my own signature. And failure on your part to conform 
to this notice, absolutely, will justly lay you liable 
for such heavy penalties as the Courts of Allegheny 
County may prescribe. 

Sorrowfully yours, etc. C. T. RUSSELL. 

Other letters of similar import are parts of the evidence, 
but the above will suffice as fair samples of the 
others. 

JUDGE'S CHARGE-JURY'S VERDICT 



The judge in the case as well as the auditors in court, 
attorneys, etc., perceived clearly that Mrs. Russell's 
charges were trumped up, that she had suffered no indignities 
at my hands; and the charge of the judge was 
about as strong as it could have been made in my favor. 

The jury was out about two hours and returned with 
a verdict granting the divorce— much to the astonishment 
of all concerned. In explanation of the verdict 
some of the jurors said, "We concluded that there would 
be no hope for reconciliation, and that we would be 
doing a kindness to both parties to decide in favor of a 
divorce." 

My attorney has made a motion before the Court 
that the jury's verdict be set aside as being opposed to 
the law and to the evidence in this case. The court I 
am told may not reach a decision in the matter for 
months; even then we all know a judge dislikes to so 
arbitrarily deal with a jury's verdict, although the law 
gives him a right to do so in such a case. I am not unwilling 
that my wife should have a divorce, but opposed 
it because her plea was a false and slanderous one. 

"THE CUP WHICH MY FATHER HATH POURED, 
SHALL I NOT DRINK IT?" 

Whatever the Court may decide, however untruthful, 
malicious, and paltry the evidence, the accusations have 
been scattered broadcast through the land, the public 
know the untruth, and the great majority will not know 
the truth in the present life. My conclusion is that 
these things could not have happened: that so far as the 
Lord's consecrated ones are concerned not a hair of 
their heads can fall without divine notice and power to 
prevent. Hence, it seems quite evident that for some 
reason it pleased the Lord to wound me and put me to 
shame. My principal grief is on account of my friends; 
and yet we sorrow not as others who have no hope. 
"We know that all things are working together for good 
to them that love God— to the called ones according to 
his purpose." 

How this bitter experience will work for good we 
may not clearly see, but we can firmly trust. Perhaps 
it is intended as a part of the shaking and sifting which 
is to separate everything that is shakable from that 
which cannot be shaken. (Heb. 12:26-28.) The unshaken 
ones undoubtedly will be drawn nearer to each 
other. We have every confidence that though Satan 
desired to sift us as wheat and to discourage us and to 
discredit us as the representative of the Lord, he shall 
not succeed beyond what the Lord sees would be to his 
own glory or for our profit. As the Master prayed for 
Peter we may be sure that all who are truly his have his 
sympathy and backing. From numerous letters received 
I am sure that I have the prayers of the Lord's 
dear flock, and I assure you all that my prayers ascend 
for you and that I fully realize that it is your hour of 



trial also. May the Church come forth from the furnace 
brighter and stronger and purer every way. 

Respecting the influence of this matter upon the 
world: it is hard to tell just what it may be. I have 
heard from many, previously somewhat opposed or non-committal, 
whose indignation has been aroused on my 
behalf, as they see in the testimony that my treatment of 
my wife was most considerate under adverse conditions, 
even according to her own testimony, when the facts 
were explained. Some of these have been brought into 
closer sympathy with the Truth. However, as respects 
the mass of the world, we know that they love not the 
light, and long for any excuse for opposing it, and quite 
likely therefore a general effect may be the arousing of 

R3817 : page 225 

a greater opposition than before on the part of some who 
will strive to use the malicious statements and false 
charges of this case as though they were true— thereby 
to crucify the Truth and all who stand firmly by it. 
Believing, as we do, that the Harvest work must come 
to a close now within a few years, we recognize that 
some experiences will be permitted to gradually narrow 
down and finally end the opportunities for service of the 
Lord and the proclamation of the Gospel call of the 
present time. We are expecting of course to suffer 
somehow. We have pledged ourselves to the Lord to 
be faithful unto death. It is not for us to determine in 
what our trials shall consist, nor how they shall come, 
nor through whom. The Lord's grace is sufficient for 
us. His promise is, "I will never leave thee nor forsake 
thee," even though he assures that in this Harvest time 
the Adversary would deceive, stumble, if it were possible, 
the "very elect," but it will not be possible, because 
"Greater is he who is on our part than all that be against 
us." 

We cannot undertake to publish all of your many 
precious letters, in which sympathy and confidence have 
been so liberally expressed, but we are preserving them 
all and can here give you a little taste. We have heard 
from many others less directly— as congregations or 

R3818 : page 225 

through the Pilgrim brethren or through a few words 
injected into business correspondence. We have not 
had time to answer these precious letters as they should 
have been acknowledged. Please accept this statement 
as my personal reply to your communications, with my 
love and best wishes. 

Your Brother and Servant in the Lord, 
C. T. RUSSELL. 



SAMPLES OF INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

At a special meeting of the Church at Scranton 
a letter was read informing us that the jury has granted 
Mrs. Russell a verdict of divorce, contrary to the instructions 
of the presiding Judge. Newspaper clippings 
were also read showing that one of the charges 
against our dear Brother was that of loose morals as 
regards the weaker sex. With these clippings we had 
read to us a statement written by Mrs. Russell, printed 
in the WATCH TOWER of June 1 1, 1894, in which she 
unsparingly condemned similar charges made by 
another defamer at that time. Her defense of her husband 
at that time, made after a dozen years of celibate 
wifehood, was surely not without mental, moral and 
physical proof of his absolute supremacy to any weakness 
of the kind mentioned. 

A letter was also read, signed by Mrs. Russell, 
addressed to the Church at Allegheny, Sept. 12, 1897, 
withdrawing all claims of grievances, real or imaginary, 
then existing between herself and husband, and 
stating she would never again say an unkind thing 
against him. With this was also read a letter over her 
signature, dated six days later, addressed to a sister 
in this city in which she flatly contradicted both of 
these statements, and showed that her promises of six 
days previous were quite false. 

At our meeting we were informed that Mrs. Russell 
at about this time stated verbally to this same 
sister that the only real grievance she had against 
Brother Russell was that he would not permit her to 
use the columns of the WATCH TOWER as she desired, 
and that if he would just give in on this one point all 
their differences could be settled immediately. 

We are neither surprised nor grieved at the success 
of this latest and most successful effort to blacken the 
good name of our beloved Brother Russell. We remember 
that for six thousand years demons and men have 
not ceased to misrepresent the character of our loving 
Father in heaven and that their treatment of him has 
been characteristic of that of many of his most honored 
servants. We remember how Miriam and Aaron slandered 
Moses, the conspiracies of Sanballat against 
Nehemiah, the false charges of Haman against Mordecai, 
the unfounded accusations of Job's friends against 
him, and the distress of David when he said, "I was a 
reproach among all mine enemies, but especially among 
my neighbors." 

We remember the misrepresentations which led to 
the imprisonment of Jeremiah, the conspiracy against 
Daniel, the false accusations which led to the death of 
Paul and the false testimony which led to the crucifixion 
of our Lord as a malefactor, in spite of the fact that 
the presiding Judge found no fault in him. We have 
not forgotten the word of our Lord, that "If they have 



called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much 
more shall they call them of his household;" nor his 
further message, "Blessed are ye when men shall revile 
you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner 
of evil against you falsely, for my sake." 

Understanding, as we do, that Mrs. Russell's only 
real grievance against Brother Russell was that he 
would not surrender the WATCH TOWER to her control, 
and blessed as we have been by the ministrations of 
our dear Brother during the eight years in which Mrs. 
Russell has had nothing to do with the work, we rejoice 
with him that he is counted worthy to suffer as 
he now does. We are sure that this suffering is for 
Christ's sake, and remind our dear Brother that "If 
when ye do well and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, 
this is acceptable with God; for even hereunto were ye 
called." Again we remind him, "If ye be reproached 
for the name of Christ happy are ye; for the spirit of 
glory and of God resteth upon you." And again, "Our 
hope of you is steadfast, knowing that as ye are partakers 
of the sufferings, so shall ye be also of the 
consolation." 

We rejoice in our present privilege of becoming 
companions of our dear Brother just now, "whilst he is 
made a gazingstock both by reproaches and afflictions," 
and our only hope is that we, like him, shall be 
so faithful to our Lord in this present time as to receive 
our full share of the persecutions which he has 
promised, that in a little while we, with him and all 
the faithful overcomers, may rejoice in the light of the 
Lord's presence forever. 

Yours faithfully, 

THE CHURCH AT SCRANTON, PA. 



TO OUR BELOVED PASTOR:- 

Realizing that you were passing through trials 
severe, being publicly and falsely traduced, and learning 
through the press that a verdict in favor of Mrs. 
Russell had been rendered, though the presiding Judge 
in charging the jury indicated that her allegations were 
not established by the evidence, the Church at St. 
Paul last evening voted unanimously that an expression 
of sympathy and love be sent you. We realize that 
the nature of your ordeal is what is to be expected, that 
false charges, false accusations will be laid at your 
door. Was it not so with the great Head of the Church? 
And has he not warned us that as he was so are we in 

R3818 : page 226 

the world. On the other hand we realize that "Greater 
is he that is for us than all that are against us." Dear 
brother, he will not give you one trial too many. He is 
too loving to cause you a single unnecessary pain. 



Again it is demonstrated that your loving words of 
caution are timely, that at this season of the year our 
great Adversary is specially active in heaping trials in 
various ways on those who are endeavoring to walk in 
the footsteps of the Master. 

You have our prayers, dear brother, that you may 
rise above these afflictions a yet brighter vessel, "meet 
for the Master's use." May he strengthen you through 
every experience and be your wisdom in every action. 

With fervent Christian love, 

ST. PAUL (MINN.) CHURCH. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

As I was going over one of the morning papers 
I saw an article respecting the long-anticipated 
attempt to put you in a wrong light before the world. 
My heart made quick response in a petition to 
the throne of grace that the heavenly Father 
would direct your cause and your course. I cannot 
fully realize what a trial this must be to you, but when 
I think how I should feel if in a similar position, it 
enables me to measurably gauge the intensity of your 
present bitter experiences. 

It seems natural to find people questioning the correctness 
of your interpretations, but when it comes to 
such a slandering of your character and motives there 
seems something so diabolical about it that my heart is 
almost overwhelmed. You have my prayers and my 
sympathy and my love and co-operation in this trying 
time. 

But since the good Lord allowed this case to be 
put off so long he evidently intended the brethren 
should have time to be strengthened to bear it; and 
by allowing Brother Weber to die meanwhile and Brother 
Hay to be confined to hospital, you might be deprived 
of your witnesses and your case thus make as poor 
a showing as possible before the world, and so those 
who have accepted the Truth would be the more thoroughly 
tested. I believe the Lord is seeking such as would 
unwaveringly cling to the Truth even though the worst 
possible reproach might be cast upon it, and the greatest 
possible persecution brought to bear upon its advocates. 
This may be the Lord's method of shaking 
out some who are unworthy the Truth; so be patient, 
dear Brother. Naught can harm his cause, and in a 
few more years the whole world will understand you 
aright and your undeserved shame and dishonor will be 
turned into joy. With Christian love, 

Your brother and servant in the narrow way, 
B. H. BARTON.-Pilgrim. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 



May the dear Lord "comfort thee with the comfort 
wherewith thou hast comforted us" so often. And while 
the sentiment expressed in both the text and comment 
in "Heavenly Manna" for February 16 seems to be 
your present experience, nevertheless I feel sure the 
Father's loving care is over you now; and though we 
trust it is not the due time for Zech. 13:7 to be fulfilled, 
yet, "Thy will be done." 

Be assured, dear brother, of our prayers in your 
behalf. In a way perhaps obscure to some not versed 
in the Truth, but quite clear to the latter, your trial 
seems similar to that of our Head. And the Father is 
"able to make all grace abound" toward his under- shepherd. 
See 91st Psalm. 

God bless you and keep you even unto the end of 
earth's stormy journey, and grant you and us all an 
abundant entrance into his heavenly Kingdom is the 

R3819 : page 226 

earnest prayer of your humble sister in the Beloved, 
MRS. G.B.,-New York. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We are in receipt of a copy of the Pittsburg Sun, 
giving an account of the divorce proceedings entered 
by Mrs. M. F. Russell, and we wish to assure you of 
our continued confidence and love. The charges, to our 
minds, were so ridiculous that they did not have much 
effect upon us, but no doubt some of the enemies of the 
Truth will be glad to have them to use against you and 
the Truth you so loyally uphold. 

We are aware, dear brother, that you have long 
been the target of Satan's fiery darts, and that he will 
resort to means, fair or foul, to injure your good name. 
How glad we are of the assurance that "no weapon 
formed against you shall prosper," and that "he that is 
for you is greater than all they that are against you." 
Whatever suffering you may endure as a consequence 
of this experience is shared by the fellow-members of 
the same Body: "If one member suffers all suffer," and 
we are glad it is so, for we all share with you the joys 
of the Truth and its service. 

Be assured, dear Brother, that we continually remember 
you at the throne of heavenly grace, and not 
you only, but all the members of the one Body, for we 
consider this a test for the whole Church in the flesh. 
May the all-conquering power of the Lord rest upon 
you, giving you grace and strength to sustain you in 
this hour of special trial, and may you learn the lessons 
he wishes you to learn in connection with the matter. 

Assuring you again of our continued confidence 
and love, we remain, 

Yours in the path of loyalty and hope of royalty, 



E. R., A. M. AND FAMILIES,-Texas. 



RESOLUTIONS OF THE ALLEGHENY CONGREGATION 
AND OTHERS 

At the close of the regular meeting of the Bible House 
Congregation, held in Carnegie Music Hall, Allegheny, 
on Sunday, May 6, 1906, the Boards of Elders and 
Deacons proceeded to the platform and requested of 
Pastor Russell the privilege of addressing the congregation 
and conducting the closing part of the service. 
They were accompanied by representatives of fourteen 
different congregations from far and near throughout 
the country, all of whom had come specially for the purpose 
of participating in the proceedings which were to 
follow. Brother Russell was wholly taken by surprise, 
but yielded to the request, backed, as it was, by the 
presence of forty-five representative brethren. 

The Boards of Elders and Deacons then presented 
to the congregation a set of resolutions which they had 
previously unanimously adopted and signed, and asked 
the friends present to express their sentiments on the 
subject, either endorsing or disapproving the action of 
the Boards. 

The entire congregation of 400 arose in unanimous 
acceptance and unqualified approval of the resolutions. 
Following this, the visiting representatives were introduced, 
and briefly stated, on behalf of their home congregations, 
that similar resolutions had been adopted, 
unanimously endorsing and loyally supporting Pastor 
Russell. These brethren represented the churches of 
New York, N.Y.; Dallas, Tex.; Washington, D.C.; Columbus, 
O.; Indianapolis, Ind.; Toledo, O.; Wheeling, W.Va.; 

R3819 : page 227 

Washington, Pa.; Butler, Pa.; New Brighton, Pa.; and 

other places. Telegrams and letters were read from Philadelphia, 

Chicago, St. Louis, Louisville, Ky.; Cumberland, 

Md.; St. Paul, Cincinnati, Minneapolis, Ft. Wayne, Ind.; 

Scranton, Pa.; Canton, O.; Youngstown, O.; Dayton, O.; 

Milwaukee, Wis.; Altoona, Pa.; Brantford, Canada; Hamilton, 

Canada; Johnstown, Pa.; New Albany, Ind.; Pottsville, 

Pa., and other places, endorsing the Allegheny resolutions 

and advising that similar resolutions had been 

adopted in those places. The text of the resolutions 

adopted by the Allegheny Church follows: 

The Boards of Elders and Deacons of the Bible House 
congregation desire to place on record the sentiments 
they entertain in regard to the reflections upon the character 
and reputation of their beloved pastor, Charles T. 
Russell, which have within the past two weeks appeared 
before the public through the trial of the suit brought 
against him for divorce. 



LONG BEFORE THE PUBLIC 

Brother Russell has been before the public as a 
preacher and teacher for the past 38 years, and as such 
has been subject to public criticism continually, without 
the slightest word being uttered respecting his character 
up to the present time. We have been ministered to by 
him, some of us for 20 years, and others for less periods, 
down to the last year, and have had many opportunities, 
both through our personal contact with him and through 
the study of the literature of which he is the author, 
under God, as we believe, to form an estimate of his 
character and to determine with far more accuracy than 
the general public, which receives its information through 
imperfect newspaper reports and biased court testimony, 
how much truth lies in the accusations which were recently 
given publicity. We recognize that very unkind 
and evil coloring has been given to some of our pastor's 
private affairs which has no foundation in the facts as 
we know them, from the intimate acquaintance with him 
and his affairs which we possess. 

Upon consideration of all the circumstances herein 
recited we hereby unite in a public declaration of our 
continued confidence in and esteem for our beloved pastor 
and brother, Charles T. Russell, recognizing him as the 
servant of the Lord, whose providence has placed him in 
the position he has occupied for so many years, and still 
occupies, for the dissemination of His Truth and the 
help of His people in the clearer understanding of His 
holy Word. We highly appreciate the lofty sentiments 
which withheld our pastor from going into details in 
public explanation of matters which were dilated upon 
in the recent action, which would have vindicated his 
course had he chosen to return railing for railing and evil 
for evil against those who opposed him. At the same 
time we recognized with great pleasure the justice displayed 
by the presiding Judge in the charge delivered to 
the jury, which, if heeded, would have had the effect of 
producing a verdict exactly the reverse of that which 
was rendered, and which would have cleared our pastor 
of all the aspersions brought against him. 

WORDS OF ENCOURAGEMENT 

While knowing the steadfastness and continued faithfulness 
of our beloved pastor, we desire to encourage him 
by reminding him again of the grace of our Lord sufficient 
to sustain and refresh him in the entire matter, 
and to bring the chastening and refining effects out of 
the ordeal which undoubtedly Divine Providence intended 
when permitting that he should be subjected to 
the experience. We remember the assurance of the 
Scriptures that "these light afflictions which endure but 
for a moment work out a far more exceeding and an 
eternal weight of glory, while we look not at the things 



that are seen, but at the things that are not seen, for the 
things that are seen are temporal, but the things that are 
not seen are eternal." While for the flesh it is extremely 
difficult to fulfil the Apostle James' injunction, "Count 
it all joy when ye fall into divers trials, knowing that the 
trial of your faith worketh patience," we are assured that 
the Lord will provide grace to carry out that ideal sentiment 
and to display it more and more fully according as 
the need arises. 

We remind our beloved brother further that, as the 
Apostle Peter suggests, "Christ hath left us an example 
that we should follow in His steps," and that the way 
which He has marked out for us is one of humiliation, 
suffering, trial, until the Pilgrimage of this life is finished 
and we are permitted to enter into the "rest that remaineth 
for the people of God." Of our Lord it was said, "It 
pleased the Lord to bruise Him; He hath put Him to 
shame;" and the Master Himself declared, "It is enough 
for the disciple that he be as His Master, and the servant 
as His Lord; if they have called the Master of the house 
Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of His 
household?" 

HIS LOYALTY TO THE TRUTH 

The loyalty of our pastor to the truth, and faithfulness 
in the interpretation of the Scriptures, have drawn 
out our love to him and stimulated in us more and more 
the love of the Lord, the love of righteousness, and the 
love for all who are in harmony with those principles. 
We rejoice together in holding up the hands of him who 
has thus brought to us spiritual refreshment, and in encouraging 
him to press on in the fulfilment of the work 
which the Lord has committed to his hand, that he be 
not moved by the various afflictions and fiery darts of the 
Adversary which may be directed against him, but that 

R3820 : page 227 

having complete confidence in the Lord's ability to perfect 
the interests of His own cause and His own people 
he may abide faithful to the Lord in all things to the end. 
Dated this 5th day of May, A.D. 1906. 

JOSEPH VERO. WM. BROSE. 

E. F. ABBOTT. OTTO MENG. 

R. H. BRICKER. CHARLES SPRINGER. 

GEO. C. GARMAN. A. E. BURGESS. 

BENJ. ROGERS. J. L. KTRKLAND. 

J. D. WRIGHT. F. L. SCHEERER. 

W. E. VAN AMBURGH. J. HUTCHINSON. 
A. E. WILLIAMSON. R. H. HIRSH. 

F. W. WILLIAMSON. J. H. GIESEY. 
J. A. BOHNET. WM. MOORE. 
EDWARD MAURER. J. H. BLACKMORE. 



The two elders whose names do not appear are those 
of Bro. M. L. Herr, absent on Pilgrim trip, and Bro. Wm. 
M. Wright, absent "with the Lord." 



R3820 : page 228 

"HARVEST GATHERINGS AND SIFTINGS." 

SOME of the friends urge a reproduction of the 
following article, previously published in 1894, 
entitled, "HARVEST SIFTINGS": 

PERILS AMONG FALSE BRETHREN--2 COR. 11:26 

Our Christian experiences differ; no two have exactly 
the same, because our temperaments and talents differ 
as well as our surroundings. But we may rely upon it 
that no real son of God is exempted from the needed 
trials of patience, faith and love. No matter how strong 
the character, or how seemingly impregnable to the ordinary 
besetments, we may rely upon it that such have 
as great trials and crosses as others— perhaps greater; 
perhaps such as would prostrate weaker ones, whom the 
Lord will therefore in love and mercy not suffer to be 
tempted above that they are able to bear.— I Cor. 10:13. 

Even our blessed Lord Jesus, though perfect, had to 
pass through an experience to test and prove his complete 
submission to the Father's will. Looking at our 
Lord's testing, we cannot doubt that his strong character 
was measurably unmoved by the sarcastic, bitter words 
and threats of the Scribes and Pharisees, and that likewise 
he speedily and firmly settled Satan's temptations 
negatively. None of these things, which would have 
been the greatest temptations to others, seemed to move 
or even to greatly annoy him. He answered coolly and 
often ironically the attacks of open enemies, and was 
comparatively unmoved by them; but it was when those 
who dipped in the dish with him lifted up the heel against 
him (Psa. 41:9; Matt. 26:23) and left him, that his heart 
was troubled;— wounded by professed friends. The only 
discouraged expression recorded, relative to his work, 
was toward the close of his ministry when the test became 
more and more severe, and "many went back and 
walked no more in his company," saying of his doctrines, 
"This is a hard saying; who can hear it?" His unreproachful 
but sorrowful words, then expressed to the 
twelve specially staunch disciples, were full of pathos and 
disappointed grief: "Will ye also go away?" The 
prompt response of Peter— "Lord, to whom shall we go? 
Thou hast the words of lasting life,"— must certainly 
have come as a comforting balm to that noble, loving 
heart, whose only impulse was to do good and to bless 
others. 

And yet as he approached the close of his ministry, 



the time came that he must still further suffer wounds 

from those he most loved. No wonder that, catching a 

clear view of how his sacrifice was to be completed, how 

all his bosom disciples would forsake and disown him, 

and how one of them would betray him with a kiss, he 

was sorrowful, troubled in spirit, and testified, "Verily, 

verily, I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me." 

And though Peter courageously said, "Though I should 

die with thee, yet will I not deny thee"— and so said they 

all— Jesus saw that all would be scattered, forsaking him 

in his most trying hour, and that courageous Peter would 

be so terribly sifted of Satan and prove so weak that he 

would even swear that he had never known him. Truly 

these trials from "brethren," some of whom were only 

weak, and one false at heart, must have been among 

the sorest of our Lord's experiences, during his period 

of trial. Yet none of these things moved him or for a 

moment influenced him to choose another course. He 

cheerfully followed the narrow path and left it for God, 

in his own time, to bring forth his righteousness as the 

light of noonday. (Psa. 37:6.) He was obedient to God 

and faithful to the truth, and it was thus that he suffered, 

not only at the hands of evil men, but also from the misunderstandings 

of his closest friends, who did not clearly 

grasp the situation, nor see how needful it was that he 

should first be Redeemer before he could become Restorer 

and King. 

The same lesson of perils among false brethren, and 
among brethren who had not so fully as himself grasped 
the truth, was also the Apostle Paul's experience. 

We never hear from him a complaint about the way 
the world rejected his message, spoke evil of him and 
maltreated him as the leading exponent of the unpopular 
doctrine of the cross of Christ, which was opposed both 
by the stumbling, blinded Jews and by the worldly-wise 
believers in the philosophies of the Gentiles. Indeed, 
instead of being downcast or discouraged at his past experiences, 
or in the prospect of bonds and imprisonments 
awaiting him in the future, he boldly and cheerfully 
declared, "But none of these things move me, neither 
count I my life dear unto myself."— Acts 20: 19-24. 

But, like the Lord Jesus, Paul had his severest trials 
from "false brethren;" who, instead of being faithful 
yoke-fellows and co-workers, as good soldiers of the 
cross, became puffed up, heady, and anxious to be leaders. 
These, being unwilling or unable to see the truth as 
fully and clearly as did Paul, because of their wrong 
condition of heart, and being envious of his success and 
the results of his zeal and labor, followed after him in the 
various cities where he had labored, and by misrepresentation 
of his character as well as of his teachings, sought 
to lower him in the esteem of the household of faith, and 
thus to open the way for various sophistical theories 
which would reflect honor upon them as teachers of what 
they claimed were advanced truths, though actually subverting 
the real truth in the minds of many. 



The only annoyance ever manifested by the Apostle 
Paul, in any of his letters, was upon this subject of his 
misrepresentation by false brethren. Referring to these 
false apostles by name, that they might be known and 
recognized as such (See I Tim. 1:19,20; 2 Tim. 4:10,14-17; 
2 Cor. 1 1:2-23), he clearly exposed their unholy 
motives of pride, ambition and envy, which scrupled not 
to make havoc of the Church and of the truth. Especially 
did he point out that, in their attempt to be leaders, 
they had manufactured a different gospel, built upon a 
different foundation than the only true foundation— the 
death of Christ as man's ransom-price. 

Paul was zealous for the truth's sake, lest these false 
apostles should use smooth words and misrepresentations 
of his character and of the truth as a lever to turn men 
aside from the true gospel. 

He warns them against those teachers, not to keep 
himself uppermost in their hearts, but to put them on 
their guard, lest receiving the new teachers, they should 
be injured by the false teachings they presented, and lest 
in rejecting him and losing confidence in him as an honest 
and true man and teacher they should discard his teachings, 
which were the truth. Hence his reference to himself 
was not in self-defence and self-laudation, but in defence 
of the truth, and an endeavor to have them see that 
his character and career as a true teacher comported 
well with the true message he bore to them. 

And he fearlessly pointed out that men might claim 
to present the same Jesus, the same spirit and the same 

R3820 : page 229 

gospel, and yet be false teachers and deceitful workers, 
transforming themselves into apostles of Christ. And, 
he says, marvel not at such a thing as that men should 
be great workers in the name of Christ from ambitious 
motives: "No marvel, for Satan himself fashioneth 
himself into an angel of light. It is no great thing, therefore, 
if his ministers also transform themselves as ministers 
of righteousness." 

Paul's letter to the Galatians was written evidently to 
counteract the misrepresentations of false brethren. (Gal. 1:6; 
3:1.) To re-establish confidence in the gospel message 
he had delivered, it was needful that he should rehearse 
to them something of his history. In doing so it 
was necessary to refer again to the false brethren (Gal. 2:4), 
who claimed to be of the same body and who yet, 
in opposition to the truth, brought again upon God's 
children the bondage of errors already escaped from. 

HARVEST GATHERING AND SIFTINGS 

R3821 : page 229 

A SKETCH OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF PRESENT TRUTH 



Many are the inquiries relative to the truths presented 
in MILLENNIAL DAWN and ZION'S WATCH TOWER, as to 
whence they came and how they developed to their present 
symmetrical and beautiful proportions— Were they 
the results of visions? Did God in any supernatural way 
grant the solution of these hitherto mysteries of his plan? 
Are the writers more than ordinary beings? Do they 
claim any supernatural wisdom or power? or how comes 
this revelation of God's truth? 

No, dear friends, I claim nothing of superiority, nor 
supernatural power, dignity or authority; nor do I aspire 
to exalt myself in the estimation of my brethren 
of the household of faith, except in the sense that the 
Master urged it, saying, "Let him who would be great 
among you be your servant." (Matt. 20:27.) And my 
position among men of the world and of the nominal 
church is certainly far from exalted, being "everywhere 
spoken against." I am fully contented, however, to 
wait for exaltation until the Lord's due time. (I Pet. 5:6.) 
In the Apostle's words I therefore answer, "Why look 
ye upon us, as though by our own power we had done 
these things? We also are men of like passions with 
yourselves"— of like infirmities and frailties, earnestly 
striving, by overcoming many besetments, discouragements, 
etc., to press along the line toward the mark of 
the prize of our high calling, and claiming only, as a 
faithful student of the Word of God, to be an index 
finger, as I have previously expressed it, to help you to 
trace for yourselves, on the sacred page, the wonderful 
plan of God— no less wonderful to me, I assure you, than 
to you, dearly beloved sharers of my faith and joy. 

No, the truths I present, as God's mouthpiece, were 
not revealed in visions or dreams, nor by God's audible 
voice, nor all at once, but gradually, especially since 1870, 
and particularly since 1880. Neither is this clear unfolding 
of truth due to any human ingenuity or 
acuteness of perception, but to the simple fact that God's 
due time has come; and if I did not speak, and no other 
agent could be found, the very stones would cry out. 

The following history is given not merely because I 
have been urged to give a review of God's leadings in 
the path of light, but specially because I believe it to be 
needful that the truth be modestly told, that misapprehensions 
and prejudicial misstatements may be disarmed, 
and that our readers may see how hitherto the 
Lord has helped and guided. In so far as the names and 
views of others, who have parted our company, may be 
associated with this history, I shall endeavor to bring forward 
only such points as are necessary to an understanding 
of our position and of the Lord's leadings. Nor can 
I name all the little points of divine favor in which faith 
was tested, prayers were answered, etc., remembering 
that our Master and the early Church left no such example 
of boasting faith, but rather admonished otherwise, 
saying, "Hast thou faith? have it to thyself." Some of 
the most precious experiences of faith and prayer are 



those which are too sacred for public display. 
LIGHT OUT OF DARKNESS 

I will not go back to tell how the light began to 
break through the clouds of prejudice and superstition 
which enveloped the world under Papacy's rule in the 
dark ages. The Reformation movement, or rather movements, 
from then until now, have each done their share 
in bringing light out of darkness. Let me here confine 
myself to the consideration of the harvest truths set 
forth in MILLENNIAL DAWN and ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

Let me begin the narrative at the year 1868, when the 
Editor, having been a consecrated child of God for some 
years, and a member of the Congregational Church and 
of the Y.M.C.A., began to be shaken in faith regarding 
many long-accepted doctrines. Brought up a Presbyterian, 
and indoctrinated from the Catechism, and being 
naturally of an inquiring mind, I fell a ready prey to the 
logic of infidelity as soon as I began to think for myself. 
But that which at first threatened to be the utter shipwreck 
of faith in God and the Bible, was, under God's 
providence, overruled for good, and merely wrecked my 
confidence in human creeds and systems of misinterpretation 
of the Bible. 

Gradually I was led to see that though each of the 
creeds contained some elements of truth, they were, 
on the whole, misleading and contradictory of God's 
Word. Among other theories, I stumbled upon Adventism. 
Seemingly by accident, one evening I dropped into 
a dusty, dingy hall, where I had heard religious services 
were held, to see if the handful who met there had anything 
more sensible to offer than the creeds of the great 
churches. There, for the first time, I heard something of 
the views of Second Adventists, the preacher being Mr. 
Jonas Wendell, long since deceased. Thus, I confess indebtedness 
to Adventists as well as to other denominations. 
Though his Scripture exposition was not entirely 
clear, and though it was very far from what we now rejoice 
in, it was sufficient, under God, to re-establish my 
wavering faith in the divine inspiration of the Bible, and 
to show that the records of the apostles and prophets are 
indissolubly linked. What I heard sent me to my Bible 
to study with more zeal and care than ever before, and I 
shall ever thank the Lord for that leading; for though 
Adventism helped me to no single truth, it did help me 
greatly in the unlearning of errors, and thus prepared me 
for the Truth. 

I soon began to see that we were living somewhere 
near the close of the Gospel age, and near the time when 
the Lord had declared that the wise, watching ones of his 
children should come to a clear knowledge of his plan. 
At this time, myself and a few other truth-seekers in 
Pittsburgh and Allegheny formed a class for Bible study, 
and from 1870 to 1875 was a time of constant growth in 



R3821 : page 230 

grace and knowledge and love of God and his Word. 
We came to see something of the love of God, how it 
had made provision for all mankind, how all must be 
awakened from the tomb in order that God's loving plan 
might be testified to them, and how all who exercise 
faith in Christ's redemptive work and render obedience 
in harmony with the knowledge of God's will they will 
then receive, shall then (through Christ's merit) be 
brought back into full harmony with God, and be granted 
everlasting life. This we saw to be the Restitution work 
foretold in Acts 3:21. But though seeing that the 
Church was called to joint-heirship with the Lord in the 
Millennial Kingdom, up to that time we had failed to see 
clearly the great distinction between the reward of the 
Church now on trial and the reward of the faithful of the 
world after its trial, at the close of the Millennial age- 
that the reward of the former is to be the glory of the 
spiritual, divine nature, while that of the latter is to be 
the glory of restitution— restoration to the perfection of 
human nature once enjoyed in Eden by their progenitor 
and head, Adam. 

However, we were then merely getting the general 
outline of God's plan, and unlearning many long-cherished 
errors, the time for a clear discernment of the 
minutiae having not yet fully come. And here I should 
and do gratefully mention assistance rendered by Brothers 
Geo. Stetson and Geo. Storrs, the latter the editor 
of The Bible Examiner, both now deceased. The study 
of the Word of God with these dear brethren led, step by 
step, into greener pastures and brighter hopes for the 
world, though it was not until 1872, when I gained a 
clear view of our Lord's work as our ransom price, that 
I found the strength and foundation of all hope of restitution 
to lie in that doctrine. Up to that time, when I 
read the testimony that all in their graves should come 
forth, etc., I yet doubted the full provision— whether it 
should be understood to include idiots or infants who had 
died without reaching any degree of understanding, beings 
to whom the present life and its experiences would 
seem to be of little or no advantage. But when, in 1872, 
I came to examine the subject of restitution from the 
standpoint of the ransom price given by our Lord Jesus 
for Adam, and consequently for all lost in Adam, it settled 
the matter of restitution completely, and gave me 
the fullest assurance that ALL must come forth from their 
graves and be brought to a clear knowledge of the truth 
and to a full opportunity to gain everlasting life in 
Christ. 

Thus passed the years 1869-1872. The years following, 
to 1876, were years of continued growth in grace 
and knowledge on the part of the handful of Bible students 
with whom I met in Allegheny. We progressed 
from our first crude and indefinite ideas of restitution to 
clearer understanding of the details; but God's due time 



for the clear light had not yet come. 

During this time, too, we came to recognize the 
difference between our Lord as "the man who gave himself," 
and as the Lord who would come again, a spirit 
being. We saw that spirit-beings can be present, and 
yet invisible to men, just as we still hold and have set 
forth in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., Chap. 5. And we 
felt greatly grieved at the error of Second Adventists, 
who were expecting Christ in the flesh, and teaching that 
the world and all in it except Second Adventists would 
be burned up in 1873 or 1874, whose time-settings and 
disappointments and crude ideas generally as to the object 
and manner of his coming brought more or less reproach 
upon us and upon all who longed for and proclaimed his 
coming Kingdom. 

R3822 : page 230 

These wrong views so generally held of both the 
object and manner of the Lord's return led me to write a 
pamphlet— "The Object and Manner of The Lord's Return," 
of which some 50,000 copies were published. 

It was about January, 1876, that my attention was 
specially drawn to the subject of prophetic time, as it 
relates to these doctrines and hopes. It came about in 
this way: I received a paper called The Herald of the 
Morning, sent by its editor, Mr. N. H. Barbour. When 
I opened it I at once identified it with Adventism from 
the picture on its cover, and examined it with some curiosity 
to see what time they would next set for the burning 
of the world. But judge of my surprise and gratification, 
when I learned from its contents that the Editor 
was beginning to get his eyes open on the subjects that 
for some years had so greatly rejoiced our hearts here in 
Allegheny— that the object of our Lord's return is not to 
destroy, but to bless all the families of the earth, and that 
his coming would be thief-like, and not in flesh, but as a 
spirit-being, invisible to men; and that the gathering of 
his Church and the separation of the "wheat" from the 
"tares" would progress in the end of this age without 
the world's being aware of it. 

I rejoiced to find others coming to the same advanced 
position, but was astonished to find the statement 
very cautiously set forth, that the editor believed the 
prophecies to indicate that the Lord was already present 
in the world (unseen and invisible), and that the harvest 
work of gathering the wheat was already due,— and that 
this view was warranted by the time-prophecies which 
but a few months before he supposed had failed. 

Here was a new thought: Could it be that the time 
prophecies which I had so long despised, because of their 
misuse by Adventists, were really meant to indicate when 
the Lord would be invisibly present to set up his Kingdom 
—a thing which I clearly saw could be known in no 
other way? It seemed, to say the least, a reasonable, 
a very reasonable thing, to expect that the Lord would 



inform his people on the subject— especially as he had 
promised that the faithful should not be left in darkness 
with the world, and that though the day of the Lord 
would come upon all others as a thief in the night 
(stealthily, unawares), it should not be so to the watching, 
earnest saints.— I Thes. 5:4. 

I recalled certain arguments used by my friend Jonas 
Wendell and other Adventists to prove that 1873 would 
witness the burning of the world, etc.— the chronology 
of the world showing that the six thousand years from 
Adam ended with the beginning of 1873— and other 
arguments drawn from the Scriptures and supposed to 
coincide. Could it be that these time arguments, which 
I had passed by as unworthy of attention, really contained 
an important truth which they had misapplied? 

Anxious to learn, from any quarter, whatever God 
had to teach, I at once wrote to Mr. Barbour, informing 
him of my harmony on other points and desiring to 
know particularly why, and upon what Scriptural evidences, 
he held that Christ's presence and the harvesting 
of the Gospel age dated from the Autumn of 1874. The 
answer showed that my surmise had been correct, viz.: 
that the time arguments, chronology, etc., were the same 
as used by Second Adventists in 1873, and explained 
how Mr. Barbour and Mr. J. H. Paton, of Michigan, a 

R3822: page 231 

co-worker with him, had been regular Second Adventists 
up to that time; and that when the date 1874 had passed 
without the world being burned, and without their seeing 
Christ in the flesh, they were for a time dumb-founded. 
They had examined the time-prophecies that had seemingly 
passed unfulfilled, and had been unable to find any 
flaw, and had begun to wonder whether the time was 
right and their expectations wrong,— whether the views 
of restitution and blessing to the world, which myself and 
others were teaching, might not be the things to look for. 
It seems that not long after their 1 874 disappointment, a 
reader of the Herald of the Morning, who had a copy of 
the Diaglott, noticed something in it which he thought 
peculiar,— that in Matt. 24:27,37,39, the word which in 
our common version is rendered coming is translated 
presence. This was the clue; and, following it, they had 
been led through prophetic time toward proper views 
regarding the object and manner of the Lord's return. 
I, on the contrary, was led first to proper views of the 
object and manner of our Lord's return and then to the 
examination of the time for these things, indicated in 
God's Word. Thus God leads his children often from 
different starting points of truth; but where the heart is 
earnest and trustful, the result must be to draw all such 
together. 

But there were no books or other publications setting 
forth the time-prophecies as then understood, so I paid 
Mr. Barbour's expenses to come to see me at Philadelphia 



(where I had business engagements during the summer 
of 1876), to show me fully and Scripturally, if he 
could, that the prophecies indicated 1874 as the date at 
which the Lord's presence and "the harvest" began. 
He came, and the evidences satisfied me. Being a person 
of positive convictions and fully consecrated to the Lord, 
I at once saw that the special times in which we live have 
an important bearing upon our duty and work as Christ's 
disciples; that, being in the time of harvest, the harvest-work 
should be done; and that Present Truth was the 
sickle by which the Lord would have us do a gathering 
and reaping work everywhere among his children. 

I inquired of Mr. Barbour as to what was being done 
by him and by the Herald. He replied that nothing 
was being done; that the readers of the Herald, being 
disappointed Adventists, had nearly all lost interest and 
stopped their subscriptions;— and that thus, with money 
exhausted, the Herald might be said to be practically 
suspended. I told him that instead of feeling discouraged 
and giving up the work since his newly found light 
on restitution (for when we first met, he had much to 
learn from me on the fulness of restitution based upon 
the sufficiency of the ransom given for all, as I had much 
to learn from him concerning time), he should rather feel 
that now he had some good tidings to preach, such as he 
never had before, and that his zeal should be correspondingly 
increased. At the same time, the knowledge 
of the fact that we were already in the harvest period 
gave to me an impetus to spread the Truth such as I 
never had before. I therefore at once resolved upon a 
vigorous campaign for the Truth. 

I determined to curtail my business cares and give 
my time as well as means to the great harvest work. 
Accordingly, I sent Mr. Barbour back to his home, with 
money and instructions to prepare in concise book-form 
the good tidings so far as then understood, including the 
time features, while I closed out my Philadelphia business 
preparatory to engaging in the work, as I afterward did, 
traveling and preaching. 

The little book of 196 pages thus prepared was entitled 
The Three Worlds; and as I was enabled to give 
some time and thought to its preparation it was issued 
by us both jointly, both names appearing on its title 
page— though it was mainly written by Mr. Barbour. 
While it was not the first book to teach a measure of 
restitution, nor the first to treat upon time-prophecy, 
it was, we believe, the first to combine the idea of restitution 
with time-prophecy. From the sale of this book 
and from my purse, our traveling expenses, etc., were 
met. After a time I conceived the idea of adding another 
harvest laborer and sent for Mr. Paton, who 
promptly responded and whose traveling expenses were 
met in the same manner. 

But noticing how quickly people seemed to forget 
what they had heard, it soon became evident that while 
the meetings were useful in awakening interest, a monthly 



journal was needed to hold that interest and develop it. 
It therefore seemed to be the Lord's will that one of our 
number should settle somewhere and begin again the 
regular issuing of the Herald of the Morning. I suggested 
that Mr. Barbour do this, as he had experience as 
a type-setter and could therefore do it most economically, 
while Mr. Paton and I would continue to travel and 
contribute to its columns as we should find opportunity. 
To the objection that the type was not sold, and that 
the few subscriptions which would come in would not, 
for a long time, make the journal self-sustaining, I replied 
that I would supply the money for purchasing type, etc., 
and leave a few hundred dollars in bank subject to Mr. 
Barbour's check, and that he should manage it as economically 
as possible, while Mr. Paton and I continued to 
travel. This, which seemed to be the Lord's will in the 
matter, was done. 

It was after this, while on a tour of the New England 
States, that I met Mr. A. P. Adams, then a young 
Methodist minister, who became deeply interested and 
accepted the message heartily during the week that I 
preached to his congregation. Subsequently, I introduced 
him to little gatherings of interested ones in neighboring 
towns, and assisted otherwise, as I could, rejoicing 
in another one who, with study, would soon be a co-laborer 
in the harvest field. About this time, too, I was 
much encouraged by the accession of Mr. A. D. Jones, 
then a clerk in my employ in Pittsburgh— a young man 
of activity and promise, who soon developed into an 
active and appreciated co-laborer in the harvest work, 
and is remembered by some of our readers. Mr. Jones 
ran well for a time, but ambition or something eventually 
worked utter shipwreck of his faith, and left us a painful 
illustration of the wisdom of the Apostle's words: "My 
brethren, be not many of you teachers, knowing that we 
shall have the severer judgment."— James 3:1— Diaglott. 

SIFTING AS WHEAT 

"Satan hath desired to have you, that he might sift 
you as wheat."— Luke 22:31. 

Thus far all had run smoothly and onward: we had 
been greatly blessed with Truth, but not specially tested 
in our love and fidelity to it. But with the Spring of 
1878, the parallel in time to the Lord's crucifixion and 
his utterance of the above-quoted words, the sifting began 
which has continued ever since, and which must, 

R3823 : page 232 

sooner or later, test every one who receives the light of 
Present Truth. "Marvel not, therefore, concerning the 
fiery trial which shall try you, as though some strange 
thing happened unto you;" for this "fire shall try every 
man's work, of what sort it is"— whether he has built his 
faith flimsily of wood, hay and stubble, instead of with 



the valuable stones of God's revealed truth, or whether 
he has built it upon the shifting sands of human theory- 
evolution, etc.,— or upon the solid rock, the ransom, the 
only sure foundation, which God has provided. They 
who build upon that rock shall be safe personally, even 
though they may have built up an illogical faith which 
the "fire" and shaking of this day of trial shall overthrow 
and utterly consume; but they who build upon 
any other foundation, whether they use good or bad materials, 
are sure of complete wreck.— Luke 6:47-49; 
ICor. 3:11-15. 

The object of this trial and sifting evidently is to select 
all whose heart-desires are unselfish, who are fully 
and unreservedly consecrated to the Lord, who are so 
anxious to have the Lord's will done, and whose confidence 
in his wisdom, his way and his Word is so great, 
that they refuse to be led away from the Lord's Word, 
either by the sophistries of others, or by plans and ideas 
of their own. These, in the sifting time, will be strengthened 
and shall increase their joy in the Lord and their 
knowledge of his plans, even while their faith is being 
tested by the falling into error of thousands on every 
hand. -Psa. 91:7. 

The sifting began thus: Regarding Paul's statement 
(ICor. 15:51,52), "We shall not all sleep, but we 
shall all be changed— in a moment, in the twinkling of 
an eye," etc., we still held the idea which Adventists, and 
indeed all Christians hold, that at some time the living 
saints would be suddenly and miraculously caught away 
bodily, thenceforth to be forever with the Lord. And, 
now, our acquaintance with time-prophecy led us to expect 
this translation of the saints at the point of time in 
this age parallel to the Lord's resurrection; for many 
of the parallelisms between the Jewish and Christian dispensations 
were already seen by us, and formed one of 
the features of the little book above referred to— The 
Three Worlds. 

We did not then see, as we now do,* that that date 
(1878) marked the time for the beginning of the establishment 
of the Kingdom of God, by the glorification of 
all who already slept in Christ, and that the "change" 
which Paul mentions (I Cor. 15:51) is to occur in the 
moment of dying, to all the class described, from that 
date onward through the harvest period, until all the living 
members ("the feet") of the body of Christ shall 
have been changed to glorious spirit beings. But when 
at that date nothing occurred which we could see, a re-examination 
of the matter showed me that our mistake 
lay in expecting to see all the living saints changed at 
once, and without dying— an erroneous view shared in 
by the whole nominal church, and one which we had not 
yet observed or discarded. Our present clear view was 
the result of the examination thus started. I soon saw 
that in the Apostle's words, "We shall not all sleep," the 
word sleep was not synonymous with die, though generally 
so understood; that, on the contrary, the expression 



sleep, here used, represents unconsciousness; and that the 
Apostle wished us to understand that from a certain time 
in the Lord's presence, his saints, though they would all 
die like other men (Psa. 82:6,7), would not remain for 
any time unconscious, but in the moment of dying would 
be changed and would receive the spirit body promised. 
Throughout this Gospel age, dying has been followed by 
unconsciousness, "sleep." This continued true of all 
saints who "fell asleep in Jesus" up to the time when he 
took the office of King (Rev. 11:17), which we have 
shown + was in 1878. 

Not only did the King at that date "awaken in his 
likeness" all the members of his body, the Church, who 
slept, but for the same reason (the time for establishing 
his Kingdom having come) it is no longer necessary that 
the "feet" or last remaining members should go into 
"sleep" or unconsciousness. On the contrary, each 
now, as he finishes his course, faithful unto death, will at 
once receive the crown of life, and, being changed in a 
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, cannot be said to 
sleep, or to be unconscious at all. Here— 1878— Rev. 14:13 
is applicable, "Blessed are the dead who die in 
the Lord from henceforth." 

So this re-examination showed further light upon the 
pathway and became a good cause for encouragement, as 
evidencing the Lord's continued leading. 

But while I was thus helped to clearer views and 
brighter hopes, and while I diligently endeavored to help 
others, the Spring of 1878 proved far from a blessing to 
Mr. Barbour and to many under his influence. Rejecting 
the plain, simple solution presented above, Mr. B. seemed 
to feel that he must of necessity get up something new 
to divert attention from the failure of the living saints to 
be caught away en masse. 

But, alas! how dangerous it is for any man to feel too 
much responsibility and to attempt to force new light. 
To our painful surprise, Mr. Barbour soon after wrote an 
article for the Herald denying the doctrine of the atonement 
—denying that the death of Christ was the ransom-price 
of Adam and his race, saying that Christ's death 
was no more a settlement of the penalty of man's sins 
than would the sticking of a pin through the body of a 
fly and causing it suffering and death be considered 
by an earthly parent as a just settlement for misdemeanor 
in his child. 

I was astonished, supposing that Mr. B. had a clearer 
understanding of the work of Christ as our sin-offering, 
our willing Redeemer, who gladly, co-operating in the 
divine plan, gave himself as the ransom or corresponding 
price to meet the penalty upon Adam, that Adam and 
all his posterity might in due time go free from sin and 
death. A totally different thing indeed was the willing, 
intelligent, loving offering of our Redeemer, according 
to the plan devised and revealed by infinite wisdom, 
from the miserable caricature of it offered in the above 
illustration. I had either given Mr. B. credit for clearer 



views than he ever had, or else he was deliberately 
taking off and casting away the "wedding garment" 
of Christ's righteousness. The latter was the only conclusion 
left; for he afterward stated that he had previously 
recognized Christ's death as man's ransom-price. 

Immediately I wrote an article for the Herald in contradiction 
of the error, showing the necessity "that one 
die for all"— "the just for the unjust;" that Christ fulfilled 
all this as it had been written; and that consequently 
God could be just and forgive and release the sinner from 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. III., chap. 7. 
+MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., pp. 218, 219. 



R3823 : page 233 

the very penalty he had justly imposed. (Rom. 3:26.) 

I also wrote to Mr. Paton, calling his attention to the 

fundamental character of the doctrine assailed, and 

pointing out how the time and circumstances all corresponded 

with the parable of the one who took off the 

wedding garment when just about to partake of the wedding 

feast. (Matt. 22:1 1-14.) He replied that he had not 

seen the ransom feature in so strong a light before; that 

Mr. Barbour had a strong, dogmatic way of putting 

things which had for the time overbalanced him. I 

urged that, seeing now the importance of the doctrine, 

he also write an article for the Herald, which, in no uncertain 

tone, would give his witness also for the precious 

blood of Christ. This he did. These articles appeared 

in the issues of the Herald from July to December, 1878. 

It now became clear to me that the Lord would no 
longer have me assist financially, or to be in any way 
identified with, anything which cast any influence in opposition 
to the fundamental principle of our holy Christian 
religion; and I therefore, after a most careful though 
unavailing effort to reclaim the erring, withdrew entirely 
from the Herald of the Morning and from further fellowship 
with Mr. B. But a mere withdrawal I felt was not 
sufficient to show my continued loyalty to our Lord and 
Redeemer, whose cause had thus been violently assailed 
by one in position to lead the sheep astray— and in that 
position, too, very largely by my individual assistance 
and encouragement when I believed him to be, in all sincerity, 
true to the Lord. I therefore understood it to be 
the Lord's will that I should start another journal in 
which the standard of the cross should be lifted high, the 
doctrine of the ransom defended, and the good tidings of 
great joy proclaimed as extensively as possible. 

Acting upon this leading of the Lord, I gave up 
traveling, and in July, 1879, the first number of ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER and Herald of Christ's Presence made 



its appearance. From the first, it has been a special advocate 
of the "ransom for all," and by the grace of 
God we hope this it will ever be. 

For a time we had a most painful experience: the 
readers of the TOWER and of the Herald were the same; 
and from the time the former started and the supply of 
funds from this quarter for the Herald ceased, Mr. B. not 
only drew from the bank the money deposited by me and 
treated all he had in his possession as his own, but poured 
upon the Editor of the TOWER the vilest of personal 
abuse in order to prevent the TOWER and the doctrine of 

R3824 : page 233 

the ransom from having due influence upon the readers. 
This of course caused a division, as such things always 
do. The personal abuse, being regarded by some as 
true, had its intended effect of biasing the judgments of 
many on the subject of the ransom; and many turned 
from us. 

But the Lord continued his favor, which I esteem of 
more value than the favor of the whole world. It was at 
this time that Mr. Adams espoused the views of Mr. 
Barbour and likewise forsook the doctrine of the ransom. 
And, true to our interpretation of the parable of the wedding 
garment as given at the time, Mr. Barbour and Mr. 
Adams, having cast off the wedding garment of Christ's 
righteousness, went out of the light into the outer darkness 
of the world on the subjects once so clearly seen— 
namely, the time and manner of the Lord's presence; 
and since then they have been expecting Christ in the 
flesh every Spring or Fall and twisting the prophecies 
accordingly. 

During part of this ordeal, or we might truly call it 
battle, for the cross of Christ, we had the earnest co-operation 
of Mr. Paton, who, up to the Summer of 1881, 
was an appreciated co-laborer and defender of the doctrine 
of coming blessings through Christ, based upon the 
ransom for all given at Calvary. The book, The Three 
Worlds, having been for some time out of print, it seemed 
as if either another edition of that, or else a new book 
covering the same features, should be gotten out. Mr. 
Paton agreed to get it ready for the press, and Mr. Jones 
offered to pay all the expenses incident to its printing and 
binding and to give Mr. Paton as many copies of the 
book as he could sell, as remuneration for his time spent in 
preparing the matter, provided I would agree to advertise 
it liberally and gratuitously in the TOWER— well knowing 
that there would be a demand for it if I should recommend 
it, and that his outlay would be sure to return with 
profit. (For those books did not sell at such low prices as 
we charge for MILLENNIAL DAWN.) I not only agreed to 
this, but contributed to Mr. Paton's personal expenses in 
connection with the publishing, as well as paid part of 
the printer's bill at his solicitation. 

In the end, I alone was at any financial loss in connection 



with the book, called Day Dawn, the writer and 
publisher both being gainers financially, while I did all 
the introducing by repeated advertisements. We need 
to give these particulars, because of certain one-sided and 
only partial statements of facts and misrepresentations 
which have recently been published and circulated in 
tract form by Mr. Paton, who is also now an advocate of 
that "other gospel" of which the cross of Christ is not 
the center, and which denies that he "bought us with his 
own precious blood." Mr. P. has since published another 
book, which, though called by the same name as 
the one we introduced, being on another and a false 
foundation, I cannot and do not recommend, but which I 
esteem misleading sophistry, tending to undermine the 
whole structure of the Christian system, yet retaining a 
sufficiency of the truths which we once held in common to 
make it palatable and dangerous to all not rooted and 
grounded upon the ransom rock. 

The false foundation which it presents is the old 
heathen doctrine of evolution revamped, which not only 
denies the fall of man, but as a consequence, all necessity 
for a redeemer. It claims, on the contrary, that not by 
redemption and restitution to a lost estate, but by progressive 
evolution or development, man has risen and is 
still to rise from the lower condition in which he was created 
until, by his own good works, he ultimately reaches 
the divine nature. It claims that our blessed Lord was 
himself a degraded and imperfect man, whose work on 
earth was to crucify a carnal nature, which, it claims, he 
possessed, and to thus show all men how to crucify their 
carnal or sinful propensities. 

And here we remark that the darkness and degradation 
which came upon the whole world in its fallen, cast-off 
condition, and which was only intensified by Papacy's 
priestcraft during the dark ages, when contrasted with 
the light of intelligence, which God is now letting in upon 
the world, have gradually led men to esteem present intelligence 
as merely a part of a process of evolution. This 
view, as we have shown, * though quite incorrect, is nevertheless 
the occasion of the predicted great falling away 
from the faith of the Bible during the harvest period. 
(Psa. 91:7.) And few Christian people seem to be well 



♦MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., p. 261, Vol. VI., p. 604. 

R3824 : page 234 

enough grounded in the Truth to be able to withstand this 
trial of the evil day, in which many will fall while only 
the few will stand. For this cause we use great plainness 
of speech. 

The little history of the way in which Mr. Paton 
came to turn from us and from the ransom, to oppose 
that which he once clearly saw and advocated, is important, 



as it became the occasion of another sifting or testing 
of the WATCH TOWER readers, by that time a much 
larger number (because Mr. Paton had been a respected 
brother and co-worker with us, and because as a traveling 
representative of the TOWER and its doctrines, his expenses 
being met in part by TOWER subscriptions and 
renewals, as well as by money from me, he was personally 
known to a larger number of the readers than was the 
Editor of the TOWER). It came about thus:- 

In the year 1881, Mr. Barbour, still publishing the 
Herald, and still endeavoring to overthrow the doctrine 
of the Ransom, finding that on a preaching tour I had 
used a diagram of the Tabernacle to illustrate how 
Christ's sacrifice was typified in the sacrifices of typical 
Israel, wrote an article on the Atonement, in which he 
undertook to show that the sacrifices of the Day of 
Atonement typified almost anything else than what they 
do typify. I could readily see through the fallacy of his 
presentation, which made of the bullock a type of one 
thing in one verse and another thing in each other verse in 
which it was mentioned, and so too with the goat. But I 
well knew that people in general are not close reasoners, 
and that, with the cares of life upon them, they are too 
apt to accept a seeming interpretation, without a critical 
examination of the words of Scripture and their context. 

I thought the matter all over. I examined the chapter 
(Lev. 16), but while seeing the inconsistency and 
error of Mr. Barbour's interpretation, I could only confess 
that I did not understand it and could not give a 
connected interpretation which would fit all the details so 
plainly stated, and all of which must have a particular 
meaning. What could I do? Those reading the Herald 
as well as the TOWER would probably be misled, if 
not helped out of the difficulty; and to merely say that 
the Herald's interpretation was inconsistent with itself, 
and therefore a misinterpretation, would be misunderstood. 
Many would surely think that I opposed that 
view from a spirit of rivalry; for there are always people 
with whom everything resolves itself into personality, 
rivalry and party spirit, and such cannot understand 
others who take a higher and nobler view, and who 
think always and only of the Truth, regardless of 
persons. 

I went to the Lord with this as with every trial, told 
him just how it seemed to me, how anxious I felt for his 
dear "sheep," who, having their appetites sharpened by 
some truth, were by their very hunger exposed to Satan's 
deceptions. I told him that I realized that he was the 
Shepherd, and not I, but that I knew also that he would 
be pleased at my interest in the sheep and my desire to be 
his mouthpiece to declare the truth, the way and the life 
to them; that I felt deeply impressed that if the time had 
come for the permission of a false view to deceive the 
unworthy, it must also be his due time to have the 
truth on the same subject made clear, that the worthy 
ones might be enabled to stand, and not fall from the 



truth. Believing that the due time had come for the correct 

understanding of the meaning of the Jewish sacrifices, 

which in a general way all Christians concede were 

typical of "better sacrifices," and that the Lord would 

grant the insight as soon as I got into the attitude of 

heart best fitted to receive the light, I prayed with confidence 

that if the Lord's due time had come, and if he 

were willing to use me as his instrument to declare the 

message to his dear family, that I might be enabled to 

rid my heart and mind of any prejudice that might stand 

in the way and be led of his spirit into the proper 

understanding. 

Believing that the prayer would be answered affirmatively, 
I went into my study next morning prepared to 
study and write. The forenoon I spent in scrutinizing 
the text and every other Scripture likely to shed light 
upon it, especially the epistle to the Hebrews, and in 
looking to the Lord for wisdom and guidance; but no 
solution of the difficult passage came. The afternoon 
and evening were similarly spent, and all of the next day. 
Everything else was neglected, and I wondered why the 
Lord kept me so long; but on the third day near noon 
the whole matter came to me as clear as the noon-day 
sun— so clear and convincing and so harmonious with 
the whole tenor of Scripture, that I could not question 
its correctness; and no one has ever yet been able to 
find a flaw in it. (This has been published in several 
editions in pamphlet form under the title, TABERNACLE 
SHADOWS OF THE BETTER SACRIFICES, and can still 
be had by addressing the Watch Tower office— 10c.) 

Then I knew why the Lord had led me to it so slowly 
and cautiously. I needed a special preparation of heart 
for the full appreciation of all it contained, and I was all 
the more assured that it was not of my own wisdom; for 
if of my own why would it not have come at once? I 
found that the understanding of that subject was bound 
to have a wide influence upon all our hopes and views of 
all truths— not that it overturned old truths or contradicted 
them, but, on the contrary, that it set them all in 
order and harmony and straightened out little knots and 

R3825 : page 234 

twists. For instance, the doctrine of "justification by 
faith" had always been more or less confused in my mind, 
as it is in every mind, with the doctrine of "sanctification" 
which calls for self-sacrifice and works. This was 
all made clear and plain at once; for the types showed 
that we all, as sinners, needed first of all Christ's ransom 
sacrifice, that we appropriate its merits (justification- 
forgiveness) to ourselves by faith, and that thus we are 
justified (reckoned free from sin) when, turning from sin, 
we by faith accept of Christ's sacrifice on our behalf. 
The type showed, too, that it is only after being thus 
cleansed in God's sight (by our acceptance of Christ's 
finished work as our ransom-sacrifice) that God is willing 



to accept us as joint sacrificers with Christ, so that if 
faithful to the end, following in his footsteps, we should 
be granted the favor of joint-heirship with him. 

Here I first saw that the great privilege of becoming 
joint-heirs with Christ and partakers with him of the divine 
nature was confined exclusively to those who would 
share with him in self-sacrifice in the service of the Truth. 
And here, too, I saw for the first time that the Lord was 
the first of these sacrifices of the Sin-Offering; consequently, 
that none of God's servants, the prophets, who 
lived and died before Christ, were priests after his order, 
nor sharers in sacrifice with him, even though some of 
them were stoned, others sawn asunder and others slain 
with the sword, for the cause of God; that though they 

R3825 : page 235 

would get a good and great reward, they would belong 
to a separate class and order from those called to sacrifice 
and joint-heirship with Christ on and since Pentecost. 
Here, too, I first saw that "the acceptable day of the 
Lord" signifies this Gospel age— the time during which 
he will accept the sacrifice of any who come unto God 
through Christ, the great Sin-Offering: that when this 
acceptable day ends, the reward of joint-heirship and 
change to the divine nature ends; and that when this 
great day of sacrifice, the Gospel age (the real day of 
Atonement), has closed, when all the members of the 
body of Christ have participated with him in the sacrifice 
of their rights as justified men, and been glorified, 
then the blessing will begin to come to the world— the 
Millennial blessings purchased for men by their Redeemer, 
according to the grace of God. 

This first brought a clear recognition of the distinction 
of natures— of what constitutes human nature, 
what constitutes angelic nature and what constitutes divine 
nature, as shown in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., 
Chapter X. And whereas we formerly used the word 
RESTITUTION in a general way to mean some sort of 
blessed change, now, under the clearer light, we began to 
see that the great work of restitution could only mean 
what the word implies— a restoration of that which was 
lost (Matt. 18:11)— a restoration to the original condition 
from which man once fell. Then I saw that God's plan, 
when carried out, would not bring all his creatures to the 
one level of the divine nature, but that he purposed to 
have an order of creatures called Angels, who, though 
perfect, would always be of a different order, or nature, 
from the divine nature, and he likewise purposed to have 
a race of beings of the human nature, of whom Adam 
was a sample or pattern, and whose future earthly home, 
Paradise, Eden was a sample or pattern. I also saw that 
God purposed that Christ and his join t-sacrificers and 
joint-heirs are to be God's instruments for blessing the 
fallen race and restoring them to the condition of perfection 
enjoyed by Adam in Eden— a condition which God 



said was "very good," and an image of himself. And 

these joint-heirs with Christ, I saw, were to be highly exalted 

to a nature higher than restored and perfect manhood, 

higher, too, than the angelic nature— even to be 

partakers of the divine nature. When all these things 

so unexpectedly shone out so brightly and clearly, I did 

not wonder that the Lord gave me several days of waiting 

and preparation for the blessing, and to him I rendered 

praise and thanks. All my faintness of heart and 

fear of the bad effect of the wrong view fled before this 

evidence of the Lord's leading in the pathway that 

"shines more and more unto the perfect day." I saw at 

once that these new developments would probably prove 

a stumbling block to some, as well as a great blessing to 

others who were ready for them. Instead, therefore, of 

publishing it in the next TOWER, I determined to first present 

the matter privately to the more prominent brethren; 

—remembering Paul's course in a similar matter. 

-Gal. 2:2. 

Accordingly I sent invitations and the money necessary 
for traveling expenses to four of the more prominent 
brethren, requesting a conference. Mr. Paton from 
Michigan was one of the four, and the only one who rejected 
the fresh rays of light. Nor could he find any 
fault with the exegesis, though urged, as all were, to state 
anything which might seem inconsistent, or to quote any 
passages of Scripture thought to be in conflict. But there 
were none; and every question only demonstrated more 
fully the strength of the position. I therefore urged that 
what was beyond the criticism of those most familiar 
with the plan of God must be the truth, and ought to be 
confessed and taught at any cost, and especially when it 
arranged and ordered all the other features of truth so 
beautifully. I pointed out, too, how necessary it was to 
a logical holding of the ransom, to see just what this 
showed; viz.: the distinctions of nature— that our 
Lord left a higher nature, and took a lower nature when 
he was made flesh, and that the object in that change of 
nature was, that he might, as a man, a perfect man, give 
himself a ransom for the first perfect man, Adam, and 
thus redeem Adam, and all lost in him. I also showed 
how, as a reward for this great work, he was given the 
divine nature in his resurrection— a nature still higher 
than the glorious one he had left, when he became a man. 
But either Mr. Paton's mental vision or heart was weak, 
for he never took the step; and before long he, too, forsook 
the doctrine of the ransom. Yet he still used the 
word "ransom," while denying the idea conveyed by the 
word; nor can he give the word any other definition, or 
otherwise dispute the correctness of the meaning which 
I attach to it— which may be found in any English dictionary 
and is true to the significance of the Greek word 
which it translates, anti-lutron, a price to correspond. 

Notwithstanding our best endeavors to save him he 
drifted farther and farther away, until I was obliged to 
refuse his articles for the TOWER for the same reason that 



obliged me to refuse to longer spend the Lord's money 
entrusted to me to assist Mr. Barbour to spread the same 
pernicious theory. 

It was about this time that Mr. Jones informed me 
that the copies of the book Day Dawn which I had purchased 
last were all that were left; and, announcing it so 
that no more orders for it might come to the TOWER office, 
I took occasion to promise MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
which should present the Plan of the Ages in the clearer, 
more orderly manner made possible by the new light 
shed upon every feature of it by the lessons from the 
Tabernacle. About this time Mr. Paton concluded that 
he would publish another book under the name Day 
Dawn, revised to harmonize with his changed views, 
which ignored the ransom, ignored justification and the 
need of either, and taught that all men will be everlastingly 
saved— not in any sense as the result of any sacrifice 
for their sin by Christ, but as the result of each one's 
crucifying sin in himself— the law under which the poor 
Jews tried to commend themselves to God, but which 
justified none. Many and severe were the calumnies 
heaped upon me, because I exposed this change, told that 
the original was out of print and that the new book was 
on a different foundation from the book of the same name 
which I had commended. 

During this time I was busied by an immense work 
known to many of you— the issue and circulation of over 
1,400,000 copies of two pamphlets, entitled FOOD FOR 
THINKING CHRISTIANS and TABERNACLE TEACHINGS, 
whose united matter was about the same as that of 
DAWN, VOL. L; and besides this I was flooded with 
thousands of joyous and joy-giving letters, from those 
who had received and were reading the pamphlets thus 
distributed, and asking questions and more reading matter. 
To add to our throng, financial complications 

R3825 : page 236 

came; and thus for four years I was hindered from fulfilling 
my promise of MILLENNIAL DAWN. Nor is our 
promise of the complete set yet fulfilled; for although 
six volumes are now issued, a seventh on Revelation and 
Ezekiel is still future: delayed by the growth of the 
general work, doubtless in accord with the Lord's "due 
time." But during those four years I struggled through 
an immense amount of labor and many drawbacks (all 
cheerfully undergone for the sake of the Lord and his 
saints), each year hoping to be able to gather the hours 
necessary to complete the first volume of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. 

Some who have The Three Worlds or the old edition 
of Day Dawn would perhaps like to know my 
present opinion of them— whether I still think them 
profitable books to loan to truth-seekers. To this I reply, 
Certainly not; because the very immature views of God's 
truth therein presented fall far short of what we now see 



to be God's wonderful plan. Things which are now 

clear as noonday were then cloudy and mixed. The distinctions 

between the perfect human nature to which the 

obedient of the world will be restored during the Millennium, 

and the divine nature to which the little flock, the 

sacrificing elect of the Gospel age, are soon to be exalted, 

were then unnoticed. All now so clear was then blurred, 

mixed and indistinct. Neither had we then seen the 

steps or planes, shown upon the Chart of the Ages, MILLENNIAL 

DAWN, Vol. I., which have assisted so many 

to distinguish between justification and sanctification, 

and to determine their present standing and relationship 

to God. 

R3826 : page 236 

Once I was much less careful about what I circulated 
or commended, but I am learning every day to be 
more careful as to what sort of food I put before any of 
the Lord's hungry sheep. The Lord has taught me that 
it is a responsible matter to be a teacher, even to the extent 
of circulating a book or a paper. Even Food for 
Thinking Christians (now also out of print), I no longer 
commend because it is less systematic and therefore less 
clear than later publications. (Vol. I., MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, in magazine form, the special "Hell" edition 
of the WATCH TOWER, Jan. 15, '01, and Tract No. 52, 
all bear this title, and are not to be confounded with 
the original booklet issued in 1881.) 

Another chapter in our experience needs to be told, 
as it marks another shaking and sifting. Mr. A. D. 
Jones proposed to start a paper on the same line as the 
WATCH TOWER, to republish some of the simpler features 
of God's plan and to be a sort of missionary and 
primary teacher. Knowing him to be clear on the subject 
of the ransom, I bade him God speed and introduced 
a sample copy of his paper, Zion's Day Star (now for 
some years discontinued), to our nearly ten thousand 
readers— only, as it soon proved, to stumble some of 
them into rank infidelity and others into the rejection of 
the ransom; for though the Day Star for a few months 
steered a straight course and maintained the same position 
as the TOWER with reference to the ransom, and for 
the same reason refused the no-ransom articles sent for 
its columns by Mr. Paton, yet within one year it had repudiated 
Christ's atoning sacrifice, and within another 
year it had gone boldly into infidelity and totally repudiated 
all the rest of the Bible as well as those portions 
which teach the fall in Adam and the ransom therefrom 
in Christ. 

All this meant another strain, another sifting, 
another cutting loose of friends, who erroneously supposed 
that our criticisms of the false doctrines were 
prompted by a spirit of rivalry, and who did not so soon 
see whither his teachings were drifting, nor how great the 
importance of holding fast the first principles of the doctrines 



of Christ— how Christ died for our sins and rose 
again for our justification. 

We want to put you all on notice that the shaking 
and sifting process, so far from being over and past, is 
bound to progress more and more until all have been 
tried and tested thoroughly. It is not a question of who 
may fall, but of "Who shall be able to stand?" as the 
Apostle puts it. And we have need again to remember 
the admonition, "Let him who thinketh he standeth 
[who feels very confident, as did Peter when he said, 
'Lord, though all forsake thee, yet will not I'] take heed 
lest he fall." 

This doctrine of another way of salvation (and salvation 
for all, too) than by the cross of Christ, is not only 
the error which is, and has been since 1874, sifting all who 
come into the light of Present Truth, but it is the trial that 
is to come upon the whole of so-called Christendom to 
try them. (Rev. 3:10.) It is already spreading among 
all classes of Christian people, especially among ministers 
of all denominations. The number who believe that 
Christ's death paid our sin-penalty is daily getting 
smaller, and before very long there will be a regular stampede 
from the doctrine of man's fall in Adam and his 
ransom from that fall by "the man Christ Jesus." (I Tim. 2:5,6.) 
As the Psalmist prophetically pictured it, a 
thousand will fall to one who will stand.— Psa. 91:7. 

The time has come for each one to declare himself 
boldly. He who is not for the cross (the ransom) is 
against it! He that gathereth not scattereth abroad! 
He who is silent on this subject, when it is being assailed 
by foes on every hand, whether it be the silence of fear, 
or of shame, or of indifference, is not worthy of the truth, 
and will surely be one to stumble quickly. He who from 
any cause sits idly by, while the banner of the cross is 
assailed, is not a soldier of the cross worthy the name, 
and will not be reckoned among the overcomers who 
shall inherit all things. And God is permitting these very 
siftings, in order to sift out all who are not "overcomers," 
and to test and manifest the little flock, who, like Gideon's 
final army, will, though few, share the victory and 
honors of their Captain in glory. 

Are you prepared for the issue, dear brethren and 
sisters? The armor of Truth has been given you for 
some time past; have you put it on? have you made it 
your shield and buckler? your defense against all the 
wily arts of the Evil One? 

Do not be deceived by the agents Satan often makes 
use of. In this he will be as cunning as in his presentation 
of the deceptive misrepresentations of truth, making 
unwitting use of many a weaker brother, and to some extent 
of every stumbling and deceived one, to spread 
farther the infection of false doctrine. And while every 
child of God should take earnest heed, that he prove not 
an occasion of stumbling to any, we cannot doubt that 
every one, through some instrumentality, will be 
assailed. 



Aptly indeed did the Prophet liken it to a pestilence. 
(Psa. 91:6.) A pestilence spreads because people are in 
a physical condition which renders them susceptible to 
disease. Physicians say that those whose systems are 
in good, healthy order are in little danger of any disease. 

R3826 : page 237 

So it is with a spiritual pestilence: it will flourish not only 
because all will be exposed to it who have not a clear intellectual 
appreciation of the doctrines of Christ, but 
from another cause also. Out of the heart are the issues 
of life, and most needful of all to be in right condition 
is the heart. How is your heart? Is it proud, boastful, 
independent, self-conscious and self-willed? If so, take 
care; you will be very liable to this epidemic, no matter 
how far from it you may seem to be. Pray for 
"A heart resigned, submissive, meek, 

The dear Redeemer's throne, 
Where only Christ is heard to speak, 

Where Jesus reigns alone." 
With such a heart you are safe. In meekness and 
lowliness, you will never think of redeeming yourself 
from the condemnation that you inherited through 
Adam, by sacrificing present sinful desires, but you will 
flee to the cross, where God himself opened the fountain 
for sin and uncleanness, present as well as past. 

DOTH THIS OFFEND YOU? 

We presume that this warning will offend some, 
though it is not designed to offend any. It is written 
for the defense of the meek against the sophistries of 
error. "Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord [into 
the Kingdom offered]? or who shall stand in his holy 
place? He that hath clean hands and a pure heart [who 
is diligently fashioning his life after the principles of holiness]; 
who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity [who 
cultivates no earthly ambitions or pride, but patiently 
waits for the glory to follow the course of present self-sacrifice], 
nor sworn deceitfully [ignoring or despising his 
covenant with God]: He shall receive the blessing of the 
Lord [the Kingdom glory and join t-heirship with Christ], 
and righteousness [perfection— full deliverance from 
present infirmities, etc.] from the God of his salvation." 
(Psa. 24:3-5.) "Watch and pray, that ye enter not 
into temptation"— that "your minds be not corrupted 
from the simplicity that is in Christ." Let all the meek 
fully awake to the trial of the hour; and while many 
are putting stumbling blocks in the way of the "feet" 
of the body of Christ, let each soldier of the cross be 
vigilant, not only to stand, but to assist others— bearing 
up the "feet."-Psa. 91:11,12. 



R3826 : page 237 

WOMAN'S RIGHTS AND WRONGS. 

THERE are two sides to nearly every question, and 
the woman question is no exception to the rule. 
Women have their rights, men have their rights; 
every creature in proportion to its intelligence has certain 
rights which ought in justice to be respected. It is 
a fact, however, that very few men, women or lower 
animals obtain or can obtain their rights under present 
circumstances and conditions. In proportion as any 
one retains the original likeness of God, in which man 
was created, in that same proportion he will surely delight 
in granting to others their rights and in appreciating 
his own rights. 

But, alas! all have fallen from that perfect image, 
that perfect likeness of the Creator. Hence there is in 
every member of the race a measure of selfishness, 
combined with various good and bad qualities of the 
mind, in such various proportions that the race as a 
whole is declared to be not of sound mind, unbalanced, 
unjust; and the Apostle declares the spirit of the world 
in general to be antagonistic to justice, righteousness. 
Anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife, pride, ambition, etc., 
are all difficulties lying in the way of sound judgment. 
The Word of God, telling these things, admonishes us 
to seek the wisdom from above, the mind of the Lord; 
and that these can be obtained only by the subjection, 
the mortifying of our natural minds, inclinations, dispositions, 
and a regulation of our views, etc., according 
to the divine standards given us in the Bible. What 
we should seek, therefore, would be the highest Christian 
standard of thought on every subject, and the 
Lord's thought, the Lord's Word, should be accepted 
by all who are his followers as that standard. 

R3827 : page 237 

If we look out all over the world we find that practically 
nobody gets his rights— certainly nobody gets 
what he considers to be his rights, his dues, except the 
very humblest minded, who, overwhelmed with God's 
goodness and mercy, are ready to claim that they have 
already received of the Lord, and are continually receiving, 
far more than they deserve in every sense of 
the word. These are thankful and proportionately 
happy. The others, proportionately unthankful and 
unhappy, constitute the mass of the world of mankind, 
—including the majority of those who have named the 
name of Christ. 

The Lord urges upon his followers the full "sacrifice" 
of all their earthly rights, assuring them that this 
will be pleasing in his sight as a testimony to their devotion 
to him and the rules which he prescribes, assuring 
them also that it will be to their advantage even in 



the present life as well as to their eternal advantage. 
Christians, then, male and female, are those who have 
made a covenant with the Lord to the effect that their 
rights as natural men and women will not be considered, 
not be claimed, not be sought after, not be fought 
for; but that they will accept from him as an exchange 
a new nature, with new hopes, new ambitions, whose 
rights, honors, privileges and dignities will come in 
completeness at the First Resurrection, when that 
which is perfect shall have come and that which is in 
part shall be done away, when they shall be glorified 
with their Lord. 

OUR SYMPATHY AND ADVICE 

Few have as good opportunity as has the Editor of 
this journal to know something of the difficulties which 
beset the New Creation in their contact with others. 
He is continually in receipt of confidential communications 
explaining circumstances and asking advice as to 
how to best meet the severest trials and difficulties of 
life which come to the Lord's consecrated ones. As he 
perhaps has a larger contact with the consecrated than 
others have, he has proportionately a better opportunity 
for sympathizing not only with the groaning creation, 

R3827 : page 238 

the natural man, but also with the New Creation. 
He well knows, therefore, that injustice is frequently 
heaped upon wives by their husbands, and almost if not 
quite so frequently heaped upon husbands by their 
wives. His general advice to those thus unjustly 
treated is in the language of the Scriptures, "Have 
patience, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord,"— the 
establishment of his Kingdom of righteousness, the 
change to his glorious likeness, draweth nigh.— Jas. 5:7. 

After kindly forbearance with gentleness and expostulation, 
if the condition is at all bearable, endure 
it, asking the Lord for wisdom and grace necessary. 
Seek to show forth the praises of him who called us 
out of darkness into his marvelous light; seek to show 
to the companion, by love and gentleness, patience, 
long suffering and endurance, the power of the Spirit 
of Christ dwelling in us richly; seek to take as little 
offence as possible, and learn more and more to go to 
the Lord as the great burden-bearer. "Consider him 
who endured such contradiction of sinners against 
himself, lest we be weary and faint in our minds," remembering 
that the time is short, and heeding the admonition 
of the Scriptures that we resist not evil with 
evil, nor railings with railings, nor slanders with slanders, 
nor sword with sword, but that on the contrary, 
we seek to be fully submissive to the trials of life, in 
the realization that the Lord himself is at the helm, 
and will bring a blessing out of each for us if we are 



in proper condition of heart to receive it. 

It is certain that every child of God who is seeking and 
expecting his rights under "the prince of this world," 
and from his fallen and blinded neighbors, is walking in 
darkness on this subject. So surely as the Lord's 
people are "taught of him" they will speedily learn not 
to strive for their rights nor to expect them, but to be 
patient, long suffering and kindly toward the unjust. 
While properly enough seeking other paths in which 
they would not be oppressed, and to the extent of their 
ability and the proprieties of their case fleeing from 
those who persecute them and unjustly treat them, they 
will learn to not only love their enemies but to do them 
all the good in their power, and to sympathetically realize 
that much of the viciousness and selfishness and 
meanness of the world is the result of ignorance and 
inbred sin— the results of the fall. Proportionately 
they will be longing and praying, "Thy Kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth," and thus will their present 
trials and difficulties be working out for them a deeper 
interest in the coming blessings, assisting them in 
making their calling and election sure, and in obtaining 
the far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 

WOMAN'S SPHERE IN THE CHURCH. 

At a time when both men and women are becoming 
exercised more and more upon the question of their 
rights and their wrongs, and when the popular side, 
therefore, is opposed to every restraint of liberty, he 
who would be loyal to the Lord and his Word on this 
question is in serious danger of being misunderstood— 
of being thought an opposer of liberty and rights and 
an upholder of wrongs. A test of the loyalty of the 
servant of God occupying a public position is thus 
forced upon him, and "It is required of a steward that 
he be found faithful." The Editor of this journal occupies 
some such position, and desires to be thoroughly 
loyal to the Master and to his Word. For the doing of 
this a few have been inclined to consider him an opponent 
of Woman, and as on the side of those who would 
degrade and demean the sex. This is most untrue and 
unjust everyway. 

Every true-hearted, noble-spirited man is sure to 
have a high esteem for the opposite sex, especially 
when the combination includes true womanly gentleness 
combined with natural talents and gifts and largeness 
and ability of heart. The natural disposition of a 
noble man under such conditions would be to bring 
forward such sisters in Christ to great prominence in 
the Church. And any refusal to do this is sure to 
awaken suspicions of a meanness of disposition 
amongst both men and women, until the voice of the 
Lord is distinctly heard from his Word. Then all the 
true sheep hearken to the voice of the great Shepherd, 
lose their own wills and sentiments on the subject and 



accept his message, "My sheep hear my voice and follow 
me; a stranger will they not follow, for they recognize 
not the voice of a stranger." 

This is the position which the Editor has been 
obliged to take in the sixth volume of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Scripture Studies. Patiently and particularly 
he has therein set forth, not his own sentiments, but 
those which in many respects are the opposite of his 
own inclinations. He has submitted his will in the 
matter to the will of the Lord, and as a mouthpiece of 
the Lord has repeated the message of God's dear Son 
given to the Church through his specially appointed 
apostles. Hearing the Father's message respecting 
his Son, "This is my beloved Son, hear ye him," the 
Editor hearkened also to the voice of the Son saying, 
respecting his inspired apostles, "Whatsoever ye shall 
bind on earth is bound in heaven, whatsoever ye shall 
loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." In other 
words, the Church is instructed to accept the teachings 
of the apostles as the direct inspired word of the Son 
of God himself,— as the Father's Word. Hence, when 
the Apostle speaks to us respecting the position of 
Woman in the Church we are not at liberty to dispute 
his word, nor to controvert it, nor to ignore it. Whoever 
does so is ignoring the voice of the Spirit and will 
surely suffer in some manner as a consequence. 

We have presented no teaching of our own on this 
subject. As we have heard the Lord's voice through 
his apostles we have merely called attention to their very 
pointed statements respecting the position of the sisters in 
the Church, which is the body of Christ. But while 
pointing out that the public ministry, the teaching 
function, was not bestowed upon the sisters, but, on 
the contrary, was specifically withheld from them, 
we have in no sense of the word implied that 
the ministry of the sisters in the body of Christ is an 
unimportant one. Quite to the contrary, we hold that 
they have a very prominent place in the Church, and 
wield a very wide influence either for good or evil— almost 
an immeasurable influence— and that they are 
responsible for that influence as a part of their stewardship, 
that it be used in harmony with the divine 
Word and not to the contrary. That in the divine order 
the males in the Church figuratively represent the Lord, 
the Head, while the females figuratively represent the 
Church, the Bride. 

This is the course of faithful obedience; and we 
remember the Scriptural statement that in God's sight 
"obedience is better than sacrifice,"— better than many 
arduous labors of a public kind contrary to obedience. 
We trust that all the Lord's consecrated people, both 
brothers and sisters, will reread very carefully the fifth 
chapter of DAWN, Vol. VI., bearing upon this subject. 
We are confident that this question is intended of the 
Lord to constitute a part of the testing of his consecrated 
ones in this harvest time. Let us resolve that our 



own sentiments on the subject, and our expressions 
and influence with others concerning the matter, shall 
all be to the best of our ability the mind of the Lord, in 

R3828 : page 239 

full accord with the teaching of his Word. "If they 
speak not according to this Word, it is because there is 
no light in them."— Isa. 8:20. 

CONFUSING SOPHISTRIES EXPOSED 

It is proper that we should here uncover some deceptive 
sophistries which are being circulated— that we 
may assist the Lord's true people to take their proper 
stand on the subject. One element of these sophistries is 
the claim that what the Apostle wrote to the Church at 
Corinth was in view of the degradation of the women of 
that metropolitan city, the argument being that he would 
not have used the same language and expressed the 
same limitations of the liberties of the sisters in public 
services of the Church to other congregations, and 
that his words therefore do not apply at the present 
time. This is sophistry, false reasoning. The epistles 
to the Corinthians were not written to the debauchees, 
neither male nor female, of that time, but to the 
saints at Corinth, both male and female; and a saint at 
Corinth meant exactly the same thing as a saint elsewhere, 
namely, one whose life had turned from sin to 
righteousness, and who, accepting Christ as his Savior, 
had made full consecration of all to him. 

Indeed it would appear that the Apostle's strictures 
on woman's sphere came from the opposite quarter 
—that the Church at Corinth seemed to feel itself superior 
to the other congregations, and desired to grasp 
liberties for its women which the other churches never 
thought of. Hence the Apostle after rebuking them 
asks, "What? came the Word of the Lord out from you? 
[Did it originate with you? Are we to look to the 
Christians at Corinth as the expounders of the message?] 
or came it unto you merely? [Did you not receive 
the Gospel as others received it? Do you not admit that 
you were not the originators of it? You have, therefore, 
nothing whatever to do with adding to or changing 
its regulations. As you will see this matter in its 
correct light you will agree that you should receive the 
message of the grace of God in the line in which he 
sent it, and should obey it without thought of alteration 
or emendation to suit some supposed preferential 
teachings in your midst]. (I Cor. 14:36.) "The faith 
once delivered to the saints" is not a variable but a 
fixed one. Hence the Apostle urges "that ye all mind 
the same things." 

Another line of sophistry used to make void the 
teachings of the Scriptures on this subject seeks its object 
by handling the Word of God deceitfully: By taking 



the statement of Colossians 3:18, twisting it about so as 
to give it a different meaning from its proper one, and 
then using that improper twist in connection with all 
other Scriptures bearing on the subject. The passage 
in question reads, "Wives, submit yourselves unto your 
own husbands, as it is fit, in the Lord." The meaning 
of these words should be evident to everyone; they are 
very distinct. They tell the Christian wife that her 
relationship to the Lord, the liberty wherewith Christ 
makes free indeed, does not annul her relationship to 
her husband, whether he be in Christ or be not in 
Christ; and that she still owes to her husband 
the duty of a wife; that the wife in the divine 
order is not the head of the family, and that it is the 
duty of the wife to be submissive (in all matters which 
do not involve conscience— which would include all 
matters which would seriously endanger health). 

The Apostle points out that this is the fit course— 
the course which he has elsewhere pointed out to be 
the proper one also for the natural man or woman; for 
he distinctly declares that the primacy of the man in 
the family was established at creation, and that the 
man was created not to be the helpmate of the woman, 
but the woman to be the helpmate of the man. This is 
the fit course in nature; and in this verse the Apostle 
declared that it is still the fit course as respects the 
Christian wife ("fit in the Lord") after she has been received 
into the liberty of the family of God. In other 
words, she has a relationship of heart and conscience 
to God and a relationship in the flesh to her husband; 
and these are not to be understood to conflict but are 
in full agreement under the Lord's arrangement. 

Do you ask how sophistry could change the plain 
statement of this verse? We reply that it attempts to 
do so by juggling with the word "fit," and implying 
that the Apostle means that the wife should be subject 
to her husband as her mind tells her would be fit and 
proper. Of course the minds of many women would 
never tell them that it was fit or proper to be subject 
to their husbands, and according to this false, sophistical 
interpretation they would be following the 
Apostle's injunction by violating the spirit of his Word 
in this text. After establishing this fallacious thought 
in the mind— and it seems to appeal to the natural 
mind of some,— this philosophy which seeks to upset 
the teaching of God's Word, while apparently remaining 
loyal to it, proceeds to deal with all the other texts 
of Scripture which relate to the wife's relationship to 
her husband, by saying that they must all be understood 
and interpreted in harmony with this declaration of 
the Apostle, "if it is fit," meaning as the woman sees 
fit in her judgment and certainly not as the husband 
would see fit. The Apostle on the contrary is saying 
that the submission of the wife to the husband is the fit, 
proper course "in the Lord" as also in nature. 

As before stated, we realize that many women, both 



in and out of the Truth, suffer great hardships at the 

hands of inconsiderate and sometimes brutal husbands; 

and in view of our knowledge of this fact nothing 

would be further from our natural disposition than 

to give such advice respecting general submission. 

Rather, our natural mind on the subject would have 

been resistance, self-assertion, contending for rights, 

etc. But as we have learned not to follow our own inclinations 

and judgment in respect to our own matters, 

interests and rights, so we have learned and are more 

and more learning to advise others to most carefully 

follow not their own combativeness nor their own ambitions 

in these matters, but that if they would be 

overcomers and win the crown they should hearken to 

him who speaketh from heaven. 

We surmise that a large proportion of the trouble 
that is coming upon the world in general will be the 
result of discontent, which we expect to see increasing 
year by year until the turmoil of anarchy shall ruin all 
except those who shall have submitted their wills to 
the Lord and waited for him to establish righteousness 
and justice in the earth. We urge upon the Lord's people, 
male and female, all the fruits and graces of the 
Spirit,— meekness, gentleness, patience, long suffering, 
brotherly kindness, love. We assure them, in harmony 
with the Word, that whether such conduct on their part 
be lovingly received and appreciated, or whether it 
shall bring them increased trials and oppositions and 
injustice, nevertheless the peaceable fruits of righteousness 
prevailing in their hearts will bring them the 
peace of God which passeth all understanding even in 
the present life, and will prepare them the more surely 
for the Kingdom and its glories and honors. "He that 
humbleth himself shall be exalted, he that exalteth 
himself shall be abased." "Humble yourselves, therefore, 
under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt 
you in due time. For it is written, he giveth his favor to 
the humble, but resisteth the proud," the self-assertive. 
-Luke 14:11; Jas. 4:6. 



page 241 



SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVII AUGUST 1 No. 15 
A.D., 1906-A.M., 6034 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 243 

Change in Churchianity's Methods 243 

The Bible Becoming Obsolete 243 

The New Idolatry 244 

Recent One-Day Conventions 244 

Report of the London Convention 244 

Berean Bible Study on Love 245 

"It Is High Time to Awake Out of Sleep" 245 

The Great Teacher's Table-Talks 246 

The Slighted Invitation 249 

The Blessing of Thorns (Poem) 252 

The Father of Mercies 252 

"Blessed Are Your Ears, for They Hear" 254 

page 242 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES 



These are now in stock in large quantity. Every letter you 
send through the mail may be a more or less potent messenger 
of the Truth, even on its outside, by the use of these envelopes. 
They catch the attention not only of those to whom they are 
addressed, but postmen and others have an opportunity, and 
sometimes the curiosity, to read their message of peace— the 
gospel in condensed form. Price, 25c per 100, postpaid. 

"DUE TIME" MOTTOES 



This motto, the text for the year (see TOWER, Jan. 1, '06), 
is now in stock again, in good quantity. Price, 10c each; in 
lots of 5, 5c each, postpaid. 

INDIA PAPER VOL. I. OUT OF STOCK 



This handsome little volume is out of stock, and the difficulty 
of procuring India paper will hinder our filling orders 
for several months. Vols. II. and III. can still be supplied at 
68c each, postpaid. 



New lot of WATCH TOWER BINDERS expected about 
August 1st. Price, 50c each, postpaid. 



R3828 : page 243 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
CHANGE IN CHURCHIANITY'S METHODS 



The Editor of the Cincinnati Enquirer says:— 
"The churches of the country enter so largely into 
the character and direction of its growth, and accomplish 
so much that is helpful in various ways in the 
uplifting of society, that information as to their progress 
is of interest to readers outside as well as inside 
their varied folds. No one can fail to notice how much 
in a general way their teaching and aims have changed 
with the times, and to how large an extent sectarian 
differences and angularities are disappearing and being 



disregarded. Fifty years ago churches were looked 
upon chiefly as divinely constituted organizations, insuring 
their members safe passage to and first-class 
accommodations in a better world, and their teaching 
was mostly along theological and doctrinal lines. Every 
sect, while doubting the efficiency of the insurance 
provision in the tickets of all rivals, was wholly confident 
of its own, and missions to the heathen were urged 
on the ground that unless converted they were all 
doomed to everlasting punishment for not accepting 
what they had never heard of. This world was not 
worth thinking about; the worse off we were here the 
better it would be for us in the next, and vice versa. 

"It is wonderful how complete and rapid the change 
has been. The churches now are trying to emphasize 
points of agreement, rather than of difference, and are 
working harmoniously together for moral and humanitarian 
ends. Theology and doctrine have been sent to 
the rear, and it is recognized that the true work of the 
Church is here and now in making this world a happier 
and better place for everybody to live in, on a basis of 
unselfishness and brotherly love. In this effort agnostic 
and churchman, Jews and infidels, are working 
together, and what a man believes is regarded as of 
comparatively little consequence." 



How clearly those whose eyes are opened to the true 
teachings of the Bible can see that the difficulty of the 
writer of the above and the general difficulty of Christendom 
is that the Truth of divine revelation has been 
buried under nonsensical human traditions which make 
the gospel an absurdity to them. 

There are two views of this matter. (1) If Christianity 
be merely a human contrivance, then no doubt it 

R3829 : page 243 

is safer and saner to disregard doctrine entirely and 
turn to fighting graft and political corruption, etc. 
(2) But if Christianity is a divine institution which 
calls for the submission of plans and schemes and 
teachings to the divine eternal purpose, then the present 
movement is a repudiation of God and Christ from 
Christianity. Hence we prefer to speak of the present 
institutions as Churchianity. 

The Editor, above, surely voices the sentiment of 
nearly all of the worldly-wise, and we who differ appear 
to his class as "fools." Let us, however, stick to the 
Lord and his promises. Let us still believe that all the 
woes of earth came as the penalty of "original sin," and 
that Christ has redeemed the world and is about to roll 
away the curse and uplift and restore all the families 
of the earth to the extent that they will accept his 
favors, in due time. Let us preach that coming uplift 



as his work and acknowledge that all that selfishness 

will permit under present conditions will be as nothing 

compared with the real uplift coming in God's own appointed 

way, and in no other. By and by the collapse 

of present institutions will discourage others, but will 

more than ever convince us that God is moving in a 

mysterious way his wonders to perform. 

Meantime let us give special heed to the message 
and work given us by our Lord, however foolish it may 
appear to others. We see that the present is the time 
for finding and polishing the Lord's jewels; the time 
for selecting, electing, the Royal Priesthood and schooling 
them for their coming service in glory— blessing 
all the families of the earth.— Gal. 3:29. 

THE BIBLE BECOMING OBSOLETE 



President G. S. Hall of Clark University declares:— 
There have been within the last few years a number 
of questions printed and sent broadcast to high 
schools and Sunday schools to test the knowledge of 
the Bible of high school and Sunday school students. 
All the questions have shown the school students to be 
amazingly defective in their knowledge, and particularly 
of the Old Testament. The reason has been discussed 
a great deal, and it seems to be that the Sunday 
school and home influence is diminishing. The Bible 

R3829 : page 244 

is less read in the home than it was a few years ago, 
and the number of children who have a fair knowledge 
of it is growing less and less. This shows the Bible is 
becoming obsolete. 

"Professors of literature, even in colleges, have 
complained that students who have matriculated show 
an amazing lack of knowledge of the Bible. The Bible 
is becoming obsolete, and this fact has been exploited 
many times in the last ten years. In my opinion a 
knowledge of the Bible should be made a requirement 
in English of all colleges. 



This speaker merely referred to the Bible as literature. 
Those of us who recognize it as the divine revelation 
must see to it that it does not become obsolete 
with us. The world can do without the Bible: indeed 
it was not given by God to the world, but "once 
delivered to the saints." To those actuated by faith 
and consecration the Bible is now and growingly 
the greatest of all books. Thank God for the "key of 
knowledge," by which its riches of treasure are now 
coming more than ever to our view. 



THE NEW IDOLATRY 



BY REV. WASHINGTON GLADDEN 

To a very large extent the worship of Mammon has 
supplanted the worship of God. It is not a mere lip 
service, it is a living allegiance. It is by their works 
that the devotees prove their faith. We know that they 
believe in Mammon more than in God, for their lives 
give clear and abundant testimony. The evidences of 
this devotion are visible on every side. To what other 
cause can we attribute the evils that infest the government 
of our cities and that fill many of our State capitals 
with the stench of rotten politics; that turn many 
of our railway systems into gigantic instruments of extortion 
and build up a mighty enginery of finance with 
power to exploit the savings of a nation for the enrichment 
of a few? 

Their actions prove that the real object of their 
faith and allegiance is Mammon. In their hearts they 
believe that Mammon is stronger and greater than God; 
that he is a better protector and friend than God; that 
he can do more for them than God can do. When the 
claims of Mammon and of God conflict their conduct 
makes it perfectly clear in whom they put their trust. 

But these instances which I have mentioned are 
not exceptional. They are striking illustrations of 
tendencies which we see at work on every side. They 
are symptoms of a constitutional malady. Love of 
money, faith in money, devotion to material things has 
become the prevailing distemper of the time. It was 
doubtless true when the Apostle said it, but it is probably 
ten times truer now than it was then, that the love 
of money is the root of every kind of evil.— Kansas City 
Star. 



R3829 : page 244 

RECENT ONE-DAY CONVENTIONS 

AT Springfield, 111., we had a delightful season on 
June 24. The friends had worked hard and 
the Lord had blessed the wide advertising, 
so that the public service was attended by 1400, a very 
large audience for the size of the city. Surrounding 
cities were well represented, and an excellent spirit was 
manifested at all the meetings, the morning one being 
a Rally and Testimony service, and the evening one a 
discourse to the interested, already reported to many 
of you through the public prints. 
The Allegheny Convention, July 1 , was well attended 



by friends from nearby towns, the local congregation 

and the public, to the number of about 700. At 

the evening service five were baptized. The spirit of 

the Lord was richly with us and showed in the faces of all. 

Hartford, Conn., had a very successful Convention 
July 1 1. Friends from New York City, Boston, Springfield 
and various other nearer places were in good evidence 
and helped greatly as well as encouraged the little 
class at Hartford, which is growing rapidly. The 
Rally was good. The afternoon service for the public 
was attended by about 900 people, who gave excellent 
attention. The evening session for the interested at 
"City Mission" was attended by about 300, and about 
50 accepted invitations to remain over for a Monday 
morning Question Meeting. The joys of the Lord were 
with us richly and we feasted on both temporal and 
spiritual good things. 



R3830 : page 245 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY ON LOVE 
--SEE COMMENTS IN OUR JULY 1 ISSUE- 
AUGUST 5 

15. Why is love called "the mark"? Z.'01-'97 (1st col. 
par. 3) to 8 (1st col. par. 3). 

16. What are the four "quarter-marks" of the Christian 
race-course? F.187, par. 2, to 189, par. 1; F.369, par. 2, 
to 373. 

17. How does the Church's experience differ from that 
of her "Forerunner"? F.187, par. 1. 

AUGUST 12 

18. What is the significance of love as "the girdle"? 
Col. 3:14. Z/99-142 (1st col. par. 2). 

19. How is love the ultimate "end of the commandment"? 
I Tim. 1:5; Z/00-360 (2nd col. par. 1, 2). 

20. How is love the "fulfilling of the Law"? Rom. 13:10. 
Z. '05-121 (1st col. par. 3 to 2nd col. par. 1). 

AUGUST 19 

21. How is love the "law of the New Creation"? F.364, 
par. 1, to 367, par. 2. 

22. Why is love called "the perfect law of liberty"? 
Jas. 1:25. F.377, 378; Z/99-57; (2nd col. par. 2, 3); 
58 (1st col. par. 1); Z/03-43 (1st col. par. 2) to 45. 

AUGUST 26 

23. How are the "fruits of the Spirit" but different 



manifestations of love? F.186, par. 1, 2. 

24. How may we discern the true fruits of the holy 
Spirit? Z/05-123 (2nd col. par. 1, 2) and 124. 

25. How is "zeal the measure of love"? Luke 7:41-43. 
Z/97-242 (1st col. par. 1 and 2nd col.); Z/05-153 
(2nd col. par. 3). 



R3830 : page 245 

"IT IS HIGH TIME TO AWAKE OUT OF SLEEP" 

"And do this knowing the season, that now it is high time 
to awake out of sleep; for now is our salvation nearer 
than when we believed. The night is far spent, 
the day is at hand."— Rom. 13:11,12. 

PREVIOUS to this exhortation the Apostle had 

been giving some wholesome counsel concerning 

the proper course of the Lord's people in the 

every-day duties of life. His advice seems to cover a 

wide range of the little vexing cares and trials that 

every one must meet, and shows us how to triumph in 

them through the mighty power of love. He evidently 

thought of the thin veneer of politeness in the world 

which so often covers deep-seated selfishness, and 

showed that our politeness and love should be only the 

genuine solid article, saying, "Let love be without dissimulation 

[pretence or hypocrisy]. Abhor that which 

is evil [abhor all shams and pretence]; cleave to that 

which is good. Be kindly affectioned one to another; 

in honor preferring one another." He thought of the 

temptations and vexations of our business intercourse 

with the world, and of its natural tendency to engross 

time, energy and thought in worldly things, and therefore 

counselled, not that we should give up all business, 

but that, while we should be energetic and "not slothful 

in business," we should be careful always to be "fervent 

in spirit, serving the Lord." 

He thought of the depressing tendency of the ever-present 
cares of life, and of the persecutions in one 
form or another that are sure to come to those who will 
live godly; and so, while admitting that no trial can 
for the present be otherwise than grievous, he tells us 
that we may rejoice in hope; for the trial will not continue 
forever, and by and by it will bring forth the 
peaceable fruits of righteousness if we are rightly exercised 
thereby, and in the end the rewards of righteousness; 
and therefore he says we should be "patient in 
tribulation, continuing instant in prayer" for that 
grace which is promised according to our needs. 

He thought of the poverty and losses of some and 
therefore counselled sympathy and hospitality— "Distributing 
to the necessity of saints, given to hospitality. 
Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with 



them that weep. Be of the same mind one toward 
another. Mind not high things, but condescend to men 
of low estate. Be not wise in your own conceits. Bless 
[even] them which persecute you; bless and curse not. 
Recompense to no man evil for evil. Provide things 
honest in the sight of all men." 

He thought of the numerous vexations arising from 
contact with those of undisciplined hearts and said, 
"If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably 
with all men. Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, 
but rather give place unto wrath; for it is written, 
Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord. 
Therefore, if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, 
give him drink: for in so doing thou shalt heap coals 
of fire on his head. [You will thus make him ashamed 
of his own conduct in contrast with yours.]" 

Finally, he says, "Be not overcome of evil [do not 
allow the trials of life to make you sour, or vindictive, 
or cold and unsympathetic; nor allow the more 
favorable circumstances to make you proud or highminded 
or wise in your own conceits]; but overcome 
evil [of every kind] with good." 

R3830 : page 246 

Then he instructs us to be law-abiding and God-honoring 
citizens in the communities in which we live— 
"Rendering to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute 
is due; custom to whom custom; fear [respectful deference 
or submission] to whom fear; honor to whom 
honor." And after pointing to the several commandments 
of the moral law he adds, "If there be any other 
commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, 
namely, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. 
Love worketh no ill to his neighbor: therefore love is 
the fulfilling of the law." 

Yes, love; supreme love to God and then to the 
neighbor as to self, is that disposition of heart that 
will make us victorious in every trial and temptation. 
In its operations toward God it lays hold by faith upon 
his mighty power; it trusts his wisdom and his guidance; 
it takes his standpoint of observation and patiently 
waits the outworking of his deep designs, rejoicing 
in hope; and is persevering and faithful through all the 
painful processes that lead on to victory. In its operations 
toward our fellow-men it is pure, peaceable, kind, 
forbearing, gentle, sympathetic, tender, and in strict 
conformity to the golden rule. 

"Do this," says the Apostle— cultivate this God-like 
disposition of love. And not only so, but he would have 
us be diligent in the cultivation, "knowing the season," 
knowing that the time is short in which to build up in 
ourselves this God-like and Christ-like character. We 
have not a moment to lose if we desire to be finally approved 
of God as meet for the inheritance of the saints 
in light. 



If the Apostle could say to the saints of his day, 
"Knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake 
out of sleep," etc., because they had then entered upon 
the Gospel age with its privilege of running the race for 
the prize of our high calling, with how much greater 
force do his words apply to these closing days of the 
age. In the clear light of unfolded time-prophecy we 
see that we are now living in the latter half of the 
harvest period; that only eight years of the harvest time 
remain, and that before its close all the overcoming 
saints will have passed the vail of the flesh and entered 
into the joy of the Lord as co-workers with him in the 
great work of the Kingdom. Yes, "the night is far 
spent" and "the day [the glorious Millennial day] is at 
hand." Even now the gray streaks of dawn appear. It 
is the day when the kingly Bridegroom shall receive 
unto himself his ready and waiting Bride, and the time 
is short in which to make ready for our gathering together 
unto him. It is high time indeed to awake 
out of sleep; for now is our salvation, our glorious deliverance, 
very near. 

It is possible that some, even of the very dear and 
fully consecrated children of God, surrounded by the 
cares of this life, or weary in the struggle against sin 
and evil, or somewhat beguiled by the present things 
of time and sense, may have become more or less 
drowsy, and so stand in special need of the stirring exhortation, 
"It is now high time to awake out of sleep." 
It is a time for earnest, searching self-examination, for 
a more diligent feeling after God, for a closer walk and 
more intimate fellowship with him, for more thorough 
self-abnegation, more diligent and persevering cross-bearing, 
and more faithful conformity in every respect 
to the whole will of God concerning us. 

R3831 : page 246 

The Apostle says, "Let us cast off the works of 
darkness, and let us put on the armor of light;" and 
again, "Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ." A careful, 
prayerful searching of our hearts will make plain 
wherein we lack of conformity to the perfect will of 
God. And if we discover in us any perverse way we 
will want to correct it and the more fully to put on the 
armor of light— the armor of righteousness and truth. 
Thus we put on the Lord Jesus Christ— the mind or 
disposition of Christ, that spirit of love which Paul 
says "is the fulfilling of the Law"— that love that worketh 
no ill to its neighbor; that suffereth long and is 
kind, that envieth not, that vaunteth not itself, is not 
puffed up, doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not 
her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil, that 
rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; 
beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all 
things, endureth all things; and without which, though 
we speak with the tongues of men and of angels and 



have it not, we are only as sounding brass or a tinkling 
cymbal; and though we have the gift of prophecy 
(teaching) and understand all mysteries and all knowledge, 
and though we have all faith so that we could remove 
mountains, and though we bestow all our goods 
to feed the poor, and even give our bodies to be burned, 
itprofiteth nothing.— I Cor. 13:1-7. 

How important, then, in the short time that remains 
to us here, that we awake fully and apply ourselves 
most diligently to the cultivation of this God-like 
and Christ-like disposition of love. "Beloved, let 
us love one another; for love is of God, and everyone 
that loveth is begotten of God, and knoweth God. He 
that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God is love... 
and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God 
in him. "-I John 4:7,8,16. 



R3831 : page 246 

THE GREAT TEACHER'S TABLE-TALKS 

-LUKE 14:1-14.-JULY 29.- 

Golden Text:— "He that humbleth himself shall be exalted." 

THE SABBATH was quite a feast day amongst the 

Jews, but in accordance with the requirements of the 

Law the dishes were served cold— cooked previously. 

Our Lord evidently made no objection to these Sabbath 

feasts, since we find that on several occasions he participated 

in them. The feast at Bethany just before his crucifixion 

was on the Sabbath, and likewise the one referred 

to in the present lesson. The invitation was from a prominent 

Pharisee, one of the rulers. It evidently included our 

Lord's disciples as well as himself, and numerous of the 

R3831 : page 247 

host's prominent friends, Pharisees and Doctors of the Law. 

The fame of Jesus had spread considerably, and doubtless 
these men were interested in thus coming in close contact 
with him, with a view to judging according to their own 
standards respecting his character, teachings and miracles— 
whether or not he was a fanatic, whether or not he made 
great boasts of himself, why the common people seemed so 
attracted to him, and why he did not seem to specially seek 
the fellowship of the rich and influential— although, so far 
as we know, he never refused an invitation to a feast, always 
using such occasions as opportunities for the presentation 
of the truth, to glorify the Father in heaven, to help, to 
instruct, to benefit those with whom he was in contact. 

The guests watched him critically rather than sympathetically. 
They were looking for faults rather than for 
virtues. But as with others, so with these— they found no 



fault in him. Perhaps by accident, perhaps by design, 
there was in the company a man who had the dropsy. He 
may have been a member of the household or family; indeed 
our Lord possibly may have been invited there with a 
view to proposing the healing of this one with the infirmity. 
Our Lord seems to have had a special feeling of sympathy 
with the afflicted, and he quickly noticed the man 
with the dropsy. The Pharisees were no doubt interested 
in witnessing the miracle, as any others would be; and at 
the same time, according to their forms, such a miracle on 
the Sabbath day would have been a misdemeanor. Our 
Lord's interest in handling the situation is apparent. He 
first inquired of his host and his learned associates whether 
or not it was lawful to heal the sick on the Sabbath day. 
The Doctors of the Law were expected to be able and willing 
to answer such questions propounded by the people at 
any time; yet in the presence of the great Teacher they all 
held their peace, made no reply; they wanted to see what 
course he would take. They did not wish to interrupt him 
—perhaps they wished to have an opportunity to find fault 
with him on this account. No objection to healing on the 
Sabbath day having been cited from the Law, our Lord performed 
the miracle— "He took him and healed him and let 
him go." The implication is that in some manner our Lord 
touched the afflicted one, that thus it might be the more 
manifest that the miracle was of divine power through him. 

THEY WOULD ASSIST DUMB BRUTES 

After having answered his own question by the miracle, 
thus attesting that nothing in the Law forbade the healing 
of the sick on the Sabbath, our Lord justified his course before 
the company saying, "Which of you having an ass or an 
ox fall into a pit would not draw him out on the Sabbath?" 
Another reading is, "Which of you having a son or even an 
ox fall into a pit would not on the Sabbath draw him out?" 
The proposition was unanswerable. They all knew that, 
where their selfish interests were involved, they would decide 
that there was nothing in the Law to hinder lending 
assistance on the Sabbath. Thus our Lord clearly showed 
that their thought respecting the healing of humanity on the 
Sabbath was fallacious, unscriptural. 

It will be remembered that our Lord was still under 
the terms of the Law Covenant, bound by every provision of 
the Law just as much as every other Jew had been from the 
time the Law was given at Mount Sinai. The Law Covenant 
did not pass away, as the Apostle points out, until 
Christ "nailed it to the cross." (Col. 2:14.) Hence nothing 
that our Lord did on the Sabbath day, healing the sick, 
etc., could properly be esteemed a violation of the fourth 
commandment, or any other feature of the Law. 

We have already shown (DAWN STUDIES, Vol. VI., chap. 
VII.) that the Law Covenant sealed at Sinai was not in force 
before that time upon the Jews, that it was not given to any 
other people, and that so far as those who accepted Christ 
were and are concerned the Law Covenant ended at the 



cross. Hence all the obligations of the Jewish Sabbath ended 
there also. The followers of Jesus during this Gospel 
age keep the higher Sabbath, the antitypical Sabbath, the 
"rest of the people of God"— rest from their own works, rest 
from fear, rest in hope of the glorious things which God has 
provided through Jesus for all who love him, rest in hope 
also for the world, that in due time all shall come to a 
knowledge of the Lord. This perpetual rest of peace abides 
with us every day alike. 

"NO LONGER SERVANTS, BUT SONS" 

Our celebration of the first day of the week as a 
Christian Sabbath should not be with the thought that it is 
a law or bondage, but rather an appreciation of the great 
privilege we enjoy of leaving the ordinary affairs of life on 
that day to give special thought to the spiritual things of 
the New Creature and to fellowship one with another, commemorating 
the day also as the one on which our Lord 
arose from the dead and began the work of the New Creation. 
We are looking forward also to the glorious rest that 
remaineth for the people of God, the eternity of blessed perfection 
into which we hope to be ushered by a resurrection 
from the dead, when we shall awake in our Lord's likeness. 
During this Gospel age our heavenly Father addresses us 
not as a house of servants but as a house of sons— as New 
Creatures in Christ Jesus. It would not be appropriate for 
him to give to these New Creatures, begotten of his Spirit, 
such laws as he gave to the Jews, the house of servants. 

The Lord would not insult the New Creature by even 
suggesting the various things stipulated in the Ten Commandments. 
The New Creatures in Christ Jesus have no 
sympathy with profanity, idol worship, the unrest of disbelief, 
with dishonor to parents, with murder and adultery, 
false witness, covetousness. Those whose hearts run in 
these directions have not been begotten of the Spirit, have 
not the Spirit of Christ, are none of his. The Lord's command 
to those who are New Creatures in Christ Jesus is that, 
being begotten of the spirit of love, they shall grow in grace 
and in knowledge and in love, seeking daily to bring into 
subjection all the weaknesses of their mortal bodies, reckoned 
dead at the moment they were begotten of the Spirit. 
True, the apostles do urge upon the Lord's people to put 
away anger and malice and envy and strife, etc., works of 
the flesh and of the devil; but even then they address the 
New Creature, not as though it were in sympathy with these 
wrong doings, but on the contrary, urging the New Creature to 
put away, to mortify, to put to death, these deeds of their 
flesh, already reckoned dead. 

Our Father's dealings and commands are never to the 

R3832 : page 248 

flesh, but to the New Creatures. From this standpoint, "Ye 
are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit 
of Christ dwell in you." (Rom. 8:9.) Therefore, "Henceforth 



know we no man after the flesh: yea, though we have 
known Christ after the flesh, yet now, henceforth, know we 
him [so] no more." (2 Cor. 5:16.) We are "judged according 
to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the 
spirit." (1 Pet. 4:6.) We are reckoned as fulfilling the 
highest demands of the divine law to God and to man, because 
we are not walking after the flesh but after the Spirit. 

THE HUMBLE TO BE EXALTED 

It was probably in answer to some question that our 
Lord propounded the parable of the guests bidden to a marriage 
feast, warning against the custom of seeking prominent 
positions, and the danger incurred that a more honorable 
person might come in later, and thus they might get the 
least honorable seat in the company. Our Lord noted this 
mark of selfishness in those who were gathered with him at 
the table of his host, but we must suppose that he did not 
rudely intrude the matter as a reproof at such a time without 
having a question or some reasonable cause for bringing 
the matter forward. 

The entire lesson of the parable seems to be an illustration 
of the proper course amongst men as viewed from the 
divine standpoint, and hence an illustration to all of the 
way in which God will deal with those whom he invites to 
the antitypical marriage-feast. The chief places will not be 
given to those most bold, most inclined to usurp authority; 
but, on the contrary, the Lord will not forget the man or 
woman of humble mind who, thinking little of himself or 
herself, would thankfully and gratefully seek for and appreciate 
the very humblest place in the divine presence. 

Ambition is a very necessary faculty of the human 
mind, without which the world would make comparatively 
little progress; but it is a very dangerous element as respects 
the formation of Christian character. We may be 
sure, from all the Scriptures set forth, that God's principle 
of dealing with us in the distribution of the glories and 
honors of the Kingdom will be along the lines laid down by 
the Master: he that humbleth himself shall be exalted, he 
that exalteth himself shall be abased. 

LOVE OF POWER TO DO GOOD 

We are frequently charged by those who, from blindness 
or other reasons, would disparage the glorious Gospel 
of the Kingdom, that those "of this way" are seeking selfishly 
for the glory and honor and immortality of the Kingdom 
as something superior to what others will receive at the 
Lord's hand. This as a whole is an unfair and an unjust 
charge, for as far as we know the majority of those who are 
interested in "Present Truth" are not so much ambitious 
for the dignities of the Kingdom as they are for any place 
in that great marriage feast, any membership in the glorious 
Bride company, any opportunity to share with the heavenly 
Bridegroom in the great and wonderful work of blessing all 
the families of the earth. It would not occur to any of us 



to think of ourselves in connection with such high honors 
and dignities, glory and immortality, except as we find it 
plainly stated in the divine Word, but finding it there, it is 
the duty of faith to accept whatever we may be deemed 
worthy of, and to allow it to work in us to will and to do 
the Lord's good pleasure, as he intended. 

The chief difficulty, so far as our experience goes, is not 
a mere ambition as respects glory, honor and rank in the 
Kingdom, but rather an ambition as respects the present 
life— a seeking who shall be greatest on this side the vail. 
Our observation is that some of the most talented, most able, 
most conscientious of the Lord's followers are in danger 
along this line, and it is a part of our duty to call this matter 
to the general attention, that each of the Lord's dear 
people may do all in his power to help any who are in such 
a position to see that an ambitious striving for glory and 
honor and dignity and position in the present time would 
surely mean a loss of the Lord's favor and the ultimate attainment 
in the Kingdom of a much humbler position, if indeed 
pride did not hinder them entirely from being accepted 
as members of the "little flock." Let us remember the 
Apostle's exhortation, "Humble yourselves, therefore, under 
the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due 
time."-l Pet. 5:6. 

REMEMBER THE POOR AND THE FRIENDLESS 

Perhaps it was in answer to some other question that 
our Lord gave his dissertation respecting the making of a 
feast and who should be invited to it, the conclusion of our 
lesson. He set forth a new proposition: The custom was to 
invite to a feast those whom you would expect and desire to 
ask you in return to a feast at their home. The thought of 
recompense was thus associated, a selfish thought. But our 
Lord's suggestion would not necessarily, we think, mean that 
it would be wrong to invite a person to a feast at our homes 
if we thought it at all probable he would ask us to his 
home. His thought rather is that, while this would be a 
pleasant and profitable interchange, there would be no 
merit in so doing in the Lord's sight— each would get his 
reward in such a reciprocity. 

Perhaps the Lord wished to show his host that in inviting 
himself and his disciples, who were not so situated as 
to be able to invite the others of the company in turn to 
their homes, he had really done a gracious act, provided he 
had the gracious motive back of it. In making a feast for 
the poor, the helpless, the maimed and the blind, a work of 
charity and mercy would be done, and, no recompense coming 
in the present life, they might be sure of a blessing in 
the future life. In other words, our Lord intimates that 
every good deed willingly, intelligently done from the right 
motive, may be sure to have a blessing, as surely as will 
every evil deed, every injurious matter done with a wrong 
thought and evil sentiment, be sure to have some kind of 
punishment either in the present or in the future life. 

Our Lord declared that such a good deed will be recompensed 



in the resurrection of the just, but since he was 
not addressing his disciples, not addressing justified ones, 
we feel that his words should not be understood to mean 
that such a feast to the poor, etc., would secure the highest 
place in the First Resurrection among the blessed and holy 
who shall be kings and priests unto God and reign as the 
kingly class, the Bride class, with the Bridegroom. This 
would not be a reasonable view to put upon the words, because 
other Scriptures intimate that not only faith in Jesus 

R3832 : page 249 

as the Mediator is necessary, but a travelling faithfully in 
the narrow way in order to attain a share in the First 
Resurrection. 

What then did our Lord mean? We answer that the 
First Resurrection, which will include only the "blessed and 
holy," the saints, the Bride of Christ, the Bride with the 
glorious Head and Bridegroom, will mark the beginning of 
the Kingdom which our Lord preached and which he taught 
us to pray for, saying, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be 
done on earth as in heaven." Those who will have part in 
the First Resurrection are to be the kings and priests and 
judges of the world. (1 Cor. 6:2; Rev. 20:6.) Surely after 
that First Resurrection the blessing of the world, the times 
of restitution of all things, will begin! Then the whole 
world will stand before these judges during the thousand 
years to be helped up, if they will, to the full of human 
perfection, or, failing to respond to their glorious opportunities, 
they will be destroyed in the Second Death. 

In that day of their judgment every deed of kindness 
to the poor will be found to have wrought some blessing in 
the character of the individual which will have to do with 
his station, with his starting-point on the highway of holiness. 
The most degraded, those who have accomplished 
nothing in the present time in the way of character development, 
must begin at the very start of the road and have the 
longer journey to its farther end of perfection; while those 
who in the present time have loved righteousness and hated 
iniquity, and have sought to comfort and benefit their fellows, 
especially those who would give even a cup of cold 
water to a disciple of the Lord because he was his 
disciple— all such would be found to be benefited 
proportionately in that day of glorious possibilities. 
Thus the Lord's words would signify that any who would 
give a cup of cold water or who would bless the maimed 
and the blind and the poor would experience a reward and 
blessing in that future time which would follow the resurrection 
of the just— in the Millennial age. 

VALUE OF TABLE TALKS 

The example set by our Lord in the matter of table-talks 
we have followed for many years at the Bible House 
with great profit. We find that much advantage accrues 
from the observance of order and regularity. Every morning 



promptly at 7 o'clock we have praise and prayer (Sunday 
8 A.M.)- Then we gather at the table, and after giving 
thanks for the food and praying that a blessing may be derived 
from our fellowship together, one of our number reads 
the text for the day from the Heavenly Manna. Questions 
are called for as breakfast proceeds and the text is thoroughly 
discussed. Later, before leaving the table, the comment 
following the text in the Manna is read as a conclusion 
of the lesson. Our dinner and supper-table talks are 
upon whatever questions may suggest themselves to any of 
those present, with opportunities for general expression— 

R3833 : page 249 

the brethren being asked for an expression, then the opportunity 

thrown open to anybody. The one occupying the 

head of the table is expected to give the final answer to the 

question. These table-talks are a schooling of themselves, 

ranging as they do on all parts of the Word of God, and 

refresh the memories of those present respecting what they 

have previously learned. We commend this method to all 

the dear people of God. Food partaken of under such circumstances 

seems to do one more good than otherwise, and 

the spiritual refreshment is almost certain to be advantageous. 

We do not favor disputings or replies of one to 

another, but merely the statement by each one of them of 

his own understanding of the question or the Scripture involved. 

Our minds cannot help being active, and it is profitable 

to us to have them directed into useful channels. 

Anyway, the example set by our Lord is surely a good one. 



R3833 : page 249 

THE SLIGHTED INVITATION 

-LUKE 14:15-24.-AUGUST 5.- 

Golden Text:— "They all with one consent began to make excuse.' 

THIS LESSON is a continuation of our Lord's table-talk 
at the home of the Pharisee. He had given suggestions 
along the line of humility on the part of guests, 
then to entertainers as to how their hospitality might wisely 
be dispensed: following this came a remark from one of the 
guests, "Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the Kingdom 
of God." This was doubtless uttered in a reverent spirit, 
possibly by one of the apostles, with a view to turning the 
attention of the company to the message which the Master 
and his disciples were proclaiming— the Kingdom of heaven 
is at hand. 

The Jews for over sixteen centuries had been waiting 
for the Kingdom of Messiah, which God's promise to Abraham 
indicated should come in connection with his seed- 
Israel. Moses, their Mediator and lawgiver, had declared 



that Messiah would be like unto himself as a leader for the 
nation, but greater. Through the prophets, all the way 
down through Israel's history, God had told his chosen nation 
of the great blessings in store for them. The grandeur of 
the Millennial Kingdom had been portrayed, and the wonderful 
opportunity for divine favor and refreshment had 
been pictured, with the assurance that it should extend from 
Israel to all the families of the world. In a vague manner 
the Jews had looked forward to this Kingdom with a mixture 
of hope and pride, combined with a fear that the changed 
conditions might in some particulars put any restraint upon 
their liberties as respects sins, etc. The reference to eating 
bread in the Kingdom, viewed from the oriental standpoint, 
would signify to be on good terms with the King, and a new 
regime, and to be a participator in the blessings of that glorious 
epoch. 

PARABLE OF THE GREAT SUPPER 

Our Lord was quick to turn the remark so as to point 
out a valuable lesson to all present who had the hearing 
ear. He gave, especially for the benefit of his disciples, but 
incidentally for the benefit of others of the company who 
were entertaining him, a lesson showing how those who 
might have been expected to appreciate God's favors would 

R3833 : page 250 

fail to do so, because of lack of faith and because too closely 
wedded to the affairs and interests of this present evil world. 
He likened God's Kingdom blessings to a great feast. This 
is a common illustration throughout the Scriptures— a feast 
of fat things with wines well refined, is the Prophet Isaiah's 
description of the Millennial blessings and glories which the 
Lord has in reservation for the world of mankind. The 
Prophet declares that the Lord will in this mountain spread 
a feast. (Isa. 25:6.) The mountain is the Kingdom, the 
dominion of Christ when it shall be set up, his Church being 
glorified with him in power, and blessings of very rich and 
choice kind will be set forth for the whole world of 
mankind. 

The Jews usually ate two meals in a day: the first 
might be termed breakfast, and was usually very simple, 
very plain— bread, olives, milk, etc.; the second and principal 
meal of the day was called sometimes dinner and sometimes 
supper, and consisted of more elaborate dishes, according 
to the ability of each family. The great feasts were 
usually made about sundown. Our Lord's parable pictures 
such a great feast, for it speaks of oxen and fadings being 
killed, which implies hundreds of guests. In these great 
feasts it was customary to send out the notifications 
long in advance, without specifying exactly the time, which 
would depend upon contingent circumstances. On the day 
of the feast, when it was assured that there would be no 
miscarriage of the arrangements, servants were sent to those 
already notified or bidden that they might come promptly to 



the feast. 

Our Lord represents the host of his parable as getting 
ready the supper on a grand scale, and then sending word 
to the previously bidden ones to come. Contrary to all precedent 
these guests declined, literally "begged off," asked 
to be excused, did not appreciate the honor done them, and 
sought for one or another excuse to avoid going to the feast. 
Such great feasts were made by princes or very wealthy 
men, and it was considered a high honor to have an invitation 
and to attend. Our Lord purposely made the parable 
the very contrary to the custom. One excuse was that 
the invited guest had recently purchased property and must 
examine it; another had purchased five yoke of oxen and 
needed to inspect them, test them; another had married a 
wife, etc. When the servant returned and reported that the 
bidden guests had declined to come the host was indignant, 
as he had every right to be. It was indeed a shameful procedure 
from any standpoint to accept an invitation, to allow 
the host to expect the invited one and to make elaborate 
preparations, and then at the final moment for the latter to 
make some trivial excuse. 

"THEY THAT WERE BIDDEN" 

As the parable refers to Jehovah's invitation to the 
blessings of the Kingdom, so those in the parable who originally 
were bidden, but who began to make excuse, were the 
Jews. To them God had given notice respecting the coming 
feast. They as a nation had declared that they would be 
very glad indeed to accept the high honor which he had 
conferred upon them in bidding them first to the special 
favors and privileges of the Kingdom. The feast had been 
in preparation for more than eighteen centuries from its first 
announcement. Our Lord with the apostles was the servant 
of Jehovah to inform his chosen people that all things were 
now ready, to come in prepared condition of heart to enter 
into the Kingdom, to enjoy its bounteous feast of rich blessings 
in their own hearts and lives, to be changed, begotten 
of the Spirit, that they might become New Creatures and 
heirs of God and joint-heirs with Messiah in that Kingdom. 
What a wonderful offer! How we should have expected 
that the whole people of Israel would have joyously hailed 
the message, and cried Hosanna to God in the highest! 
Blessed is he that cometh in the name of Jehovah— the 
Messiah. 

But no! the guests on the contrary looked at the servant 
and said, "We do not believe that this will be so grand a 
feast as we had supposed. The servant looks so meek, so 
gentle, so lowly of heart, that we feel it indicates that the 
feast will be a very tame affair; and now, separated as we 
are, lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God, we do not 
believe that we would very much enjoy the feast. We will 
not say this in so many words, we will preserve an outward 
form of godliness, and instead of confessing the truth 
on the subject we will merely make excuses to ourselves or 
to the servant of being too busy, etc. We will send our regrets 



instead of attending, although really we have no regrets. 
Indeed we feel that we will be happier pursuing our 
usual course of selfish ambition rather than get too close to 
the Lord, to his supervision, and the rules of righteousness 
which must certainly obtain in connection with those whom 
he would honor." 

The parable represents that the entire company of 
those who were bidden refused— failed to hearken to the 
servant or to come to the feast. Those who did receive our 
Lord and his message were so few, as compared with the 
entire Jewish nation, as to leave them almost unworthy of 
being mentioned, but, additionally, those who received Jesus 
were in large proportion the publicans and sinners, who in 
their day were considered rather as moral and social outcasts, 
and not at all recognized as the ones eligible to the 
Kingdom which God had promised to the holy. The Scribes 
and Pharisees counted themselves the holy people, and 
claimed for themselves the blessings, the invitation to the 
feast. Practically none of these received the Lord or came 
to the feast. 

The host, who had made so great provision for the 
Jewish nation, "was angry"— not mad, not in a rage, but indignant, 
and with perfect propriety he decided that "None 
of those men which were bidden shall taste of my supper." 
The supper of this parable, therefore, is not the only parable 
mentioned in the Scriptures, is not the supper mentioned 
by the Prophet Isaiah, which would be a feast of fat things 
for all nations. Because other Scriptures clearly show us 
that when that secondary feast for all nations shall be 
spread, Israel will have the first opportunity of participating 
in it. (Rom. 1 1 :25-32.) The feast here spoken of is evidently 
the marriage feast of another parable. Its blessings 
are not the general favors and mercies that are coming to 
the world by and by, but the special blessings and favors of 
God which, in the beginning of the Millennial age, will be 
bestowed upon the glorified Christ, our Lord, the Head, and 
the Church his body, the Bride. 

Natural Israel had the first opportunity for attaining 
the spiritual blessings to which spiritual Israel now aspires. 

R3834: page 251 

The Apostle explains this in Rom. 1 1:7-26, where he pictures 
the favored ones of God as an olive-tree, and informs us that 
the branches of that olive-tree at the Lord's first advent 
represented the Israelites, and that nearly all of these 
branches were broken off because of unbelief, because of 
failure to accept the invitation to the feast, because of a lack 
of appreciation of the spiritual blessings to be bestowed because 
of lack of faith. The Apostle tells us that God has 
accepted the believers in Christ of every nation, and that 
these are by faith engrafted into the olive-tree to take the 
place of the natural branches, the Jews broken off from 
relationship to this blessing through unbelief. 

THE MAIMED AND HALT GATHERED 



As the Scribes and Pharisees, the more devout of the 
Jewish nation, constituted the class to whom the Kingdom 
was primarily offered, so the class whom they rejected, the 
publicans and sinners, constituted the class described in this 
part of the parable as the poor, the halt, the maimed and 
the blind. When the better educated, the less morally lame, 
the less spiritually blind, rejected our Lord and his message 
respecting the Kingdom, he at once began to seek out the 
publicans and sinners, and to these his teachings were 
chiefly directed— they were invited to come to the feast 
which their more educated, more outwardly religious and 
pious brethren of the Scribes and Pharisees did not appreciate. 
But the servant could not find enough of this class to 
furnish the feast with guests according to the original arrangement 
of the host. The explanation of this part of the 
parable is that God, knowing the end from the beginning, 
had determined a definite number to constitute the Church, 
the Bride class, to be joint-heirs with his son in the bounties 
and blessings of the Kingdom, represented by this great 
feast. 

We understand the Scriptures to teach that this elect 
number is 144,000. Jesus and his disciples, as the servants 
of Jehovah, gathered as many of these poor, halt, lame Jews 
as were willing to come to the feast. About 500 accepted the 
invitation in our Lord's time and several thousand more at 
Pentecost, under the ministration of the Spirit, while several 
thousand more responded to the same glorious message 
further on, and ultimately the message reached those of 
every country. But in all we are assured that only a remnant 
of Israel was found worthy of the Kingdom honors. 
How many in all we could only guess, but we see no reason 
for placing the estimate higher than ten thousand. Even if 
some one would estimate that double this number more or 
less accepted of Christ, we should think it strange, as compared 
with present conditions, if more than ten thousand 
became footstep followers of our Lord Jesus in the narrow 
way of self-sacrifice even unto death, through which narrow 
way only can any attain to this great feast. 

"GO YE INTO THE HIGHWAYS AND HEDGES" 

Suppose that a remnant of ten thousand Jews did 
accept the divine favor in the very spirit of it, this would 
leave 134,000 short of the furnishing of the feast with the 
predetermined number of guests. Would the householder 
abandon his original arrangement? Nay: he determined that 
the full complement of guests should be there, as this parable 
shows, and hence the servants were found outside that 
city, the Jewish nation, to which belonged the promises by 
divine favor. Those servants were sent into the byways and 
hedges, into various parts of the world, to find guests for 
this great feast. They were bidden to urge all that they met, 
up to a certain number, to come to the feast. As the Lord of 
the feast had prescribed the number of his guests, they 
were not to cease inviting until the full complement had 



been found, nor were they to invite any more than 

the fixed number. This part of the message had been 

going out to the Gentiles ever since Cornelius, the first Gentile 

convert, heard of the blessed opening of this door of opportunity 

to the Gentiles. 

Throughout the Gospel age the Lord has directed his 
servants and guided in the work, so that at no time would 
more than the elect number be even invited. This accounts 
to us for much of the opposition and persecution which the 
Lord has permitted to come from time to time upon his servants 
and upon those who are willing to accept his invitation. 
He not only wishes to have guests at his feast, joint-heirs with 
Christ in the Kingdom, but elsewhere he has shown that he 
has predetermined that these only are the ones he will 
accept as copies of his Son. This signifies, then, that those 
who hear this invitation and are inclined to respond favorably 
will be tested by opposition and persecution, which in 
various ways will test and prove them and discourage and 
hinder any who are not of the stamp, the character, which 
our Lord has predetermined will be satisfactory to himself. 
He assures us that faith and zeal are amongst the characteristics 
necessary, and he has provided for the covering of 
every blemish and defect where these acceptable characteristics 
are found. 

"VIRGINS HER COMPANIONS" 

To our understanding other Scriptures show that many 
more than the 144,000 have accepted Christ and have made 
a consecration, agreeing to follow the great servant of God 
to the feast. Many of these, a "great company," although 
following in a measure, and in that measure satisfactory to 
the Lord, are not up to the divine standard of love and zeal. 
Nevertheless, since they exercised a sufficiency of faith to 
leave the world behind with a view to accepting God's 
favors, he will not permit them to suffer loss, but will give 
them also a share in the feast, though not in the chief seats 
of honor and distinction with the heavenly Bridegroom and 
the 144,000 constituting the Bride. The "more than conquerors," 
we are assured, shall in this feast sit with our 
Lord in his throne and share his glory, honor and immortality; 
but to the great company, after a certain purifying and 
washing, tribulation, there will be granted the honor of association, 
not in the throne but before the throne, not wearing 
crowns but bearing palms, not constituting pillars and living 
stones in the Temple but doing service in the Temple in 
humbler positions. All of these are represented in Revelation 7, 
and again in Revelation 19 we have the intimation 
that although this feast is specifically the nuptial feast of 
Christ and the Church, nevertheless the "great company," 
(Rev. 7) the virgins, the Bride's companions, will be invited 
to share in this nuptial feast— "Blessed are they that are 
invited to the marriage-supper of the Lamb."— Rev. 19:9; 
Psa. 45:14,15. 

It will be later on that the feast of fat things for the 



R3834 : page 252 

world will be spread out, and the intervening time of trouble 
such as was not since there was a nation shall so plow up 
the fallow ground of the human heart that the masses of 
mankind will indeed be ready to hail the blessings of that 
day. And hence we read of it that there the Desire of all 
Nations shall come. The bread of life will be provided to 
whosoever will accept it, the water of life to all who are 
thirsty, the Spirit and the Bride shall say, Come, and whosoever 
will may come and partake freely. 

How wonderfully grand and broad are the divine provisions, 
the feast which God has prepared! What a grand 
privilege we enjoy in that our ears already have heard of 
this special feast, to which the invitations have been going 
forth throughout this Gospel age— this nuptial feast by 
which we all will celebrate our union forever with the heavenly 
Bridegroom in the glorious estate of the Kingdom 
which is to bless the world. Let us not be like those of the 
parable who disesteemed the offer. Let us, on the contrary, 
following the example of the Apostle and his exhortation, 
lay aside every weight and the sin that doth so easily beset 
us— one weakness or difficulty in one person, another weakness 
or difficulty in another— and let us run with patience 
the race set before us. 

Let us be so enthused with the glorious possibilities 
of this great feast that we will not be content to walk or 
to meander slowly, toying with the affairs of this world 
or the flowers or attractions beside the way, which would 
lure us from the way, but let us press along. The way 
is rugged, and has been purposely so arranged by the 
Lord that only the zealous, the earnest, the faithful, the 
loyal, will be able to attain to the prize. Let us not be 
discouraged either, as though it were an impossibility to 
attain the blessing to which we have been called. The 
fact that the Lord has called us implies that he has made 
it possible for us to attain, and this possibility we see 
centers in our dear Redeemer: not merely in the work 
which he accomplished for us in the past when he redeemed 
us, but also in his gracious assistances which he 
renders us all along the journey. Let us remember his 
assurance that he is able and willing to make all things 
work together for good to them that love him, to the called 
ones according to his purpose. 



R3835 : page 252 

THE BLESSING OF THORNS 

When we thank our heavenly Father 
For the blessings of each day; 

For the flowers that are strewn 
O'er the roughness of the way; 

When we thank him for the roses 



That we gather day by day, 
Do we ever see the blessing 

Of the thorns along life's way? 

Oft we thank him for the sunshine 

That he sends us from above; 
Do we ever in the shadow 

Recognize his tender love? 
When our feet grow worn and weary, 

And our crosses hard to bear; 
Oft the way seems long and dreary, 

Knowing not his tender care. 

When the clouds that round us darken 

Change to night our radiant day, 
Oft we murmur that the sunshine 

Has been hidden from our way. 
But our Father in his wisdom 

Sends the dark as well as light; 
Can we doubt his loving kindness, 

In whose keeping all is right? 

If no shadow veiled our pathway, 

And we knew no ill to fear, 
Would we cling so closely to him? 

Would our Father seem so near? 
As when darkness gathers round us, 

And our faith in self is lost, 
We but trust him, and the Savior 

Gives us strength to bear our cross. 

In our path if all were sunshine, 

Would we look to him for light? 
And if all below were brightness, 

Then would heaven seem so bright? 
When we meet beyond the shadows, 

In that land of endless day, 
We will thank our heavenly Father 

For the darkness of the way. 

Oft we cannot see his kindness 

Through the darkness, pain and loss; 
But we know the crown is dearer 

For the sharpness of the cross. 
And when in his throne we gather, 

And our dear Redeemer meet, 
We will thank our heavenly Father 

For the thorns that pierced our feet. 

— Eugenia M. Doyle. 



R3836 : page 254 

"BLESSED ARE YOUR EARS, FOR THEY HEAR" 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have wished for a long time to tell you my own 
experience in coming into the Truth, but feared to trespass 
upon your valuable time. However, as my experience 
is (I hope) very different from that of most other 
people, I am going to tell it that you may know how 
marvellously I have been blessed of the Lord through 
his servant, Brother Russell, but in order to fully understand 
the extent of the blessing you must know of 
the rebellion that once possessed me. 

I was born of Universalist parents and brought up 
in that faith, and at the age of fourteen I united with 
that Church. When I was fourteen years old I began 
to sing in a quartet choir in one of the churches in 
this city, and from that time until fifteen years ago, 
when I was compelled to give up my music on account 
of growing deafness, I was a member of a quartet choir 
in some Church in town. For the last eight years or 
so before I was obliged to give it up, I was a member 
of a local concert organization, whose services were in 
large demand for entertainments and public installations 
of the various secret orders, Masons, Odd Fellows, 
etc., and a great many other occasions, besides 
our regular concert work. During the few years we 
were associated together we furnished music at over 
300 funerals. Taking it all together my music was a 
large part of my life, and my greatest pleasure outside 
my home. 

I was during most of those years a teacher in the 
Universalist Sunday school, and one of the chief workers 
there; was always willing to do anything in my 
power to help in any good cause until my hearing utterly 
failed, when it seemed to me that I was of no further 
use to anyone or anything after that. 

Soon after my 20th birthday I was married to one 
of the best of men, and it was about three years after 
our marriage that my hearing began to fail, gradually 
growing worse until about eight years ago, when I became 
stone deaf. Since that time I have been able to 
converse with people only when I have been able to 
"read their lips," or by writing or finger-spelling. So 
you see my husband has been a patient sharer of my 

R3836 : page 255 

affliction for twenty-seven years, during which time he 
has spent hundreds of dollars in having me try different 
so-called "cures for deafness." 

We have one child, a daughter of almost sixteen 
years, but previous to her birth we had similar hopes 
three times— the little ones living but a few hours each. 
The loss of my babies, then the loss of my hearing, 
with all that implies, made me very bitter against our 
heavenly Father, and even caused me to doubt at times 
the very existence of such a being. 

One day a few years ago, when a very dear old school-friend 



was visiting me, I was bemoaning my fate and 

she was trying to cheer and comfort me. Among other 

things she said, "It may be, Tena, that God has something 

better in store for you, and some time you will 

see that, although he has permitted this affliction to 

come upon you, it was in love, and may lead you to a 

still greater blessing." That aroused all my fiery indignation, 

and I replied, "I don't want any other blessing. 

I want those he has taken away! and don't you talk to 

R3837 : page 255 

me of the love of God! If there is such a being— which 
I sometimes doubt entirely— he has shown anything 
but love for me! He took away my babies as soon as 
they had breathed a few times. He has robbed me of 
my hearing and thus taken away my greatest pleasure 
in life, my music, etc., and at the same time raised a 
barrier between me and the world which I can never 
overcome. He has isolated me from all the world while 
still leaving me in it, and he would have shown more 
love for me if he had taken me out of the world entirely; 
and all this he has done notwithstanding the 
fact that I have always been a worker in his Church 
and cause, have always praised him with my voice, 
was ever ready and willing to serve him with hand and 
voice in any good cause, and this is the way he shows 
his love for me! Oh, to me he seems a good God to be 
hated, but not one who is worthy of my love and confidence 
or reverence." 

My friend, with tears rolling down her face, clasped 
me in her arms and said, "Poor child! I am so sorry 
for you. It does seem hard, but still I can't help feeling 
that the time will come when you will feel differently 
and see things in a better light." 

Was ever anyone so wickedly rebellious as I? I 
continued to feel the same for years, during which 
time, on the rare occasions that we met, my friend 
would drop some word, principally concerning events 
which were likely to soon take place in the world's history, 
and about three years ago she sent me some tracts 
which I was tempted to at once throw into the waste 
basket; but it occurred to me that after she had taken 
the trouble to send them to me, the least I could do was 
to read them before destroying them. I did read them, 
and one of them at least I kept, thinking it might come 
handy to refer to. So I put it where I saw it daily, 
and naturally read it over frequently. After a while I 
began to wonder what those DAWN books really contained. 
My curiosity very gradually increased until I 
sent to my friend for the first two volumes and began 
to read them. 

But the "eyes and ears of my understanding" still 
refused to open and I was nearly through the first volume 
before my interest was fully aroused. As I now 
recall it, it seemed like awaking from a night's sleep: 



we begin to be conscious it is morning and soon will 

be time to get up; then we close our eyes for another 

nap, until we suddenly find it is broad daylight and we 

must be up and about our business. Then we get 

fully awake. So it was with my reading the DAWNS. 

At times in reading Vol. I., my interest would be 

aroused, but I soon relapsed into that dreamy, half-conscious 

state, until toward the last of the volume I 

found myself fully awake and was eager to begin the 

next volume. Before I was half through that I sent for 

the other four volumes to have them at hand as soon 

as needed. 

The little tract that awakened my interest was "Do 
You Know?" and I intend to scatter that seed wherever 
I think there is a chance of its doing good. I wish I 
could express in words my thankfulness for the blessing 
received through reading the DAWNS and the study 
of God's Word in connection therewith, and also the 
TOWER publications. Right here let me thank whoever 
is responsible for sending me recently a package 
of six of your discourses published in a Pittsburg journal. 
I am so grateful for them, for I need all this 
"meat." So far as I know there are but two other people 
in town who believe in MILLENNIAL DAWN, and 
they, unlike myself, seem not to care to run for the 
prize of the high calling in Christ Jesus, and I have no 
one in full heart sympathy with me to talk with, so it 
is a real feast to me to get the TOWERS and all such 
reading upon the subject now so dear to my heart. 

As for me, I feel that I am indeed a "new creature." 
I cannot recognize myself today as being the same person 
who once was so ready to "curse God and die," and 
to think that, after all my sinful rebellion against him, 
he should permit me to see this wonderful revelation 
of his plan and receive the blessing far beyond anything 
I should ever have dared to hope for, teaches me 
a lesson in humility that I shall never forget. Now in 
days of trials and perplexities I can say, "Be still! It 
is the Lord. Let him do what seemeth to him good." 
I can even thank him for bringing me through these 
devious paths of doubt and despair, sorrow and suffering 
—rejoicing in tribulation, since it has brought me 
to his feet, humbled and ashamed, but now ready and 
anxious to do his will wherever it may lead me. 

Last spring I withdrew my membership from the 
Universalist Church, although less than a year before 
my only child united with the Church. Then was a 
trial for me. I felt if I was to belong to the one true 
Church of the living God I should "come out of Babylon," 
yet I knew not what influence my doing so would 
have upon my child. But since I took that step in 
obedience to what I believed to be the Lord's will, I felt 
that no harm to my child should result. 

My daughter has since come to see this "Present 
Truth," and wishes now that she had not joined the 
Universalist Church, yet does not quite want to withdraw 



from it, and I do not urge it. The seeds of truth 

are sown in her heart, and she says she "can't believe 

anything else since she has seen this," so I am content 

to trust the outcome to the Lord. She is really but a 

child yet, and, living the pleasures of youth, does not 

seem to want to sacrifice much for the Truth's sake. 

Later on she may, for she is a good girl, very bright 

and intelligent, and, with all her fondness for the good 

times usually enjoyed by young people, she has an undercurrent 

of sober, serious thought and a deep reverence 

for those things which so greatly interest me— and 

herself, too, only in less degree. 

Pardon this lengthy letter, which I hope has not 
proved uninteresting to you, and now may the Lord's 
blessing be upon you and all co-workers in his cause. 

In deepest gratitude, I am, your sister in Christ, 

, N.H. 



page 257 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVII AUGUST 15 No. 16 
A.D., 1906-A.M., 6034 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 259 

Jews Flocking Into Palestine 259 

"Priests Are Knaves" 259 

Your Letters Appreciated 259 

A Mountain Swallowed by the Sea 259 

The Asbury Park Convention 260 

One-Day Convention Reports 261 

The Young Man and the Pulpit 261 

Pray Without Ceasing, and Humbly 264 

The Narrow Way to Life Eternal 267 

page 258 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ST. PAUL, MINN., AUGUST 13-19 



(For information respecting meetings, accommodations, etc., see last 
page, this issue) 

All railroads have granted a rate of one cent a mile on account 
of the G.A.R. Encampment at Minneapolis. Ask for 
"G.A.R. Excursion Ticket" to Minneapolis, although it will 
not be necessary to go to that city to fulfil conditions of the 
ticket. On arrival at St. Paul display a WATCH TOWER at railway 
station for purpose of identification; but be not disappointed 
if you meet no one you know. The letter sent you 
gives explicit directions for reaching the lodgings secured for 
you by the Committee. 

TO FRIENDS GOING TO ST. PAUL VIA CHICAGO: 

The Chicago Church advise that about sixty of them expect 
to leave in a body on Sunday night, Aug. 12, due to arrive 
in St. Paul early Monday morning. They have made 
arrangements with the Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul Ry. Co. 
to supply them special coaches fitted with reclining chairs 
(without extra charge). Others may take advantage of the 
same arrangement by at once notifying the C.M.& St.P. agent, 
CM. Southern 315 Marquette Building, Chicago stating the number 
in your party, and whether to expect you on the 6.30 or the 
10.30 p.m. train. The 6.30 will carry most of the Chicago 
friends. If you reach Chicago in season for the 3 p.m. meeting, 
go to the meeting room, 26 Van Buren St. 



R3837 : page 259 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



JEWS FLOCKING INTO PALESTINE 



London, England.— The correspondent of the 
Daily Mail at Jerusalem remarks that the influx of 
Jews into Palestine during the last few months has 
been remarkable. Five thousand of them from Russia 
landed at Jaffa a few weeks ago. They will settle on 
the plain of Sharon. 

A few days ago some Jewish financiers made a trip 
east of the river Jordan. They were highly satisfied 
with the land there and are willing to establish colonies, 
but they are rather suspicious of the Bedouin 
tribes. It is believed, if the government will guarantee 
protection, the sale of large tracts of land will soon 
be completed. 

The correspondent states that the Jews are regaining 
possession of the land by degrees, and that should 
the present quick rate continue the whole country in a 
few years will belong to them. 



The above is a confirmation of the item we published 
recently to the effect that the Turkish government 
had removed the restriction on Jewish settlement 
in Palestine which had been in force since 
1892. Undoubtedly there will soon be a general rush 
of Russian Jews to the Holy Land— the land of 
Abraham. 

Thus is prophecy fulfilling before our eyes. The 
Zionist movement of recent years was caused largely 
by the refusal to allow Jews to go to the land. The 
Zionists planned to buy Palestine, but did not succeed. 
Now, "in due time," God has opened the door to Palestine 
without their purchasing it. The next eight years 
will no doubt show wonders there as well as elsewhere 
throughout the world— all in line with the Word. 

"PRIESTS ARE KNAVES" 



A bricklayer named Loos was severely punished 
on February 15th at the Berlin Criminal Court for "dishonoring 
the institution of the Christian Church." 

In a speech delivered at a meeting of co-workers, 
Loos spoke of religion as being superfluous to workmen, 
and used the expression "Priests are arrant 
knaves, who keep the people stupid." 

The Public Prosecutor argued that this expression 
contained an insult to the priesthood, and the Court 
sentenced Loos to three months' imprisonment. 



YOUR LETTERS APPRECIATED 



Since the issuance of the July 15th WATCH TOWER 
the Editor's mail has been greatly increased by letters 
expressive of sympathy and confidence. These are 
highly appreciated, dear friends. Each one would 
have had a personal reply had that been possible. 
Since Convention work, etc., etc., rendered personal 
replies impossible, we request that all accept this general 
acknowledgment. 

R3838 : page 259 

The evidences are that our trials and difficulties 
will but draw all the Lord's true sheep nearer to him 
and to each other in the blessed tie of Christian love 
that binds our hearts as one. 

"A little while, our trials will be over; 

A little while, our tears be wiped away; 
A little while, the power of Jehovah 

Shall turn all darkness into gladsome day. 

"A little while! Tis ever drawing nearer— 
The brighter dawning of that glorious day. 

Blest Savior, make our spirit's vision clearer, 
And guide, O guide us in the shining way." 

A MOUNTAIN SWALLOWED BY THE SEA 



The Prophet declared that the mountains shall be 
removed and carried into the midst of the sea (Psalm 46:2). 
This we showed (DAWN, Vol. I., p. 323) means 
that the kingdoms shall be swallowed up by anarchy. 

Note how the Lord caused the same thought to 
come to worldly minds: The Chicago Daily Tribune 
on July 17 printed on its front page a sketch of a wide 
waste of waters with a mountain peak emerging from 

R3838 : page 260 

it, on which the Russian Czar and six of his advisers 
are clinging, waiting in horror for the waters to 
cover them entirely. The title is "Doomed— Russian 
Autocracy." 



R3838 : page 260 

THE ASBURY PARK CONVENTION 



FROM various directions the Truth people gathered 
at Asbury Park, N.J., for a General Convention, 
to the number of about 1,000— some staying 
throughout, and others a shorter period. Florida and 
Texas on the South, California on the West, Maine on 
the East and Canada on the North were represented, 
and many of the intermediate States, though the bulk 
of the attendance was from New England, New York, 
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, 
and District of Columbia. Besides, we were favored 
with the fellowship of three from Scotland. As 
you may surmise it was a family reunion, in which each 
was deeply interested in all others. As usual all faces 
were glad and bright because of the sunshine of the 
Truth within. The continuance of the Convention for 
an entire week under the beautiful and peaceful conditions 
of this model sea-side resort seemed to be appreciated 
by all. 

According to program, the Convention opened with 
an address of welcome at 10 a.m. Sunday, July 22, followed 
by a Praise and Testimony Meeting which all 
seemed to greatly enjoy. Brother A. E. Williamson 
preached at 3 p.m., subject, "The Saints Shall Judge 
the World." Brother M. L. McPhail discoursed at 7.30 
p.m. on "Elect and Non-Elect." 

On Monday, the 23rd, another Praise and Testimony 
meeting was enjoyed from 9 to 10.30 a.m., followed 
by a discourse from Brother John Edgar, subject, 
"Time, and Its Relation to the Divine Plan." Brother 
R. E. Streeter discoursed at 7.30 p.m. on "Our Hope 
and Its Present Effects." 

Tuesday, the 24th, opened with a Praise, Prayer and 
Testimony Meeting at 9 a.m. This was followed by a discourse 
by Brother Frank Draper on "Some Features of 
the Tabernacle's Teaching." At 7.30 p.m. Brother M. 
L. Herr preached on the subject, "Transformed." 

Wednesday's program was a little different. A Sunrise 
Praise and Testimony service, 5 to 6.30 a.m., reminded 
the friends in general that we are all awake and on the 
outlook for the Sun of Righteousness to usher in the 
great antitypical Sabbath— the Millennium. At 10.45 
Brother E. Bundy gave a discourse on "The Chief Corner 
Stone." Just as he concluded and a song of praise 
was being sung Brother C. T. Russell arrived and was 
conducted to the platform. The friends arose en masse 
and gave him their smiles of welcome with the "Chatauqua 
salute"— the waving of handkerchiefs. Brother 
Russell greeted the assemblage, assuring them of his 
joy in meeting them and of his hopes and prayers that 
the Convention would be a great success and blessing 
to all. He was assured of the Lord's willingness to 
bless us all and hence believed that the amount of 
blessing each would receive would depend very largely 
on his own attitude of heart— his receptiveness. He 
remarked that the Convention would cost the company, 
for railway fares and board, about $25 each on the 



average— or about $25,000 in all. Born with an economical 
streak he was accustomed to count the cost 
and compare it with the results. He had been learning 
of late that it is very difficult to estimate the value of 
spiritual blessings, and believed it quite possible for 
each one to get more than his money's worth of favor 
and spiritual uplift, but it behooved each one to seek 
for this result in himself as well as to assist others to 
the highest attainment in spiritual progress. Then the 
congregation filed past Brother Russell, greeting him 
and he them with hearty hand-shakes and words of 
comfort. 

Later in the day Brother Russell introduced Brother 
W. E. Van Amburgh as the Permanent Chairman 
of the Convention and the speaker of the evening at 
7.30 p.m.— subject, "The Honor of the Cross." 

Thursday, July 26, opened with a Praise Service 
and at 10 o'clock was followed by a discourse by Brother 
Russell on "Baptism and its Import." At 3 p.m. 
symbolic baptism was administered in the Congregational 
Church's baptistry— 65 symbolizing their burial 
and resurrection. At 7.30 p.m. Brother Smith Walker 
preached on "Making Our Calling and Election Sure." 

Friday, the 27th, at 9 a.m. a Praise and Testimony 
Meeting held until 10.30 when Brother John Edgar delivered 
an address on "The Lessons Taught in the 
Great Pyramid." At 7.30 Brother Russell answered a 
large bunch of written "Questions on Biblical Topics." 

July 28th, Saturday, Brother Russell addressed 
Colporteurs and the friends of that work, showing 
its importance and how evidently the Lord intended 
that it should be a feature of the present 
"Harvest" work, and how great its possibilities of 
reaching the eyes, ears and hearts of the people. The 
afternoon continued the subject and gave opportunity 
for the assignment of territory to many beginners. 
About 60 Colporteurs were in attendance. We hope 
for a still larger gathering of Colporteurs at the St. 
Paul Convention. At 7.30 p.m. Brother M. L. McPhail 
gave a discourse on "Patience." 

When Sunday, July 29, the last day of our Convention 
Feast, arrived, it found the friends well filled and 
disposed to say with the Prophet, "My cup runneth 
over." The 10.30 a.m. discourse by Brother Russell 
was from the text (Col. 3:1), "If Ye then be Risen with 
Christ, Seek Those Things which are Above." The 
3 p.m. discourse by the same speaker was on the theme, 
"The Bible Vindicated— To Hell and Back: Who are 
There. Hope for the Return of Many of Them." 

The "Love Feast," the concluding service of the 
Convention, was an occasion long to be remembered. 
It was conducted by Brother Van Amburgh. At 7 
p.m. Brother Russell gave a few parting words, reminding 
the dear friends of the General Assembly or Convention 
soon to be enjoyed by some and urging each 
one present to do all in his power to make his own Calling 



and Election sure. He reminded all that our sufficiency 
is of God in Christ, who has assured us that the 
Father himself loveth us and is for us, willing to assist 
us; that the Lord Jesus has promised, "I will never 
leave thee nor forsake thee," and assured us that all of 
life's experiences under his direction can and will be 
overruled in our favor— if we but obey his commands 
and abide in his love. He reminded the friends of his 
words of greeting on his arrival, and his exhortation 
that each get for himself and for dear ones at home 

R3838 : page 261 

the full value of the cost of the Convention. He had 

to tell them that many had told him they had been 

doubly repaid with interest, and that one brother remarked 

that he alone had gotten spiritual blessings of 

more value than the $25,000, the entire cost of the Convention. 

He had every reason to believe that many of 

us could not estimate the value of the seasons of spiritual 

refreshment, and he proposed their continuance until 

the Lord's providence indicated to the contrary. 

There was no time for a more formal adieu, so Brother 

Russell waved his hand to the audience and they theirs 

to him and he was driven to the train, while the others 

wound up the Convention with the Love Feast of the 

program. 

We have refrained from comments on the discourses, 
but we believe that all who heard were blessed 
and edified. Comments to this effect were general 
—not only among the friends of the Truth but amongst 
visitors. None can tell the scope of the blessing resulting 
from these gatherings, which seem to become 
more popular every year. May the Lord add his blessing 
richly, not only to those who attended but also to 
the many more whose hearts and prayers were with us 
and who were frequently remembered in our prayers. 



R3839 : page 261 

ONE-DAY CONVENTION REPORTS 

AT Jamestown, Ohio, we had a very interesting 
time on Sunday, July 15. Friends from surrounding 
parts were in good attendance, 

amongst them all of the Dayton class, about 40. The 
rally of the forenoon, led by Brother Martin, was refreshing 
and inspiring. The afternoon meeting for the 
public was well attended for the size of the city— about 
400 were present. At the evening session there was a 
discourse for the interested, which many of you received 
the following day through the newspapers. The Lord's 
Spirit was with his people and they were blessed; and 
it is sincerely hoped that some of the public who came 



through curiosity got some food that will profit them 
everlastingly. 

On July 22 the Elgin, 111., Convention, longed for 
by the dear friends for some time, came to pass. The 
Editor reached Chicago Sunday morning in time to join 
the dear friends there on an excursion train— three 
coaches of which were reserved for their use. About 
107 of the Chicago Church were present, and good representations 
from other small cities nearby. In consequence 
the morning rally, led by Brother Jones, numbered 
over 200— the evening attendance being nearly 
300. 

The afternoon meeting for the public was not so 
well attended as had been hoped— not over 500. But 
the attention was excellent. Elgin is not a large city and 
the audience was well proportioned to the population 
and the auditorium. The evening discourse on the 
"Ministry of Reconciliation" committed to us, many of 
you already have in the secular papers of the day following 
the Convention. We had a delightful visit with 
the Chicago friends both going and coming, and believe 
that all enjoyed the occasion thoroughly. 



Any of the friends desirous of securing these discourses 
every Monday should subscribe through the 
WATCH TOWER office and get wholesale rates on the 
papers. 



R3839 : page 261 

THE YOUNG MAN AND THE PULPIT 

-BY SENATOR ALFRED J. BEVERIDGE- 

THE American people at heart are a religious people. 

They are practical and fearless, too. If 

you will listen to the chance conversations of 

the ordinary American you will find that the laymen 

of the nation have some very decided views 

upon the Pulpit, the man who fills it and the work he 

ought to do. In the breast of the millions there is not 

only a great need, but a great yearning, for certain 

things of the soul which it is for the Pulpit to supply. 

This paper is an attempt to talk as one of these millions 

to the young man who is about to mount to this 

sacred station. 

"I have just come from Church," said a friend one 
day, "and I am tired and disappointed. I went to hear 
a sermon and I listened to a lecture. I went to worship 
and I was merely entertained. The preacher was a 
brilliant man and his address was an intellectual treat, 
but I did not go to Church to hear a professional lecturer. 



When I want merely to be entertained I will go 
to the theater. But I do not like to hear a preacher 
principally try to be either orator or play-actor. I am 
pleased if he is both; but before everything else I want 
him to bear to me the Master's message. I want the 
minister to preach Christ and him crucified." 

The man who said this was a journalist of ripe 
years, highly educated, widely experienced, acquainted 
with men and life.... 

First, then, young man aspiring to the Pulpit, the 
world expects you to be above all other things a minister 
of the Gospel. It does not expect you to be primarily 
a brilliant man, or a learned man, or witty, or eloquent, 
or any other thing that would put your name on 
the tongues of men. The world will be glad if you are 
all of these, of course; but it wants you to be a Preacher 
of the Word before anything else. It expects that 
all your talents will be consecrated to your sacred calling. 
It expects you to speak to the heart, as well as to 
the understanding, of men and women, of the high 
things of faith, of the deep things of life and death. 
The great world of worn and weary humanity 
wants from the Pulpit that word of helpfulness and 
power and peace which is spoken only by him who has 

R3839 : page 262 

utterly forgotten all things except his holy mission. 
Therefore merge all of your striking qualities into the 
divine purpose of which you are the agent. Lose consciousness 
of yourself in the burning consciousness of 
your cause. 

But if you do that you must be very sure of your 
own belief. Any man who assumes to teach the Christian 
faith and yet, in his own secret heart, questions 
that faith himself, commits a sacrilege every time he 
enters the pulpit. Can it be that the lack of living interest 
in certain Church services is caused by a sort of 
subconscious knowledge of the people that the minister 
himself is speaking from the head rather than from 
the heart; that what he says comes from his intellect, 
and not as the "Spirit gives him utterance"; and, 
to put it bluntly, that he himself "no more than half 
believes what he says"? 

"The man spoke as if he were bored with endless 
repetition of sermons," said a close observer of a weary 
parson. Certain it is that even in political speaking 
the man who believes what he says has power over his 
audience out of all comparison with a far more eloquent 
man whom his hearers know to be speaking perfunctorily. 
No matter how much the latter kind of speaker 
polishes his periods, no matter how fruitful in thought 
his address, no matter how perfect the art of his delivery, 
he fails of the ultimate effect wrought by a much 
inferior speaker whose words are charged with 
conviction. 



He is like the chemist's grain of wheat, perfect in 
all its constituent elements except the mysterious 
spark of life without which the wheat grain will not 
grow. 

If, then, you do not believe what you say, and believe 
it with all your soul— believe it in your heart of 
hearts— do not try to get other men to believe it. You 
will not be honest if you do. The world expects you to 
be sure of yourself. How do you expect to make other 
people sure of themselves if you are not sure of 
yourself? 

And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy 
brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in 
thine own eye? 

Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull 
out the mote out of thine eye; and behold, a beam is 
in thine own eye? 

Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine 
own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out 
the mote out of thy brother's eye. 

The world is hungry for faith. Do not doubt this 
for a moment. More men and women today would 
rather believe in the few fundamentals of the Christian 
religion than have any other gift that lavish fortune 
could bestow upon them. But these millions want to 
believe; they do not want to argue or be argued at. 
They want to believe so thoroughly that their faith 
may amount to knowledge. Doubtings are disquieting. 
We want certainties, we laymen. 

For years I have made it a point to get the opinion 
of the ablest and most widely experienced men and 
women I met on the subject of immortality. In all 
cases I found that the subject in which they were more 
deeply interested than in all other subjects put 
together. 

"I would rather be sure that when a man dies he 
will live again with his conscious identity than to 
have all the wealth of the United States, or to occupy 
any position of honor or power that the world could 
possibly give," said a man whose name is known to the 
railway world as one of the ablest transportation men 
in the United States. 

"When I am by myself I think about a lot of strange 
things. Is the soul immortal, and what is the soul 
anyhow?" It is a politician who is talking now, and a 
ward politician at that, a man whom few would suspect 
of thinking upon these subjects at all. 

So you see, young man, you who are being measured 
for the Cloth, all manner and conditions of men 
are thinking about the great problems of which you are 
the expounder, and longing for the answer to those 
problems which it is your business to give them. That 
is the condition of the mind of the millions. 

But what is the condition of the mind of the young 
minister? A few years ago a certain man, with good 
opportunities for investigation and a probability of 



sincere answers, asked every young preacher whom he 
met during a summer vacation these questions: 

First: "Do you believe in God, the Father; God a 
person, God a definite intelligence— not a congeries of 
laws floating like a fog through the universe; but God 
a person in whose image you were made? Don't argue; 
don't explain; but is your mind in a condition where 
you can answer 'Yes' or 'No'?" Not a man answered 
"Yes." Each man wanted to explain that the Deity 
might be a definite intelligence or might not; that the 
"latest thought" was much confused upon the matter, 
and so forth and so on. 

R3840 : page 262 

The second question was: "Do you believe that 
Christ was the son of the living God, sent by him to 
save the world? I am not asking whether you believe 
that he was inspired in the sense that the great moral 
teachers are inspired— nobody has any difficulty about 
that. But do you believe that Christ was God's very 
Son, with a divinely appointed and definite mission, 
dying on the cross and raised from the dead— 'yes' or 
'no'?" Again not a single answer with an unequivocal, 
earnest "Yes." But again explanations were offered, 
and in at least half the instances the sum of most of 
the answers was that Christ was the most perfect man 
that the world has seen, and humanity's greatest 
moral teacher. 

Then came the third question: "Do you believe 
that, when you die, you will live again as a conscious 
intelligence, knowing who you are and who other people 
are?" Again, not one answer was unconditionally 
affirmative. Of course they did not know. Of course 

R3840 : page 263 

that could not be known positively. On the whole they 
were inclined to think so, but there were very stubborn 
objections. And so forth and so on. 

The men to whom these questions were put were 
particularly high-grade ministers. One of them had 
already won a distinguished reputation in New York 
and the New England States for his eloquence and 
piety. Every one of them had had unusual successes 
with fashionable congregations. But every one of them 
had noted an absence of real influence upon the hearts 
of their hearers, and thought that this same condition 
is spreading throughout the modern pulpit. Yet not 
one of them suspected that the profound cause of what 
they called "the decay of faith" was, not in the world 
of men and women, but in themselves. 

How could such Priests of Ice warm the souls of 
men? How could such Apostles of Interrogation convert 
a world? 

These were not examples, however; they were exceptions. 



Most preachers believe that they actually 
know the truths they preach.... 

Faith is infectious. James Whitcomb Riley, whose 
sweetness of character and nobility of soul equals his 
genius, gave me the best recipe for faith in God, Christ 
and Immortality I have ever heard: 

"Just believe," said he; "don't argue about it; 
don't question it; simply say, 'I believe.' Next day 
you will find yourself believing a little less feebly, and 
finally your faith will be absolute, certain and 
established." 

And why not, you of the schools who split hairs 
and dispute, and whose knowledge, after all, as Savonarola 
so well said, comes to nothing— why not? For, 
if you cannot prove God and Christ and Immortality, 
it is very sure you cannot disprove them; and it is safe 
—yes, and splendid— to believe in these three marvellous 
realities— or conceptions, if you like that word 
better. 

The doctrine of noblesse oblige was one of the most 
beautiful of human conventions. It was based upon 
the propositions that a man being noble and the son of 
a nobleman could not do a mean thing— it was not 
good form. But if a man gets it into his consciousness 
that he is the child not of a nobleman, not of an earthly 
ruler, not of a great statesman, warrior, scientist or 
financier, but of the living God who presides over the universe, 
how large, how generous, how exalted and how 
fine his attitude toward life, and all his conduct, needs 
must be!... 

Of course, everybody understands that preaching 
and faith and all that is not everything that the young 
minister must do for his fellow-men. "Faith without 
works is dead." Everybody who has read the Bible 
understands that. But this paper is on The Young 
Man and the Pulpit— an attempt to give him an idea of 
how the people to whom he is going to preach look at 
this matter, how they regard him and, above all else, 
what the people to whom his life work is devoted really 
need and really want above everything else in this 
world. 

Don't preach woe, punishment and all mournfulness 
to the people all the time. Where you find sin, go 
ahead and denounce it mercilessly. But do your denouncing 
crisply, cuttingly, not dully, innocuously. 
Speak to kill. Do not forget that the Master told people 
of his day that they were "a generation of vipers." 

But that was not the burden of his appeal. He 
knew that there were other things in the world and 
human nature besides sin. Mostly he spoke of "things 
lovely and of good report." Remember that his coming 
was announced as a bringing of "good tidings of 
greatjoy." 

The Sermon on the Mount is the perfection of 
thought, feeling and expression. Make it your example. 
You will recall that it begins, "Blessed are the 



poor in spirit." It is full of "blessed" and blessings, 
of consolations and encouragements and promises of 
certainties. It radiates sense and kindness and prayer. 

The One understood that most glorious truth of all 
truths— that there is some good in each of us, and that 
if that good only could be recognized and encouraged 
it would overcome the bad in us. You will remember 
the saying, "A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump." 

So don't be an orator of melancholy. There is 
enough sadness in the world without your adding to it 
by visage, conduct or sermon. Besides, it is not what 
you are directed to do. The people would be very glad 
if you could say with Isaiah that: 

"The Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings 
unto the meek; he hath sent me. ..to proclaim liberty 
to the captives, and the opening of the prison to 
them that are bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of 
the Lord,. ..to comfort all that mourn,. ...to give 
unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, 
the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness." 

That is the kind of talk that will cheer the people, 
and it is the kind of talk that will do the people good. 
There is nothing "blue" about that. And it is what the 
Book bids you tell the people. They want it, too, and 
need it— they need beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for 
mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness." 
Ah, yes, indeed, that is worth while! Your 
pews will never be empty if such be the fruit of your 
lips and the ripeness of your spirit. The people want 
to hear about something better than they know or have 
known. 

"How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of 
him that bringeth good tidings!" Nobody likes a scold. 
Of course when it is necessary to scold, go ahead and 
scold. But don't make scolding a practice. Your congregation 
will not stand being abused; they will not 
stand it unless they actually need it. But they will 
then stand it. Unconsciously they will know that the 
stripes you lay upon them are medicine after all, and 
for their healing. Yet ordinarily we all have such a 
hard time that we all would like to hear about "a good 
time coming." Ordinarily we are all so tired that we 
would like to hear something like this: "Come unto 
me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will 
give you rest." 

R3840 : page 264 

The religion which you preach owes its vitality to 
the glorious hopefulness of it. The people want to 
know that, if they do well here, joy awaits them hereafter 
—and here, too, if possible. They want to hear 
about the "Father's house" that has "many mansions," 
and about him who has "gone to prepare a place" there 
for them. 

They demand happiness in some form, if only in 



talk. If they do not get it in the assurances of religion, 
who can blame them if they say: "Let us eat, drink 
and be merry, for tomorrow we die"? For sure enough, 
they do die tomorrow so far as their world goes. 

If you do not believe that religion means happiness, 
quit the pulpit and raise potatoes. Potatoes feed 
the body at least. But unfaithful words and speech of 
needless despair feed nothing at all. Put beauty, hope, 
joy, into your preaching, therefore. Make your listeners 
thrill with gladness that they are Christians. Even 
the men of the world have wisdom enough to make 
things profane as attractive as possible. 

Think of the intimate and personal subjects of 
Christ's teachings. He spoke of prayer and the fulfilment 
of the law, of master and servant and of practical 
charity, of marriage, divorce, and the relation of children 
to parents; of manners, serenity and battlings; 
of working and food and prophecy; of trade and usury, 
of sin and righteousness, of repentance and salvation. 
Yet by means of all this he made noble the daily living 
of our earthly lives and gloriously triumphant the ending 
of them. 

I do not think the ordinary layman cares to hear 
you preach about some new thing. The common man 
prefers to hear the old truths retold. Indeed there can be 
nothing new in morals. "Our task," said a clear-headed 
minister, "is to state the old truths in terms of the 
present day." That is admirably put. In science progress 
means change; in morals progress means stability. 
No man can be said to have uttered the final word 
in science; but the Master uttered the final word in 
morals. 

But, after all is said and done, what the millions 
want from the modern pulpit is the fruitful teaching of 
the Christian religion. They want the fundamentals. 
They want decisions and certainty. Their minds are 
to be convinced, yes, but even more their hearts are to 
be touched. 



R3841 : page 264 

PRAY WITHOUT CEASING, AND HUMBLY 

--LUKE 18:1-14.-AUGUST 19.- 

"God be merciful to me a sinner." 

AGAIN we have a lesson on Prayer, from various standpoints. 

The disciples needed to learn certain 

lessons respecting prayers, and our Lord gave 

the instruction through two interesting parables. The first 

lesson was respecting persistency: that they should continue 

to pray and not faint, nor grow disheartened and discouraged 

because of the delay in the answer. They were to be 



assured of the real character of our God, of his willingness 
to hear their petitions and to give them all necessary good 
things in the proper manner and at the proper time. The 
delay of the answer was to work out for them a blessing of 
increasing faith and trust. 

THE UNJUST JUDGE 

The parable illustrating this represents a judge in an 
oriental country, void of reverence for either God or man- 
ready to defy divine commands and to violate public opinion 
in the attainment of his selfish ends. Judges in Christian lands 
we believe to be honorable and trustworthy: we recognize this 
as the rule and anything else as the exception; but in oriental 
lands it is often regarded as a matter of course that 
officials will indulge in graft of every kind, and that whoever 
is in office is there for personal benefit and profit. In 
olden times, indeed until within the last century, judges 
were to a large degree lawmakers as well as executives. 
Today in civilized lands these functions are separate, the 
lawmaking or legislative department of the government being 
entirely separate from the judicial and executive departments, 
much to the advantage of the public and to the 
forwarding of the ends of justice. 

Before the unrighteous judge of the parable came a 
widow who was suffering from certain indignities and injustices 
from which she desired to be relieved by the judge. 
Since she was not wealthy and could not bribe him, since 
she had little influence, her demands for redress and justice 
were ignored. However, she was persistent until finally the 
judge, admitting to himself that it was not love of justice on 
his part but merely selfish desire to avoid further trouble, 
took up her case and granted her the necessary assistance 
and justice. 

GOD NOT UNJUST THOUGH HE DELAY 

The parable does not compare this unjust judge with 
our heavenly Father, and thus imply that the latter is an 
unjust judge. On the contrary it contrasts the two and gives 
us the thought, the lesson, that if an unjust judge would 
finally grant relief simply from selfish motives, surely our 
heavenly Father, who is neither unjust nor unloving nor 
careless of the interests of his people, will heed their prayers. 
If, therefore, a matter be one that in our judgment is 
very importune, demanding our earnest prayers, and if the 
answer to those prayers be not quickly forthcoming, we can 
neither conclude that God is an unjust judge who cares not 
for us because we cannot bribe him nor otherwise advantage 
him, nor are we to think of him as selfishly careless of 
our interests except as we would bother him; but we are to 
think of him as our loving heavenly parent, whose arm is 
not shortened that he cannot assist us, whose love for us is 
not deficient but strong, who loveth us as a father pitieth 
his children, and, on the strength of our knowledge of God's 
character and trust in his faithfulness, we are to have patience, 



and to trust the fulfilment of our petitions to his wisdom, 
love and power, knowing that all things shall be made 
to work together for good to them that love God, to the 
called ones according to his purpose. 
Our Lord in applying the parable says, "And shall not 

R3841 : page 265 

God avenge his elect which cry to him day and night?" 
though he manifest no special haste in the matter. The 
lesson is that we are to have confidence in God and in his 
promise that eventually the right shall triumph. This confidence 
is to amount to an absolute faith which will grasp 
the promises, never doubting but merely waiting. Those 
who thus come to God in faith and trust may come repeatedly 
and be refreshed at every coming, because they come 
not with a hope of changing the Almighty, altering any of 
his plans and arrangements, which they recognize as righteous 
altogether: but, on the contrary, they come because 
they believe his promises and because they desire to rest 
and comfort their hearts by communion with him, by assuring 
their hearts in prayer that the Father himself loveth us 
and that he has a due time for the deliverance of those who 
are his from the bondage of the Adversary, of sin and death. 
The time may seem long, but if the proper faith be exercised 
a blessing will come with every step of the delay that 
will more than compensate. 

Our Lord concludes this parable by saying, "I tell you 
that he will avenge them speedily." This may mean that 
when the Lord's time shall come for the delivering of his 
people he will make a short work with the great Adversary 
and all the machinery of unrighteousness which, under the 
prince of this world, has come to occupy so prominent a 
place in the affairs of life— in opposing truth, righteousness, 
etc. Or on the other hand it might be understood to mean 
that the Lord will really not long delay in bringing in his 
Kingdom of righteousness. From the human standpoint the 
more than eighteen centuries from the time our Lord redeemed 
the world until now, the time for the setting up of 
his Kingdom, seems a long time: How could it be spoken 
of as "speedily"? We reply that "a day with the Lord is 
as a thousand years": hence from this standpoint the whole 
period would be less than two days. What we need today 
is to take the Lord's standpoint in viewing matters. Both 
views are Scriptural, and therefore we need not dispute as 
to which one the Lord intended. Possibly he meant that 
we should take both. 

SHALL HE FIND THE FAITH? 

Separate and distinct from the parable the Lord interjects 
the statement, "Nevertheless, when the Son of man 
cometh shall he find faith on the earth?" The intimation 
is that at the second coming of the Lord for the establishment 
of his Kingdom the true faith would be seriously 
lacking, almost extinct— just as at the first advent we read, 



"He came unto his own [people] and his own received him 
not." So, in the end of this age, our Lord's second presence 
for the establishment of his Kingdom will similarly try and 
test nominal spiritual Israel. Again he will come unto his own 
and his own will receive him not— he will not find the necessary 
faith in the earth. However, as respects the first 
advent we read, "But to as many as received him to them 
gave he liberty," etc. So at the second advent, to as many 
as have faith and receive him, to these also similarly he will 
grant a special blessing. 

Associating these words with the parable foregoing the 
implication is that the Church, the very elect, the little flock, 
throughout the Gospel age will be expected to look to the Lord 
continually for help and deliverance, but that they will not 
actually be helped or delivered until the First Resurrection, 
at the Master's second advent, at the time he will set up his 
Kingdom. It is in line with this that the Apostle exhorts us 
saying, "Brethren, avenge not yourselves, but rather give 
place unto wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine; I 
will repay, saith the Lord." (Rom. 12:19.) Hence we find 
the Scriptures throughout indicating clearly that the second 
advent of our Lord will be a time of tribulation to the world 
in general, a day of vengeance, a day of rectifying the wrongs 
of the people. Thus through the Prophet the Lord declares, 
"The day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year [time] 
of my redeemed is come;" and again, "It is the day of the 
Lord's vengeance, and the year of recompense for the 
controversy of Zion."— Isa. 63:4; 34:8. 

Taken as a whole, the lesson to the Lord's people 
through this parable is that we are to have patience, not attempt 
to render vengeance upon our opposers, but to love 
our enemies and to do good to them that despitefully 
use us, and to look to the Lord for such relief as he sees 
proper to send; and though we find the full measure of 
relief long deferred, we are to have rest and refreshment 
through faith that the time is coming when all the gracious 
promises will be abundantly fulfilled, "According to thy 
faith be it unto thee." 

Those who believe little of the Lord's promises, who 
trust him little, will pray to him little, will exercise little 
faith, and will have little joy and blessing in consequence. 
Those, on the contrary, who have faith, and who go continually 
to the throne of grace and appreciate the Lord and trust 
in the glorious outcome of their prayers and labors, will 
have joy now and fulness of joy by and by. 

PRAYERS OF THE SELF-RIGHTEOUS NOT ACCEPTABLE 

The Pharisees were a very moral class amongst the 
Jews, devout, at least outwardly, very exact, though inwardly, 
the Lord tells us, they were far from right. He 
alone was competent to make the terrible arraignment that 
they were like sepulchers, beautifully whitened on the outside 
but inwardly full of corruption. There is a similar 
class in Christendom today, who are outwardly moral, very 
particular, exact, scrupulous, and yet not pleasing to the 



Lord. They are proud of their righteousness, and seem to 
fail to realize that if they are naturally less depraved than 
some others they have nothing therein to boast of, because 
they are still far from being actually perfect. This parable 
is intended to show that God would look with more sympathy, 

R3842 : page 265 

more compassion, upon the more depraved man if he 
were the more honest and more humble rather than on the 
morally better but less humble. 

The parable pictures two men going up to the Temple 
according to the Jewish custom to pray: the one was a 
self-righteous Pharisee, a moral man, in many respects a 
good man, but very conscious of all his righteous deeds and 
perfunctory observances of divine rules; the other man was 
of a lower class and cast, who had more weaknesses and 
blemishes and who realized his condition. The Pharisee, 
we are told, stood and prayed with himself: apparently his 
prayers did not ascend to the Lord, and it would be strictly 
true, therefore, to say that he prayed with himself, heard 

R3842 : page 266 

himself pray, congratulated himself in the prayer, and rejoiced 
in his own self-consciousness generally. His prayer 
was not the kind which the Father invites, for he seeketh 
such to worship him as worship him in spirit and in truth; 
and it seems impossible for any one to come before the Lord 
in a proper manner who does not appreciate his own weaknesses, 
imperfections, blemishes, and acknowledges these and 
seeks the divinely arranged means for covering them. 

PRAYER OF THE SELF-RIGHTEOUS 

The Pharisee said, "God, I thank thee that I am not as 
other men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this 
publican." It is quite true that such a prayer uttered truthfully 
would imply a compassion of heart for which we 
might well give thanks to God. All Christians by virtue of 
their relation to God, the covering of their sins, the begetting 
of the Spirit, the transforming work progressing in their 
hearts, have every reason to give thanks to the Lord that 
they differ from the majority of their fellow-creatures. But 
they have nothing whereof to boast, for, as the Apostle remarks, 
What have we that we have not received from the 
Lord? Who hath made us to differ? (I Cor. 4:7.) If, 
therefore, the difference between ourselves and others be 
recognized as of the Lord and his work of grace in us and 
not of ourselves, this is the proper attitude of heart, and all 
who have this realization may properly enough give thanks 
to the Lord that in this respect they are different from others 
because he hath made us to differ, because by his grace 
we are what we are. 

The difficulty with the Pharisee of the parable was 
that he prayed with himself, congratulated himself, and 



merely pretended to give thanks to the Lord for these differences. 

He did not thank the Lord that he had made him 

to differ, but thanked the Lord that he had made himself to 

differ— he was trusting in his own works of the flesh, which 

could never be acceptable to the Lord, and was, therefore, 

as a Pharisee, rejecting the imputed righteousness of the 

Atonement Day sacrifices. The condition would be similar 

today to us if we boasted in ourselves in any sense or degree. 

Such a man offering such a prayer should know that 

it does not go to God, that it was merely self-adulation and 

that he profiteth nothing by it. We are in the right attitude 

when we realize that our sufficiency is of God, who 

has made us to differ and who keeps us by his own power, 

covers us with the robe of Christ's righteousness and is preparing 

us for the glory, honor and immortality which he has 

promised us if we are faithful in obedience to his lessons 

and guidance. 

All the Lord's people should be able to assure themselves 
at the throne of grace that they are not extortioners, 
not unjust, not adulterers, nor like other men. This is all 
in harmony with our Lord's declaration, "If ye were of the 
world the world would love its own: but because ye are 
not of he world, but I have chosen you out of the world, 
therefore the world hateth you." We are to be glad if we 
find these evidences of our separateness from the world, but 
we are not to boast of them nor to consider that they are of 
our own institution nor attempt to take credit for them. 
As already shown, we are what we are by the Lord's grace. 

The Pharisee as a part of his boast claimed that he 
fasted twice in the week, as well as gave tithes of everything 
that he acquired. In this fasting he was going beyond 
anything that the Law required, and doubtless felt 
that he was to be especially commended therefor. But not 
so from the Lord's standpoint— works can never justify us. 
If we were to fast, starve ourselves to death, it would not be 
meritorious; no works can be of value except as based upon 
proper recognition of our own imperfections and proper acceptance 
of divine justification, which is granted to us now 
through faith in Jesus, and which in that day was typically 
imputed to all the members of the Jewish nation through 
the typical sacrifices of their Day of Atonement. As for 
fasting, the Lord's people today will find plenty of things 
from which they may well fast. Fasting simply signifies 
self-denial, and self-denials of food are not the greatest nor 
the most estimable in God's sight, we may be sure. There 
are other desires of the flesh which all who are the Lord's 
true followers are to strive to control and diminish and 
starve out, that they might proportionately flourish and be 
nourished spiritually and made strong. 

BOASTING OF GIVING TITHES 

The tithe-giving was proper. God had enjoined, as a 
mark of respect for him, that one-tenth (or tithe) of all increase 
of herd or flock or field should be set apart peculiarly 
to his service: and obedience to this arrangement was 



nothing to boast of, particularly when it is remembered that 
the Lord is the bountiful giver of all good. Where then was the 
room for pride and boasting in connection with such tithe-giving? 
It showed a self-satisfied condition of heart, unready to 
make the still greater consecration required of all who would 
be accepted as members of the house of sons, the followers of 
Jesus, who are expected to consecrate their all to the Lord, 
and thenceforth to act as stewards who will be prepared to 
give an account of the use of every dollar, every talent, 
every opportunity. Are the saints inclined to boast of their 
self-denials or services? Let them reckon the matter carefully 
and see how little the most energetic is able to accomplish, 
and then doubtless with shame many will confess how 
little of all they desired to accomplish they have been able 
to render unto the Lord. 

"GOD BE MERCIFUL TO ME A SINNER" 

The publican was a sample of those who made no profession 
of great piety. Humble-minded people, they realized 
that they did not live up to the grand requirements of God's 
perfect Law, and, discouraged by the assertions of the Pharisees 
that they could obey and live up to those requirements, 
these more humble-minded ones were often in a discouraged 
attitude, and sometimes in consequence lapsed into carelessness 
and sinful ways. In the parable the publican stands 
afar off; he did not approach close to the holy precincts of 
the Temple; he stood at a goodly distance. He recognized 
the great difference between God's perfection and his own 
personal unworthiness, imperfection and sinfulness. He 
smote upon his breast, upon his heart, as though indicating 
that he accepted the divine sentence of death as well deserved, 
merited, yet he appealed for mercy— Lord have 
mercy upon me, I am a sinner! Although outwardly not as 
moral nor as good a man as the other, judged by any human 
standards, inwardly, from God's standpoint, his was the 

R3842 : page 267 

better heart of the two, the more hopeful. He was not 
trusting in himself, and was in a better condition, therefore, 
to receive the grace of God upon the only terms upon which 
it could be obtained, humble faith. Our Lord indicates that 
of the two this one— outwardly less noble, less moral— was 
inwardly more acceptable to the Father, justified rather than 
the Pharisee. And then, as a lesson based upon this, comes 
the word, 

"EVERYONE THAT EXALTETH HIMSELF SHALL BE ABASED; 
AND HE THAT HUMBLETH HIMSELF SHALL BE 
EXALTED" 

Is it not remarkable that so frequently throughout the 
Scriptures the Lord calls attention to the great necessity for 
humility, assuring us that without it, whatever may be our 
conditions, our qualifications, we could by no means enter 



the Kingdom. In the parable just considered this quality of 
humility is illustrated in the publican, the lack of it is illustrated 
in the Pharisee. To reason the matter out we can 
see that only the humble minded could possibly be prepared 
to confess themselves sinners and unworthy of divine favor 
and love, needing justification, forgiveness, provided for us in 
Christ. Not only so, but even after exercising such humility 
and coming to the Lord and being accepted of him, if the 
humility be lost our gracious standing in Christ is forfeited. 
Pride signifies self-satisfaction, and the corresponding ignoring 
of the all-sufficiency of our glorious Head, who said to 
us, "Without me ye can do nothing."— John 15:5. 

Alas, that so many of those who have some knowledge 
of God and of his plan of salvation are hindered from laying 
hold in a proper manner by a lack of humility and readiness 
to see their own faults, confess them and to accept divine 
mercy and grace. Alas, also, that so many, after having exercised 
faith and been washed from their old sins, are through 
lack of humility led to haughtiness, high-mindedness, which in 
one way or another is sure to work injury to us as New Creatures- 
sure to blast the prospect for a share in the Kingdom 
in which only those who humble themselves shall be 
exalted. 



R3843 : page 267 

THE NARROW WAY TO LIFE ETERNAL 

-MARK 10:17-31.-AUGUST 26.- 

"If any man will come after me, let him deny himself 
and take up his cross and follow me."— Matt. 16:24. 

THE PICTURE presented in this lesson is that of a 
young man, a Jew of a prominent family, a ruler, 
who, seeing Jesus going forth on a journey with his 
disciples, came to him running, fell on his knees before him, 
and said, "Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit 
eternal life?" Jesus did not immediately answer his question, 
but sought first to prepare the way, so that when the 
answer was given it would have the greater weight. He 
therefore inquired, "Why do you call me good?" Is this 
simply a mark of courtesy, or do you recognize the fact that 
there is only one standard of goodness, which is represented 
by God the Father, and that in calling me good, therefore, 
you are not only recognizing this divine standard but recognizing 
me as a teacher whom God approves? Thus paraphrased 
our Lord's language would signify to the young 
ruler, This teacher claims to be of God: his claim is either 
true or false; he is therefore either a true or false prophet. I 
have called him Good Master or Good Teacher. If I have been 
sincere, if this is the result of my previous investigation of 
his teachings, I ought to be ready to accept whatever answer 
he will give me as divine direction, and should promptly 



obey. 

Not waiting for a reply to his query, but content with 
leaving the suggestion before his mind, our Lord proceeded 
to answer the original query, saying, "Thou knowest the 
commandments, Do not kill, Do not commit adultery, Do not 
steal, Do not bear false witness, Defraud not, Honor thy 
father and mother." Matthew's account of the incident informs 
us that our Lord added the words, "Thou shalt love 
thy neighbor as thyself. "--Matt. 19:19. 

THE LAW COVENANT STILL IN FORCE 

Some have queried why our Lord did not answer the 
young man as we today would answer him, saying, Believe 
on the Lord Jesus Christ, confess your inability to keep the 
divine Law perfectly, believe on the Lord Jesus as the one 
who has redeemed you and whose robe of righteousness you 
may receive by faith and thus become acceptable to the 
Father, and then make a full consecration of your life to 
the Lord. We answer that such a full statement of the matter 
was not yet due to be promulgated, because our Lord 
Jesus had not yet finished his sacrifice, and it was not yet 
possible for anyone to have access to the Father through the 
merit of that sacrifice. Before any could thus come to God 
it was necessary that our Lord should finish his sacrifice 
and rise from the dead and ascend on high, "there to appear 
in the presence of God for us" as our representative, appropriating 
to us [believers] his merit, justifying us before 
the Father. 

The Law Covenant which had been given to Israel sixteen 
centuries before was still in force, because our Lord 
Jesus had not yet "nailed it to the cross." (Col. 2:14.) 
Hence it was necessary that our Lord's answer should be in 
line with the Law Covenant still in force. For this reason 
he directed the young man's attention to the Law, showing 
that the way to eternal life was by the keeping of the Law, 
as God had promised. But we see through the teaching of 
the New Testament what the Jews as a people had failed to 
discern, namely, that by the deeds of the Law no flesh could 
be justified in God's sight, for by the Law is the knowledge of 
sin. (Rom. 3:20.) In other words, the intention of the Law 
was first of all to test our Lord Jesus, and to demonstrate 
his perfection in that he would be able to keep it; and secondly, 
it was to prove to the Jews and thus to all men the 
impossibility of any one but a perfect man fulfilling the 
terms of the Law Covenant. The value of thus proving to 
them their inability to meet the divine requirements was to 
show them the necessity for getting eternal life as a gift 
from God through Jesus Christ, and not as a reward of their 
own good works, which were short of the divine requirement 
and could never justify them. 

When the young ruler replied, "All these things have I 
observed from my youth up," the Lord looked lovingly upon 

R3843 : page 268 



him. He was a model young man, such an one as all lovers 
of truth and righteousness delight in. Our Lord loved him, 
loved his endeavors to keep the Law, and loved his manifestation 
of humility and earnestness in coming as he had 
done in a public manner to ask the way to life eternal. 
Evidently the young ruler had his misgivings as to whether 
or not he was up to the divine standard, even though outwardly 
observing the requirements of the Law. Quite probably 
he felt fairly satisfied, but perceiving the deep spirituality 
of the teachings of Jesus he thought he would like to 
have the confirmation of this great Teacher, his assurance 
that the Law was all-sufficient, and that his obedience to it 
in the manner claimed guaranteed him life everlasting. 

The conclusion of our Lord's recitation of the Law, 
"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself," was a part of the 
usual formula of statement amongst the Jews, and it had 
probably lost much of its intense and deep signification because 
so commonplace. The young ruler evidently neglected 
to attach to the words their only meaning; he was thinking 
of the more specific definitions of the Law, neglecting 
this more comprehensive statement, "Thou shalt love thy 
neighbor as thyself." Our Lord, always gentle toward those 
who manifested a right attitude of heart, those who were 
sincere inquirers after the way of eternal life, did not rudely 
call the young man's attention to his defects by saying, "You 
are a liar; you know very well that you do not love your 
neighbor as yourself, and your wealth indicates this, for 
there are many poor all about you, and if you love them as 
yourself you would be endeavoring to do for them." On the 
contrary, Jesus realized that selfishness had become ingrained 
in the fallen human nature, that this young man was 
really far above the average of men in his nobility of character, 
in his desire to be just toward his fellows. 

The young man was blinded by the customs of his time, 
and Jesus proceeded to open the eyes of his understanding 
in a most gentle manner, saying, "One thing thou lackest: 
Go, sell whatsoever thou hast and give to the poor, and thou 
shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, follow me."* 
Here was the crucial test; every Jew ready and willing to 
sacrifice his earthly belongings and to become a follower of 
Jesus would be accounted worthy of transfer from the house 
of servants under Moses to the house of sons under Christ. 
The actual transfer of all such took place at Pentecost, 
when the Father acknowledged them as no longer of the house 
of servants under the Law Covenant, but as members of the 
body of Christ, begotten of the holy Spirit to heavenly things 
and to life eternal. 

The young man, so full of confidence a few moments 
before, found that the great Teacher had probed his heart in 
its one vulnerable spot— he had not sufficient love for God 
and for his fellows. During the past eighteen centuries the 
same test has proven many good, honorable, wise people to 
be unfit for the Kingdom. In other words, the tests for 
joint-heirship in the Kingdom are so high that the majority 
of mankind even amongst the most moral, the most enlightened, 
the most reverent, fail under the test and miss the 



Kingdom. 

It is proper enough for us to inquire if the test for 
membership in the Kingdom is too severe. Has God fixed 
too high a standard— an impossible one— or one impossible 
at least to the majority of mankind? We reply that 
to the majority of Christians this whole matter is beclouded 
by the false doctrines received from the "dark ages," 
which tell us that this young ruler, because he did not become 
a follower of Christ, would go to an eternity of torment, 
notwithstanding his many admirable qualities of heart 
and life— because although willing to be just and honorable 
and upright in his dealings with his fellow men and reverential 
to his God, he was unwilling to sacrifice his earthly 
possessions and to become by all disesteemed, a follower of 
Jesus the Nazarene, despised of men. According to that 
standard would not almost the entire human family be properly 
considered as surely en route for eternal torment? How 
few there are who forsake all, consecrating life and time 
and every interest to the Lord and his service as followers 
of Jesus! 

If these few who are to inherit the Kingdom are the 
only ones who will get eternal life, then indeed there are 
few that will be saved. But when we take the Scriptural 
view of this matter, that the Lord at the present time is seeking 
out from amongst men a very elect, a very select, class 
to be joint-heirs with his Son in the Millennial Kingdom as 
his "Bride," and that the specific work of that Kingdom will 
be the bringing of order and righteousness and restitution 
blessings and opportunities of eternal life to all the human 
family— then and then only can we understand this matter, 
and see not only the justice but also the wisdom and the 
love of the divine arrangement in the entire procedure. Then 
we are prepared to appreciate the privilege we now enjoy of 
becoming followers of Jesus, forsaking all that we may be 
his associates and joint-heirs in that glorious Kingdom to 
come. 

"HE WENT AWAY SORROWFUL" 

The young ruler had no complaint to make. The one 
whom he had acknowledged to be the good Master, the great 
Teacher, had showed him in a few words from the Law just 



*The words, "Take up the cross," are not found in the 
Sinaitic and Vatican MSS. 

R3844 : page 268 

where he stood— the utter futility of his endeavor to justify 
himself under the terms of the Law Covenant. What he 
needed to know, but what he did not stop to inquire, was 
how could he do this? What power or assistance could be 
rendered him by which he could overcome his innate selfishness, 
his greater love for himself, and hence his desire to 



keep the great possessions he already enjoyed and to add 
thereto? Had he said to the Lord, "Master, I perceive that 
I am not what I thought I was— you have found in my 
heart selfishness, contrary to the divine standard, which I 
did not know was there. Can you help me over my difficulty? 
It seems too great a sacrifice for me to make." 

In reply to such words the Master no doubt would 
have said, "What I propose is not so unreasonable as you surmise. 
If you give your heart completely to the doing of the will 
of the Lord in this matter I can point out to you step by step 
how you can accomplish it: but the consecration, the determination 
on your part to do this to the extent you are able 
to do it is necessary first. Then my grace, my assistance, 
will be sufficient for you and enable you to accomplish 

R3844 : page 269 

those good desires of your heart." If the young man had 
then proceeded to say, "Lord, I do consecrate everything to 
be your disciple and to get the eternal life, hard as it may 
be. I accept your promised assistance in the matter. Now 
how can I begin?" Our Lord probably would not have 
told him to sell everything that he possessed immediately, but 
to begin with doing all the good that he could find to do, using 
time and judgment and intelligence to ascertain the best 
ways of using all that he possessed, not as his own, but as 
wealth which he had consecrated to the Lord and his service 
—the Lord's wealth, the Lord's property, the Lord's time, 
the Lord's influence. 

Some of his money might have been expended at once 
for the Lord and his apostles, and thus he might at once have 
begun to have a share in the harvest work then in process. 
But, you say, Were the Lord and the apostles in need? We 
answer, No. The Father saw to it that a sufficiency of 
means was provided for the work, and similarly he has always 
cared for the interests of his cause. He is not dependent 
upon the generosity of humanity. He is pleased to use 
human generosity and thus grant a blessing to those who 
seek to render a service to his cause; but his cause would 
not be left destitute if none appreciated the privilege, for 
the gold and silver and the cattle upon a thousand hills belong 
to him who has the supervision of his own work.— Psa. 50:10; 
Hag. 2:8. 

It is the same today. That young man would have had 
a privilege in connection with the service of the Truth. And 
it is still a privilege for any of us who possess this world's 
goods to have our means used in the Lord's service. We 
are not to think that we are carrying on the Lord's work, 
and that he could not get along without us; but, reversely, 
are to consider that he has no need of either us or our 
means; that it is a great privilege we enjoy to have the opportunity 
of casting influence, time, money, everything we 
possess, into the Lord's treasury, for use in his service. 
Whatever could not have been done for the Lord's cause directly 
could have been done for the poor of the Jewish nation, 
who indirectly represented the Lord's people, so that 



anything done for them because they were the Lord's would 
be so much which the Lord would accept as being done unto 
himself, and would appreciate and ultimately acknowledge 
and reward. 

THE DIFFICULTIES OF THE RICH 

When the young man had gone away sorrowful— declining 
to have the eternal life which Jesus was offering on 
the only terms now attaching to the offer— Jesus looked 
around upon his disciples and followers and noted afresh 
that they were for the most part ignorant, unlearned men 
and the poor of this world, and he said to them, "How hardly 
[with what difficulty] shall they that have riches enter 
into the Kingdom of God." We read that the disciples were 
amazed at this statement. As they looked about them they 
well knew that the most prominent in religious circles were 
the rich, either in mental, social or physical riches. If the 
great, the learned, the Doctors of the Law, the prominent 
Pharisees, the rulers in the synagogues, the members of the 
Sanhedrin, etc., who constituted the wealthiest portion of 
the nation— if these would not get into the Kingdom of God, 
which the whole people had been waiting for for centuries 
—if these, whom they supposed to be the ones most ready for 
that Kingdom, and who claimed to be the only ones ready, 
and that all others were unfit because unholy, what must 
they think of the Kingdom— who would be in it 
anyway? 

Noting their astonishment Jesus made the matter still more 
emphatic, saying, "Children [simple, unsophisticated ones], 
how difficult it is for them who trust in riches to enter the 
Kingdom of God!" Here our Lord defines the difficulty: it 
was not merely the fact that a man had been born wealthy 
or that by some peculiar means he had acquired great 
wealth— not these conditions would hinder him from getting 
into the Kingdom; but it would be the fact that he would 
love these riches and trusted in them that would hinder his 
faith in God and his love for God and his dependence upon 
God and his learning the lessons of faith which the poorer 
would have many more opportunities for learning. 

THROUGH THE EYE OF A NEEDLE 

Our Lord emphasized the matter, saying, "It is easier 
for a camel to go through a needle's eye, than for a rich 
man to enter into the Kingdom of God." The thought is 
not that all of the Lord's people should be penniless, dependent 
upon the charity of others, but that they must all 
be so fully consecrated to the Lord and to his service that they 
will not be their own— that their possessions, whatever they 
may consist of, riches of knowledge or wealth of money and 
houses and lands, or wealth of reputation and honor of men 
—all must be consecrated to the Lord, to be used in his service, 
to be sacrificed as our belongings if we would have a 
share with him in the Kingdom. We must not blind our 
eyes to these specific terms; if we do there will some day 



be an awakening to the fact that the opportunities which 
are ours have passed from us and are lost to us, and we 
will find that others have entered into the Kingdom and we 
have failed. 

Our Lord's words indicate what is elsewhere set forth 
throughout the Scriptures most explicitly, namely, the 
necessity of sacrifice. The Royal Priesthood alone will 
constitute the Kingdom class, and, as the Apostle declares, 
every priest is a sacrificer and must have 
something to offer. (Heb. 8:3.) We have nothing of 
ourselves that would be fit to offer to God or that he 
would be willing to accept: every sacrifice upon his altar 
must be without blemish, and we by nature are blemished, 
children of wrath as are others. (Eph. 2:3.) Hence first 
of all we must receive from the Lord Jesus, from our Redeemer, 
through faith, the robe of his righteousness to cover 
our blemishes, to make us fit and acceptable for the altar 
of the Lord, and then we must follow the Apostle's directions, 
"I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God, that 
ye present your bodies living sacrifices, holy, acceptable to 
God, your reasonable service."— Rom. 12:1. 

When we sacrifice ourselves wholly and unreservedly 
it includes not merely our hearts, our wills, our intentions, 
but all they can control— our mortal bodies, with whatever 
are their belongings, health or strength, time or talent, influence 
or money. Whoever makes this consecration has the 
promise of divine assistance in carrying it out— whoever 
fails to make such a consecration can have neither part nor 
lot in the Kingdom. 

R3844 : page 270 

Our Lord's words with respect to the camel and the 
needle's eye are illustrated by the accompanying sketch of a 
city gate with a small panel door therein. These small 
doors were called needles' eyes. When the gate of the city 
was closed at sundown for fear of robbers, etc., the watchman 
guarded merely the needle's eye and admission through 
it was designedly tedious to prevent the intrusion of enemies. 
We have never seen one of these gates, but have 
heard that it is possible for a camel to squeeze its way 
through on its knees provided the load be first removed 
from its back, but for the truthfulness of this we cannot 
vouch. In any event the Lord's thought is evident: no rich 
man can enter the Kingdom. The only way one can enter 
it is by becoming poor, nothing;— by sacrificing everything, 
and this would include riches, social, political and financial; 
and thus, whatever his previous condition, he must 
cease to be rich in his own name and title and possession 
ere he could be accepted by the Lord as fit for the Kingdom. 
The spirit of the Royal Priesthood must be one of 
self-sacrifice and not one of selfishness. The great work of 
the future will be the blessing and uplifting and assisting 
of the world, and the Lord now seeketh for the "very elect," 
such as will manifest a sympathy of heart-desires in accordance 
with the terms and conditions of the Kingdom he is 



about to establish. All others will be excluded. 

THE KINGDOM THE HOPE OF THE WORLD 

Where then would be the hope for the rich young ruler 
and the many of our day who intellectually and socially 
and in a monetary way are wealthy, and who do not exercise 
faith nor make the consecration to the Lord, without 
which they could have no part in the Kingdom? What provision 
has God made for these? We answer that "Jesus 
Christ by the grace of God tasted death for every man," 
that "he is the propitiation for our sins [the sins of the 
Church, who now accept him and forsake all and become 
his followers], and not for ours only, but also for the sins 
of the whole world." (Heb. 2:9; 1 John 2:2.) A benefit 
must come to all mankind through this great sacrifice for 
sins, which God himself has arranged for. The rich young 

R3845 : page 270 

ruler and all the families of the earth are to be blessed, and 
the time for their blessing is specifically stated by the Lord 
to be under his established Kingdom. Only a very elect, 
select class of faithful sacrificers will constitute that Kingdom. 
These, with the dear Redeemer, on the spirit plane, 
will constitute the seed of Abraham, through which all the 
families of the earth are to be blessed. 

Under the reign of that Kingdom Satan and sin and 
selfishness will be dethroned. In various ways conditions 
amongst men will be so changed that wealth will not have 
the same strong bondage upon mankind that it now has; 
knowledge will be so increased that all may have it freely, 
fully; the good things of life will be made so common, so 
general, that all may enjoy them; name and fame will go 
only to those who merit them. Under those new conditions 
we may see the young ruler glad to have life eternal 
through acceptance of the divine arrangement. Sacrifice 
will not be possible then nor will it be required, even 
as the angels of heaven are not required to sacrifice. 
Only Christ Jesus, our Lord, and the Church, his 
Bride, are put under this severe ordeal of test, invited to become 
sacrificers of their interests; and to them is granted 
the exceeding great and precious promises of God, and to 
them will be given the great exaltation to glory, honor and 
immortality by which they shall not only be superior to 
mankind but also far above angels, principalities and powers 
and every name that is named— next to the Father.— 
Eph. 1:21. 

This is what our Lord meant by his statement, With 
men it is impossible, but not with God. This was said in 
answer to the disciples' query, "Who then can be saved?" 
It was not then time to explain that in God's plan various 
salvations are provided for— that first comes the special salvation, 
and that finally will come the general salvation, 
which will make it possible for such as this rich ruler and 
others who love righteousness and hate iniquity to attain 



eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. According to the 
Law no such thing was possible, but God made possible this 
plan of salvation through Jesus, who not only fulfilled the 
requirements of the Law for himself but sacrificed himself 
for those who were condemned under the Law, so that God 
might be just and yet the justifier of him that believeth on 
Jesus— not only of those who are now called in the election 
to the high calling, the heavenly calling, but to those also 
who will have a share in the great work of restitution uplift 
which will follow the establishment of the Kingdom. 

"WHAT SHALL WE HAVE?" 

A new idea respecting the exclusiveness of the Kingdom 
offer was reaching the apostles, and Peter, the spokesman 
for them, called attention to the fact that although they were 
not wealthy they had forsaken all that they did possess to become 
the Lord's followers, and therefore he desired an assurance 
that he and his associates would be in the Kingdom. 
Our Lord's reply was surely amply satisfying to his dear 
followers: he assured them that no man that hath left either 
home or brethren or sisters or mother or father or children 
or lands for his sake and the Gospel's sake but would receive 
again an hundred fold now in this time, with persecutions, 
and ultimately in the world to come such will receive 
also eternal life. There was encouragement in this to the 
apostles, and there is encouragement also to all who are the 

R3845 : page 271 

Lord's people today. The suggestion is that the more we 
leave, the more we sacrifice, the greater our present loss for 
the Kingdom's sake, the greater will be our reward both 
now and hereafter. O, if we could only have this thought 
well in mind continually how we would vie with one another 
in our endeavors to spend and be spent in the service 
of so gracious a Master and in so glorious a mission and 
with so grand prospects and rewards. 

Our Lord's words being true it is very evident that some 
who receive little of the Lord in this present life and who 
have but faint prospects respecting a share in the Kingdom 
in the future have themselves to blame. They should ask 
themselves, What have I sacrificed? What have I left, 
for the Lord's sake, for the brethren's sake, for the Father's 
sake? The stipulations are specific, hence those who have 
nothing to sacrifice can have no reward. But who has nothing 
to sacrifice? We know of none so poor that he could 
not sacrifice something, and the poorer we are the more diligently 
should we strive to find something to render unto the 
Lord our God. 

In this connection we are to remember that the thing 
which the Lord most appreciates and the thing which is 
most difficult for us to sacrifice is self. Hence we read, "A 
broken and a contrite heart, O Lord, thou wilt not despise." 
(Psa. 51:17.) If we have given our hearts to the Lord we 
have given him all that we possess, and he will see to it 



that this shall cost us enough to test the loyalty and sincerity 

of our sacrifice; and as we see the test coming day by 

day we are not to be intimidated, but to remember that the 

Lord has promised that greater is he who is on our part than 

all they that be against us, and again that his grace is sufficient 

for every time of need. Hence, as trials and difficulties, 

pain and sorrow and persecutions or slanders shall 

come upon us, we are to rejoice and be exceeding glad (1) 

That these indications of our being in the hand of the Lord 

as pupils in the school of Christ are evidences that we are of 

the elect who are being shaped and polished, fitted and prepared 

for places in the Kingdom. (2) We are to remember 

that all these trials and difficulties rightly met, loyally responded 

to, are working out for us a far more exceeding 

and eternal weight of glory. We are, therefore, to take the 

spoiling of our goods with patience, with joy, knowing that 

in heaven we have enduring riches, enduring friendships, 

enduring knowledge and blessings of every kind. 

But even in this present life how much the Lord grants 
us to enjoy: our enjoyment will be proportionate to our 
loyalty of spirit in the sacrificing. If we love much, and 
are prompt and liberal in our sacrificing, we will in turn be 
loved much by the Lord, be blessed and comforted, as he 
has stipulated, an hundred-fold more than all our distresses. 
Who are these who have an hundred-fold more 
than they give to the Lord? Who are these whose joys are 
more than an hundred-fold greater than their sorrows, trials 
and difficulties, pains and disappointments? They are the 
elect of God, whom Jesus is not ashamed to call his 
brethren. 

MANY FIRST SHALL BE LAST 

"Many that are first shall be last; and the last first," 
are the concluding words of our Lord in this lesson. What 
did he mean? His words stand related to the recorded discourse 
just preceding. The rich young ruler, the priests 
and Scribes and Pharisees and wealthy generally, appeared 
to the disciples to have much better opportunities for the 
Kingdom than would the less learned, the less noble, the 
less influential and the less wealthy fishermen and tax gatherers, 
etc. Yet the latter, though seemingly less favored of 
God, seemingly handicapped by lack of influence, etc., were 
really advantaged. It was easier for them to humble themselves, 
to sacrifice earthly interests and ambitions, to make 
a complete consecration of themselves to the Lord than for 
those who had greater advantages everyway. On the contrary, 
as we have seen, position, honor of men, wealth and 
education were all barriers to becoming disciples of Jesus. 
Thus those who were first or most prominent apparently in 
opportunity were really less favored, while those who had 
less opportunity were really first or most favored from the 
divine standpoint. 

"FORSAKING ALL" 



Let us guard against a mistaken view of our Lord's 
words respecting father, mother, houses, lands, etc. Our 
Lord certainly did not mean that we should sacrifice others 
in order to be his disciples. Our Golden Text expresses the 
thought we would enforce: it is ourselves that we are to 
deny, ourselves that we are to sacrifice. Hence in making 
our consecration and in our endeavor to carry it out we are 
to remember this, and to deal justly and lovingly with those 
who are dependent upon us and for whom we are responsible 
by ties of nature. For instance, the selling of houses 
and lands, the forsaking of these, would not mean that the 
Lord would have us deprive our families of necessary comforts 
and temporal provisions. Other Scriptures show this 
distinctly, that he that provides not for his own— for those 
for whom he is the responsible caretaker,— is worse than 
an unbeliever. It would be worse for any of the Lord's people 
to neglect the ties of duty than for an unbeliever to do 
so, because with his higher light and sounder spirit of mind 
he should appreciate the situation more clearly than do others, 
and therefore be more just in his dealings with those 
who are properly dependent upon him. 

This does not mean, however, that we should yield to 
the whims and fancies of friends or neighbors or parents or 
children in respect to our course as the Lord's followers. We 
are not men pleasers— and the only one who has the right 
to command us and the only one we have a right to obey is 
the Lord Jesus. If, therefore, a man finds that he has made 
proper provision for his children or for his parents, so that 
they suffer not in respect to a reasonable share in life's 
necessities and comforts, it is for him and not them to decide 
how his time and energy and further means shall be spent. 
He is not to seek to amass wealth for them, he is not to consider 
that wealth already entrusted to him belongs to them. 
He is to understand that he has one responsibility toward 
them as a father or as a son and another responsibility 
toward the Lord, and that the Lord is not only willing but 
commands that the responsible duties of life shall be fulfilled 
by him. Whatever is more than this in his possession 
he holds merely as a steward, for use in the Master's service. 

Let us then, dear friends, whatever our station, remember 
that there is only one narrow way to the Kingdom, and 
that it is open only during this Gospel age, and that the 

R3846 : page 271 

highway of holiness belongs to the next age. While rejoicing 
that the world, now unwilling to travel the narrow way, 
will have the glorious opportunities of the highway by and 
by, let us rejoice that the great favor of God respecting this 
narrow way has been brought to our attention, and that it is 
our privilege to walk in the footsteps of Jesus, with the 
assurance of his assistance all the journey through to the 
farther end, and with the gracious promise of life eternal 
and participation in the Kingdom. "If any man will come 
after me, let him deny himself [let him sacrifice himself, 
his personal interests, ambitions, etc.], and take up his cross 



and follow me." 



page 273 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVII SEPTEMBER 1 No. 17 
A.D., 1906-A.M., 6034 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 275 

Conscience a Barrier to Peace 275 

The Lack Felt— Crying Aloud 275 

Berean Bible Study on Love 277 

"Thy Faith Hath Saved Thee" 277 

Bartimeus' Experiences Illustrative 278 

"Salvation Come to Thy House" 280 

Coming in the Name of the Lord 281 

Cleansing the Temple 282 

The Temple a Den of Thieves 283 

Teaching With Authority 284 

An Entangling Question 285 

"Whose Wife Shall She Be?" 286 

page 274 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3847 : page 274 

OUR SYMBOLIC PINS 



For some time the friends have been inquiring for symbolic 
pins, and now we are able to supply them. One represents 
the scene of Isa. 1 1:6. Sister Darlington drew the design for 
us and it is very fine. The other is a representation of the 
cross, crown and wreath which appears on the upper left corner 
of the TOWER cover. These are without metal rims, celluloid 
finish— beautiful. The latter design is in three sizes, 
5/8 in., 3/4 in. and 1-1/4 in.; the former is 1-1/4 in. in diameter. 

Getting these made in large quantities permits us to supply 
them at 25 cents per dozen— postpaid. We will assort 
them three of each unless you specifically mention a different 
preference. They are ready now. You may order at once. 
From their appearance you would expect them to cost each, 
the price we charge by the dozen. 

These pins sometimes serve as texts from which the Truth 
may be explained to inquirers. As you get to explaining their 
significance you will be preaching the good tidings of great 
joy almost unconsciously to others. There is nothing sectarian 
about the pins— nothing objectionable to any true Christian. 



R3846 : page 275 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
CONSCIENCE A BARRIER TO PEACE 



ALTHOUGH the Presbyterians and the Cumberland 
Presbyterians have officially united, 
there is some dissension. At Warrensburg, 
Mo., each denomination had a church edifice, and both 
had influential members. The union program was that 
the Cumberland meeting house should be used, but a 
majority of the Cumberland congregation (128 out of 
230) objected to the union and locked the building 
against the Unionists and notified them that it could 
not be so used. 

The ground of objection is that although the Presbyterians 
have adopted a new statement of their faith, 
which is unobjectionable, they still hold on to the old 
"Westminster Confession of Faith," which these Cumberland 
Presbyterians cannot conscientiously endorse. 
Asked what particular portion of the Confession stung 
their consciences into disunion, one of their leaders, 
W. K. Morrow, produced the Presbyterian Higher Catechism 



and read the following: 

"God's decrees are the wise, free and holy acts of 
the counsel of his will, whereby, from all eternity, he 
hath, for his own glory, unchangeably foreordained 
whatsoever comes to pass in time, especially concerning 
angels and men. 

"God by an eternal and immutable decree out of 
his mere love for the praise of his glorious grace, to be 
manifested in due time, hath elected some angels to 
glory, and in Christ hath chosen some men to eternal 
life and the means thereof; and also, according to his 
sovereign power and the unsearchable counsel of his 
own will (whereby he extendeth or withholdeth favor 
as he pleaseth) hath passed by and foreordained the 
rest to dishonor and wrath, to be for their sin inflicted, 
to the praise of the glory of his justice." 

Mr. Morrow closed the book with a slam, held it 
up and said: 

"I, for one, can't swallow that doctrine, and I won't 
have it forced down my throat. God never gave such 
a doctrine. It is of the devil. It would drive men to 
the devil instead of bringing them to God." 



The pity is that so many Christians are not so conscientious, 
but willing to stultify themselves for the 
sake of unity. The Bible rule is, "First pure, then 
peaceable"; and if it were strictly followed there would 
be a religious earthquake which would lead to true 
peace and unity. 



THE LACK FELT-CRYING ALOUD 



While some Christian people are so busied with 
forwarding Federative Christian Union and in performing 
"many wonderful works" (Matt. 7:22) that they do 
not feel the loss of spiritual power in Churchianity, 
others more alert to the true situation are crying aloud 
of their distress. Thus, for instance, The Christian 
Work and Evangelist (New York) says: 

"The great need is to make the Church mean in present 
conditions what Christianity meant to the world ages 
ago. This is the real reform needed. But, strange to 
say, there is no effort made in this direction. Instead, 
schemes of expediency are resorted to. In their last 
analysis institutional church efforts, young people's 
movement, Church federation and the endowment of 
churches are such schemes primarily designed to gloss 
over glaring weaknesses, and to stimulate flagging interests. 
These efforts offer nothing for improving the 
ethical status of organized religion or for restoring the 
spirit of primitive Christianity. These efforts do not 
make the Church mean in the new condition what the 



early Christian Church meant ages ago. 



The real trouble is recognized by but few: it is 
the loss of the "faith once delivered to the saints." 
Twenty-eight years ago faith in the teachings of the 
Bible began to suffer from the teachings of the Evolutionists 
and the Higher Critics. As a result faith in 
the divine revelation has waned, and Christian zeal and 
godly living in proportion. The Bible discredited, faith 

R3846 : page 276 

has no proper anchorage, and as our Lord said of the 
Samaritans, "Ye believe ye know not what!" Thus, 
many well-intentioned people are in a pitiable condition 
so far as religious conviction is concerned. 

CONGREGATIONALISTS CONFESS THE CHANGE 

The following extract from The Congregationalist, 
put in the mildest possible form, shows how important 
teachings have been abandoned. Some of these are improvements 
in that some errors are less tenaciously 
held; but with the rejected and incongruous errors 
went truths most vital— most essential to true Christian 
faith and necessary as a basis for Christian conduct 
and zeal for divine service. Note the difference 
between what "our fathers believed" and what "we believe." 
We quote:— 

"As to our belief in Christ— our fathers looked up 
to him as the second person in the Trinity, seated at 
the right hand of the throne of God the Father, after 
having purchased the forgiveness of our sins and the 
remission of sentence of eternal death by his death on 
the cross and his resurrection from the tomb. We see 
in him who is the ideal man, the Father manifested to 
human apprehension, the unique revelation of God to 
men. Through him we know God and we worship the 
Father in him. We do not attempt to put into exact 
forms of statement the relations between the Father, 
Son and Holy Spirit, whose manifestation as God we 
see in Jesus Christ. To quote Professor Walker here: 
"Whether by virgin birth, by preexistence as the eternal 
Logos, by enduement at baptism, by Davidic descent, 
by all these lines of argument combined, or by others 
like his sinlessness and moral oneness with the Father, 
that unity is to be explained or no, the great truth to 
which these interpretations bear witness is the fundamental 
fact of Christianity— that of the incarnation. 
Its explication is relatively a matter of speculation; 
its reality is of prime importance.' 

"Our fathers regarded man as created perfect in 
one human pair, who by wilful disobedience to a divine 
command corrupted and brought sentence of eternal 



death on the whole human race descended from them. 

Our fathers believed that Jesus Christ coming as God 

in a human form begotten through the power of the 

holy Spirit and born of the Virgin Mary, by his sufferings 

and physical death inflicted on him by men, endured 

the equivalent of the punishment of sinners sentenced 

to eternal death, and delivered from it certain 

members of the race foreordained to be saved. We believe 

that Jesus Christ the son of God living, suffering, 

and dying as a man among men revealed the self-sacrificing 

love of God for his children, who include all 

mankind, and that this manifestation continued 

through the Spirit of God in and among men, is teaching 

sinners the nature of sin and the character of God, 

and is drawing all men unto him.... 

"Our fathers believed that the New Testament revealed 
the divine plan and pattern of Christ's Church 
on earth, and that it was Congregational in its organization. 
We believe that the Congregational order is 
best suited to the Christian development of the individual, 
to 'intelligent discipleship, mutual responsibility, 
direct loyalty to Christ alone, full rounded Christian 
manhood.' We hold, however, that whenever and 
wherever modifications of this order are found to be 
best suited to advance the Kingdom of Christ they 
should be adopted, and that the disciples of Christ of 
all denominations should work together as far as is 
practicable to show their unity in spirit and to bring 
his Kingdom to perfection.... 

"Our fathers believed that men could be saved only 
by believing on Jesus before they died. The theological 
controversies of the last twenty-five years have resulted 
at least in toleration for Christians who express 
a reasonable hope that those who die without knowledge 
of Christ may not have closed their probation in 
this life. The tendency thus indicated has gone so far 
that some Congregationalists, who believe, as all 
Christians do, in the final triumph of righteousness 
over sin, hold also that it is not an unwarranted hope 
that this triumph may include the final redemption 
from sin of all the children of God." 

MINISTERIAL DISHONESTY RESPONSIBLE 

We charge that this spiritual decline and loss of 
faith in the Bible is the result of dishonesty amongst 
the professed ministers of Christ. Many of them have 

R3847 : page 276 

for years been practicing most ignoble dishonesty- 
obtaining money and honor of men under false pretenses. 
Professing loyalty to the Bible and to the 
creeds they have betrayed both. Professing to build 
up believers in the most holy faith, as ministers of 
truth, servants of God, they have systematically put 



poison into the children's bread which has destroyed 
the faith of many, and by reason of them the way of 
Truth has been evilly spoken against— discredited in 
the name of God, and backed by the education of these 
professed servants of God and the Church and the special 
confidence reposed in them as men separated from 
the world. 

This is not too strong a charge. It is confessed from 
day to day, if we but learn to read between the lines, 
and sometimes on the lines, as in the following extract 
from the Homiletic Review, a prominent Christian magazine. 
It is discussing the case of Rev. Crapsey, D.D., 
an Episcopalian minister recently expelled from the 
pulpit of that denomination because he utterly denied 
every item of Christian faith— including our Lord's 
prehuman existence, miraculous birth, etc. The Review 
says: 

"What Dr. Crapsey does in an extreme degree without 
question nine out of every ten ministers in every 
Church requiring creed subscription also do in some degree. 
The principle on which Dr. Crapsey is to be unfrocked, 
impartially applied by those churches requiring 
creed subscription, would undo and unsettle their whole 
ministry. Nearly all of the creeds subscribed are of 
ancient date. They were framed as metaphysical and 
logical statements, frequently to meet the heresies of 
the age that produced them. It would be quite generally 
regarded as proof of intellectual disease if a man 
living today should affirm his belief verbatim et literatim 
in the ancient symbols. Yet they are 'subscribed' 
by a very great number of ministers. In view of this 
fact it is a matter of importance to ascertain in what 
sense and to what extent creed subscription is binding." 



Here it is plainly stated: Dr. Crapsey's perfidy in 

R3847 : page 277 

professing to believe and teach what he does not believe 

and teach is excusable in the eyes of the "nine out 

of every ten ministers in every Church requiring creed 

subscription also do in some degree." It is because 

such falsification has become so common amongst professed 

servants of the Truth that some men of conscience 

feel justified in doing the same. Is there any 

other class of professional men or business men of 

whom it can be said (in their defense) that nine out of 

ten of them perpetually live a lie? We hope not. 

Just as Christian Scientists permit their minds by continually 
misrepresenting facts until their sense of truth 
on every subject seems to be perverted, so that argument, 
facts and logic are alike wasted on them, so it is with 
the "nine out of ten" Christian ministers, who habitually 
prostitute the Truth for name and station and 



salary. Bible testimony, quotations of the apostles, 
no longer have the weight of Truth in their minds because 
of their long subordination to policy, their so-long 
continued sacrifice of Truth. 

We believe that without a love for Truth none will 
be favored with the light of "Present Truth." More 
than this, we hold that if sincere love for Truth— honesty 
of thought and deed— be yielded, sacrificed to 
pride, ambition, vain-glory, or any other thing, the result 
will be the loss of Present Truth. Let us ever 
keep in memory our Lord's message through the Apostle, 
that now in the end of this age he will send strong 
delusion that all may believe a lie who have pleasure 
in untruth— who received not the Truth in the love of 
it. (2 Thess. 2:10-12.) Let us guard our consciences, 
realizing that their perversion would surely work our injury, 
our alienation from the Lord, and our rejection 
from his service now and hereafter. 



R3849 : page 277 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY ON LOVE 
-SEE COMMENTS IN OUR JULY 1 ISSUE- 
SEPT. 2 

26. What is the importance of loving zeal and how may 
we cultivate it? Z.'98-l 12 (1st col. par. 1); Z/03-165 
(2nd col. par. 1, 2); Z/01-151 (2nd col. par. 1); Z/01-318 
(1st col. par. 1); Z. '96-163 (2nd col. par. 1, last 

half. 

27. How may we cultivate loving submission? Z. '96-44 
(2nd col. par. 2, 3); Z.'99-6 (1st col. par. 1 to 3); 
Z.'02-249 (2nd col. par. 1). 

28. Must perfect love include sinners and also our enemies? 
and how may we determine that it is the 

sin we hate and not the sinner? Luke 6:27,28; 
Z.'99-5 (2nd col. par. 3, 4); Z/01-331 (2nd col. par. 
2, 3); Manna, March 21. 

SEPT. 9 

29. What is the relation between love and justice? Z. '02-265, 266; 
Z/04-56 (2nd col. par. 2, 3). Z/02-171 

(2nd col. par. 2); Z/05-287 (2nd col. par. 2, 3). 

30. What is the relation between love and benevolence? 
Z/01-247 (1st col. par. 2, last sentence); Z. '01-253 

R3850 : page 277 

(1st col. par. 2, 3). 

31. What is the relation between love and fear? I Jno. 4:18; 
Z.'98-l 12 (1st col. par. 4 and 2nd col.) 



32. What is the relation between love and knowledge? 
I Cor. 8:1; E.260 (top of page); Z/00-184 (1st 

col. par. 2, 3); Z/03-42 (1st col. par. 3). 

SEPT. 16 

33. What is the best evidence of our acceptableness 
with the Lord? Z.'98-201 (1st col. par. 1); Z/03-56 
(1st col. par. 2). 

34. How may we become copies of God's dear Son? 
Z.'98-201 (2nd col. par. 2, 3); Z/02-172 (1st col). 

35. How must we keep ourselves in the love of God? 
Jude 21; Z/00-184 (2nd col. par. 1); Z. '02-173; 
Z/05-139 (2nd col. par. 4); Z/05-124 (2nd col. par. 
4,5). 

36. How should we examine ourselves and overcome 
the unlovely spirit of criticism and harsh judgment? 
F.402 par. 2, to 409; Z/00-73 (2nd col. par. 

3); 74 (1st col. par. 1, 2 and 2nd col. par. 3); also 75 
(1st col. par. 1); Z. '04-43 (2nd col. par. 5) to 43 (1st 
col. par. 2). 

SEPT. 23 

37. How must love deal with evil surmisings? Z. '05-213 
(1st col. par. "Ill" to 2nd col. par. "IV"). 

38. How shall we fulfil the command, "Love one another" 
Z/99-88 (1st col. par. 3 to 2nd col. par. 2); 

Z/03-121 (1st col. par. 2); Z/98-201 (1st col. par. 2 
and 2nd col. par. 1); Z/05-125 (2nd col. par. 2); Z/05-297 
(1st col. par. 1,2). And what proprieties 
should be observed by the New Creation in this 
respect? F.489 par. 2, to 490. 



R3847 : page 277 

"THY FAITH HATH SAVED THEE" 

-LUKE 18:35-19: 10.-SEPTEMBER 2.- 

Golden Text:— "The Son of man is come 
to seek and to save that which was lost." 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT briefly and concisely sets forth 
our Lord's mission. To those who learn to read it 
aright it tells of a world of mankind, the entire 
race of Adam, lost in sin and its penalty, death— lost without 
hope of ability to recover itself, without hope that any 
member of the race could ever redeem it or give to God a 
ransom for his brother. (Psa. 49:7.) This text sets forth 
the remedy, the only remedy provided by the Son of man. 
"He who was rich for our sakes became poor, that we 
through his poverty might be rich"— he left the heavenly 
condition and humbled himself to human nature that "he 



by the grace of God should taste death for every man." 
(2 Cor. 8:9; Heb. 2:9.) To appreciate the meaning of the 
word "lost" in this connection helps us to appreciate the 
meaning of the word "saved." As man was lost in sin, lost 
in death, so he is to be recovered from sin, recovered from 
death. 

Salvation then, in God's arrangement, means recovery 
from sin and its penalty death, and from all its concomitants 
of sorrow and pain, imperfection and dying. How 
reasonable, how sensible, is this Scriptural proposition! 
How well it is backed up by the Apostle's statement that the 

R3847 : page 278 

salvation to be brought to mankind at the second coming of 

Jesus will be a recovery or restitution of all that was lost, during 

the "times of restitution of all things spoken by the mouth 

of all the holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21.) 

While this salvation belongs specifically to the 

coming age, the Millennium, nevertheless to some the Lord 

is granting a beginning of salvation in the present time— to 

those whose eyes and ears of understanding and hearts of 

appreciation are open to the messages of divine grace, whispered 

at the present time under adverse conditions, but by 

and by to be so sounded abroad that every ear shall hear. 

BLIND BARTIMEUS' FAITH 

Jesus was en route for Jerusalem by way of Jericho. 
The Feast of Passover was approaching, and the roads leading 
to Jerusalem had many travellers, who usually went in 
companies or in groups. With our Lord and his apostles was a 
considerable number of friends, together with numerous Pharisees 
headed toward Jericho. By the wayside sat a blind man, 
Bartimeus, hoping to excite the sympathy of the passers-by, for 
he was a beggar. In those days there was no special provision 
for the blind, and there were many of them in those 
parts. 

Although numerous groups had passed, something especially 
attracted the attention of Bartimeus to this group as 
an extraordinary one, and he inquired who or what so large 
a company might represent. He was told that Jesus of 
Nazareth was passing by, and that the commotion, the multitude, 
represented those who were in his company. Many 
evidently preceded Jesus, so that the blind man began to cry 
for mercy and help before the Lord got to him. Those in 
the forefront rebuked him and told him to stop his shouting, 
intimating that the great Teacher should not be interrupted 
by a wayside beggar. But the man had evidently heard of 
Jesus before— possibly had heard of other blind men healed 
by him. In any event he was seized with a conviction that 
this prophet of Nazareth was able to grant him relief, that 
he was probably the true Messiah, the Son of God. Hence 
he shouted the more vociferously, "Thou Son of David 
[Messiah], have mercy on me!" 

The procession stopped, and Jesus commanded that the 



man be brought to him. He did not shout for him to come, 
but commanded, "Let him be brought." Mark (10:46) tells 
us that those who brought the blind man said to him, "Be 
of good cheer, rise; he calleth thee," and also tells us that 

R3848 : page 278 

he immediately cast away his cloak or mantle in his haste 
to respond. When led to Jesus the latter asked him, "What 
wilt thou that I should do for thee?" He responded, "Lord, 
that I may receive my sight." The Lord answered, "Receive 
thy sight; thy faith hath saved thee." 

There were many blind men throughout Palestine, yet 
only comparatively few received such a blessing. Why? 
Undoubtedly because few had the requisite faith. Note in 
the case of Bartimeus, the evidence of his faith as soon as 
he heard, the persistency which belongs to true faith; and 
note also the evidence that he was of sincere heart, as demonstrated 
by the fact that after he had received his sight he 
followed the Lord, glorifying God. He might on the contrary 
have said to himself, "Yes, I have heard a good deal about 
modern salves and about a prophet who could speak the 
word and restore the sight, but in my opinion all these are 
deceptions. In any case they are not for me. I suppose if 
I were rich and influential this Prophet of Nazareth would 
be pleased to heal me if he thought I would give him a good 
fee, or if some of my relatives were able to pay him well. 
No, I have given up all hope. Israel has been looking for 
a long time for the Messiah, anyway. It is not at all probable 
that he will come in my day, that he will pass by just 
where I am sitting, and that it would be any use for me to 
cry out for mercy to him." Had the blind man thus reasoned, 
without faith, undoubtedly the procession would have 
passed him by and he would have remained blind. 

EYES OF UNDERSTANDING BLINDED 

That physical blindness is a terrible affliction none 
will question. But how much more serious is the mental 
and spiritual blindness which prevails. The Scriptures tell 
us that the whole world, except the few who are true believers 
in the Lord Jesus, are all blind— "The god of this 
world hath blinded the minds of them that believe not." 
(2 Cor. 4:4.) The blinded ones are cut off by false doctrines 
from ability to see the grandeur of the divine character 
and plan for human salvation. There are various degrees 
of this mental and spiritual blindness: some can see 
nothing, others can see a little, vaguely, dimly. Some can 
look at the sun, moon and stars and see nothing in them 
beyond what they call nature— a federation of matter without 
intelligent direction. The Prophet has declared that 
"Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night showeth 
knowledge. There is no speech nor language where 
their voice is not heard," by some; but, alas, how many 
there are who hear not, see not, these things, who realize 
not the divine supervision of all of life's affairs. 



Lacking of faith in a gracious, just and loving God of 
wisdom and power, these blind and deaf ones are unprepared 
for the messages of his love and grace as they are 
given to us in his Word. To some of them it seems foolishness 
to think of a personal Creator at all: to others it seems 
foolish to think that one so great as to be able to create the 
worlds would pay particular attention to the interests of the 
individual members of our race. They are blind and cannot 
see afar off— they can merely see the affairs of the present 
life, with its eating and drinking, planting and building, 
laughing and crying, living and dying. They know not if 
there is anything else or what it is. Others with a little 
opening of the eyes of understanding can realize that there 
is a personal God and that he takes a personal interest; and 
these in turn are blinded by the Adversary's misrepresentations 
of the divine Word, which give false impressions respecting 
the divine character and plan. These are blinded 
by the traditions of the elders from the "dark ages" respecting 
the divine purpose— that it is merely to elect a few and 
to turn the great majority into a place of eternal torment. 
Alas for such blindness! How we long for the time promised 
by the Lord through the Prophet, when all shall know 
him, from the least to the greatest— when all the blind eyes 
shall be opened and all the deaf ears shall be unstopped. 

BARTIMEUS' EXPERIENCES ILLUSTRATIVE 

The incident before us in this lesson serves well to 
illustrate how some who at the present time belong to the 
blind class are brought to the Lord and graciously receive 
the opening of the eyes of their understanding. In the 

R3848 : page 279 

Lord's providence they hear that Jesus of Nazareth passes 

by; in the Lord's providence they have heard something respecting 

the great Teacher and the eternal life and the opening 

of blind eyes which he effects. They seize the opportunity, 

they lay hold upon the Lord by faith, they cry to him, 

—"Have mercy upon me, thou Son of David." The thought 

is suggested to them that there are many more worthy than 

themselves to have the Master's attention, that they are too 

insignificant, too sinful for him to recognize. But faith 

holds on. They have heard of his mercy toward others and 

they cry unto him so much the more, until finally he bids 

them come, and "whosoever cometh unto him he will in no 

wise cast out."— John 6:37. 

All who now come unto the Lord by faith encounter 
some experiences of opposition which correspond in considerable 
degree to those of Bartimeus. Generally they are 
without encouragement until they realize their need and cry 
to the Lord. Even these now find assistance from those who 
delight to assist them, saying, "Be of good cheer, rise; he 
calleth thee." 

Then comes the Master's question, "What wilt thou?" 
And well it is for those who, like Bartimeus, can say, "Lord, 



that I may receive my sight." Such do receive enlightenment 
from the Lord, an enlightenment by which they can 
see him who is the Way, the Truth and the Life, and 
through whom they may come to a knowledge of the Father, 
whom to know is life eternal.— John 17:3. 

But, alas, many today when asked this question, "What 
wilt thou?" request riches or honors of men or temporal 
blessings of some sort, appreciating not their great need of 
spiritual necessities. Even those of us who have enjoyed 
considerable blessing in the way of the opening of our eyes 
to see the divine character and plan need to remember how 
the Apostle prayed for the Church, "that the eyes of your 
understanding being enlightened, that ye may know what is 
the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of 
his inheritance in the saints, and what is the exceeding 
greatness of his power to us-ward who believe, according to 
the working of his mighty power."— Eph. 1:18,19. 

WHEN THE PEOPLE SAW IT 

When the multitude saw that the blind man had received 
his sight and had become a follower of Jesus and 
was giving glory to God they also joined in praise— all who 
beheld. So it is today with us. As one after another come 
to a knowledge of the divine character and plan, all who 
are in accord with the Lord are not only ready to assist them 
to the Lord, but ready also to join in praise on their behalf, 
rejoicing in their blessing. The great mass of the world, 
however, who see not, who appreciate not, this miracle of 
change from blindness to spiritual sight and understanding, 
cannot now join in praise and thanks to God. We are glad, 
however, that the time is coming when the knowledge of the 
glory of God shall fill the whole earth, when every knee 
shall bow and every tongue confess, when every creature in 
heaven and in earth shall be heard saying "Praise and honor 
and dominion and glory and power be unto him that sitteth 
on the throne and to the Lamb."— Isa. 11:9; Phil. 2:11; 
Rev. 5:13. 

Our lesson gives a second illustration of how the Son 
of man is able to save all that come unto him through faith. 
The Lord and his company had passed through Jericho on 
toward Jerusalem. The whole city evidently was stirred 
with the knowledge that the great Prophet of Nazareth was 
en route for Jerusalem. Zaccheus was apparently one of its 
prominent and wealthy citizens, a publican. The word 
"publican" today is in some places the name applied to bar -keepers, 
liquor-dealers, but in our Lord's time it indicated 
a collector of taxes for the Roman government. The Israelites 
demurred against being taxed by the Romans, claiming 
that they were the Kingdom of God, and that the Roman nation 
and all nations should rather pay taxes to them. The 
prejudice on the subject was so strong that the more reputable 
class of Jews would not accept the office. Besides 
this, the methods of collecting the taxes were frequently 
along the lines of extortion, as indeed is said to be still the 
method of collecting taxes in oriental lands. 



Consequently to be a publican came to signify an irreligious, 
unpatriotic, unscrupulous character. The Pharisees 
disesteemed these as sinners, as no longer Jews nor heirs of 
the Covenant promises. The publicans recognized themselves 
as of the sinner caste, and sometimes in the Temple, 
if they went there to pray, heard the more religious give 
thanks to God that they were not publicans— that they had 
not lost all their manhood and religion and patriotism. 

Zaccheus was one of the chief publicans, a prominent 
one amongst them, and rich. Yet apparently his heart was 
ill at ease. Although he had found his occupation a lucrative 
one he was not satisfied. Not that he would admit 
that his riches were all gained by dishonesty, but he realized 
that some of them were not honestly and honorably 
obtained. This would probably be true of the majority of 
rich people. As he heard of the Kingdom of God and the 
Prophet of Nazareth and his work of miracles, his heart was 
longing for relationship with God— he wanted to at least 
see this Prophet. Short of stature, the crowd being large, 
he had poor opportunity, but he ran ahead of the procession 

R3849 : page 279 

and climbed into a sycamore tree, and, seated on one of its 
branches over the road, he got a good view of Jesus as he 
passed by him. 

Similarly today to some come longing desires for righteousness, 
harmony with God and fellowship with the Lord 
Jesus, and the prospect of eternal life in the Kingdom. How 
much depends upon the way they entertain this thought! 
They can turn it aside and say, "It is no use for me to think 
of reconciliation with the Father and a life of harmony with 
him; it is no use for me to try to turn over a new leaf. My 
business is built upon a disreputable foundation; I have already 
acquired a reputation for dishonesty, which I could 
never shake off. The new life which this great Teacher 
Jesus proclaims is no doubt grand for those who can accept 
it, but I am not one of them." Had Zaccheus followed such 
suggestions and inclinations he would perhaps have gone in 
another direction instead of wishing to see more of the 
Lord. 

It is a hopeful sign when we find any desiring to have 
clearer views of the Lord or his Word or his plan. We 
would exhort all such to go ahead and climb a sycamore 
tree and get a good view of matters; peradventure to them, 
as to Zaccheus, the Lord might speak some word of comfort 
and encouragement. Let such remember that, if honest 

R3849 : page 280 

hearted and earnest of purpose, some of their natural disadvantages 

may under the Lord's providence work out for 

them a blessing, even as Zaccheus found that his smallness 

of stature brought him more particularly to the Lord's attention 

than otherwise. But his zeal was necessary, as 

well as his manifestation of interest and faith. 



"SALVATION COME TO THY HOUSE" 

We can imagine Zaccheus lying on a limb of a sycamore 
tree, looking down upon the Lord, studying the lines 
of his countenance, wondering whether or not this were the 
very Christ, and feeling despair in his own heart as he realized 
his own imperfection and impurity as contrasted with 
the Master's character, which shone forth in his countenance, 
speaking purity, gentleness, meekness, patience, love. 
How surprised he must have been when the Master stopped 
and looked directly into his eyes and, calling his name, said, 
"Zaccheus, come down, for I must dine today at thy house." 
We have here evidences of the Lord's knowledge of what is 
in man, that he reads the heart and makes no mistakes. 
Zaccheus was indeed glad to receive him and hasted to come 
down and to take him to his home. Doubtless there were 
others in that vicinity not only more highly esteemed 
amongst men but of still grander and nobler character than 
Zaccheus, but he had the longing heart, hungering and 
thirsting for righteousness. To him the blessing came; he 
should be filled. 

What a wonderful opportunity it was to have the Master 
come to his home! What an honor, what an opportunity 
for hearing some precious words, instructions, guidance, 
encouragement! Not all the conversation of that dinner-table 
is recorded, but sufficient is told to teach the lesson. 
Whatever the Lord said to him, Zaccheus there made a full 
surrender of his heart— that henceforth he would not only 
forsake sin and evil customs and practices, but that so far 
as possible he would make restitution for wrong doing and 
injustice. This is of great importance in the Lord's sight. 
It is in vain that we attempt to make use of God's grace 
forgiving our sins while we would hold on to money or 
property obtained from our neighbors by some dishonest 
practices. Zaccheus gave evidence of a sound conversion 
when he declared, "If I have wrongly exacted aught from 
any man, I restore fourfold"— not" I have restored fourfold," 
but "I will restore fourfold." The intimation here given is 
that Zaccheus was more than ordinarily upright as a publican, 
otherwise to have restored fourfold would of itself have 
ruined a large fortune. On the contrary, Zaccheus consecrated 
one-half of all his possessions to the poor, and out of 
what remained he would make good fourfold, four times as 
much, for all that he had taken unjustly from others, and 
still he hoped a reasonable competence would be left. 

We believe that many today make a great mistake in 
that they do not more fully follow the course of Zaccheus— 
in that they continue to hold on to something which really, 
rightfully, belongs to another; and secondly, that they do 
not consecrate more of their wealth of money or property or 
time or talents to the Lord. Zaccheus was a Jew, and under 
the requirements of the Law one-tenth of his yearly increase 
would be his obligation to religious matters. But he 
far exceeded this, giving not merely a half of his annual income, 
but a half of all the principal, of all the money and 



property and goods which he possessed. Some have inquired 
of us, What is the reasonable obligation of a Christian? 
We answer that our reasonable service should surely be 
more than the one-tenth of the Jews. To our understanding 
Zaccheus did not even go the full length of a complete sacrifice. 
The hymn expresses our sentiments:— 
"All my little life I give thee, 
Use it, Lord, in ways of thine." 

However, Zaccheus publicly, practically, did this very 
thing, the difference being that we who live this side of Pentecost, 
and who consecrate all to the Lord, are in turn by 
him made stewards to use that all according to our enlightenment 
day by day in his service. 

This question should be settled promptly by all who 
would grow in grace, in knowledge, in love and character-likeness 
of our Lord— Have I forsaken sin, and the ways of 
sin and dishonesty? Have I made ample restitution so far 
as possible for every injury done to fellow creatures? What 
have I sacrificed, half of my goods or all of my goods to the 
Lord and his cause? If as a Christian I have sacrificed all, 
how am I keeping that engagement, that covenant, that 
sacrifice? Am I remembering that time and talent and 
influence as well as money belong to him and are my reasonable 
service? Am I spending and being spent day by 
day or not? How will it stand with me when the Master 
reckons with his people? Will I have joy in rendering my 
account, or will I with sorrow be obliged to admit that 
as a steward I have been unfaithful, and have buried 
my talents in earthly aims and objects and ambitions 
and services, or will I be able to present to the Lord fruits 
of my labor and sacrifice, and hear him say, "Well done, 
good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joys of thy 
Lord"? 

"THEY SHALL BE MINE" 

Let us remember the words of the Lord through the 
Prophet, "Gather together my saints unto me; those 
who have made a covenant with me by sacrifice" (Psa. 50:5), 
"They shall be mine, saith the Lord, in that day when I 
make up my jewels."— Mai. 3:17. 

Some of those of the multitude who had rejoiced with 
the blind beggar were greatly disappointed when they found 
Jesus affiliating with an acknowledged publican. The difficulty 
was that they had misconceptions and had not yet 
come to see that the Lord looketh upon the heart, and that 
in the Lord's sight this humble and grateful publican was 
nearer to the Kingdom than themselves. Jesus' words to them 
were, "This day is salvation come to this house." Zaccheus 
also is a son of Abraham. "The Son of man came to seek 
and to save that which was lost." Salvation came to his 
house— not in the complete sense, for that, as the Apostle 
says, is to be brought unto us at the revelation, the second 
coming of our Lord and Savior. But salvation came to him 
in the sense that his heart was turned from sin and selfishness 
toward God and righteousness. Zaccheus that day, under 



the Lord's favor and blessing and instruction, and his 
own cooperation in the same, in the turning over of a new 
leaf and becoming a follower of the teachings of Jesus, was 
saved in a reckoned sense— in the sense that he no longer 

R3849 : page 281 

loved the ways of sin, but now loved the ways of righteousness 
—in the sense that he was no longer walking after the 
things of the flesh, but now was walking after the things of 
the Spirit, the things of God, the things of righteousness, 
the things of truth, the things most pleasing to the Master, 
in his footsteps. 



R3850 : page 281 

COMING IN THE NAME OF THE LORD 

-MATT. 21:1-17.-SEPTEMBER 9.- 

Golden Text:— "Blessed is he that 
cometh in the name of the Lord." 

IN our last lesson Jesus and his disciples, with others, 
were on the way to Jerusalem for the celebration of 
the Passover. They had already passed through Jericho. 
En route Jesus gave the parable of the talents; and 
Bethany, the home of Lazarus, Martha and Mary, was 
reached Friday night, just a week before his crucifixion. 
He rested with his friends on the Sabbath, partook of the 
feast prepared in his honor that evening, received the anointing 
of the costly spikenard from Mary, and next morning, 
the first day of the week, continued his journey to Jerusalem. 
Throughout the week, however, he made Bethany his 
home, going daily to the city, returning at night. Bethany 
was about two miles distant from the Temple. Here the 
present lesson begins. 

With the Lord were a considerable number of people 
who had come up to Jerusalem in his company, and some 
who had come out from Jerusalem to Bethany to see him, 
because they had heard that the Prophet of Nazareth who 
had raised Lazarus from the dead was at the home of the 
latter. When this multitude reached Bethphage, a little 
village on the Mount of Olives, Jesus stopped and sent two 
of his disciples to another village close by to bring to him 
an ass and her foal. The owner of the animals may have 
been acquainted with Jesus, and if so would also have been 
acquainted with his disciples. At all events his request was 
honored, and Mark tells us, according to the revised version, 
that they promised that Jesus would send back the colt to the 
owner. Evidently it was unusual for our Lord to ride, and, although 
he came and went a longer distance every morning and 
evening throughout the week, this was the only occasion we 
have any knowledge of his riding. Evidently the reason 



for riding at this time was not weariness. He was about to 
present himself to the people after the manner of their kings 
of the past, who we are told rode in triumph on white asses. 

THE OBJECT AND SIGNIFICANCE OF THE RIDE 

A prominent writer on this lesson seems to present a 
very wrong view of our Lord's course and program, saying: 
"Jesus now for three days made his final attempts to persuade 
the Jewish nation to accept him as the Messiah and 
thus save themselves from destruction, and become a great 
power for bringing in the Kingdom of heaven among men. 
He uses every possible means, in a great variety of ways, for 
accomplishing his purpose. He presents himself to them as 
a king. He shows his royal authority by cleansing the temple, 
his Father's house. He performs royal deeds of power 
and of mercy in healing the sick. He argues, he discourses, 
he pleads, he teaches, he answers objections, he threatens, 
he warns." 

To the very contrary of all this, we find that our Lord 
here studiously avoided arousing the people, lest they should 
"take him by force to make him a king." (John 6:15.) He 
taught the people in parables and dark sayings, which he 
did not explain except privately to his disciples, saying, 
"Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the Kingdom 
of God: but unto them that are without all these things are 
spoken in parables: that seeing they may see and not perceive; 
and hearing they may hear and not understand." 
(Mark 4:1 1,12.) Just a few days before this our Lord had 
expressly told his disciples that he would be set at naught 
by the rulers of the nation and would be crucified and rise 
again the third day. They had at least partially understood 
this matter, for they endeavored to dissuade him from 
such a view, and he had explained to them that his Kingdom 
was to be a heavenly one, "in the regeneration" times, when 
they should sit upon twelve thrones judging the twelve 
tribes of Israel. 

Our Lord knew that he would be rejected, and before 
he entered the city, viewing it, he wept over it and said, 
"Your house is left unto you desolate." He evidently had 
not the slightest intention of alluring the people to his support 
and for the establishment of an earthly Kingdom. We 
cannot doubt what a power he would have had if he had 
but spoken in defense of his own position. Even when he 
was accused before Pilate, the Roman governor marvelled 
that he offered no defense. All this was in harmony with 
the prophecy, which declared, "As a sheep before her 
shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth." 

Jesus sought to influence only those Jews who were 
"Israelites indeed," in whom there was no guile; and he understood 
the Father's plan to be that his message, as directed 
under the leadings of providence, would attract this class 
—and he did not wish for others. It was not the Father's 
will, as he declared. The remainder of that nation, aside 
from the "Israelites indeed," the holy ones, according to the 
divine plan and arrangement, would reject our Lord, crucify 



him and be blinded for more than eighteen centuries until, 
at the time of his second advent, their eyes of understanding 
would be opened and they would "look upon him whom 
they have pierced and mourn for him as one mourneth for 
his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him as one is in 
bitterness for his firstborn." (Zech. 12:10.) Meantime the 
Lord's favor during this Gospel age, as intended, would pass 
throughout the world, making disciples of the pure in heart, 
a zealous class of various nations, peoples, kindreds, tongues, 
for the purpose of selecting joint-heirs in the heavenly Kingdom, 
which was not intended to be established as an earthly 
Kingdom nor a heavenly one until God's due time— at 
the second coming of our Lord. 

THE FULFILMENT OF PROPHECY 

Two prophecies combine in the testimony here recorded: 
"Tell ye the daughter of Zion, Behold your King cometh 
unto thee, meek and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the 

R3850 : page 282 

foal of an ass." (Compare Isa. 62:11; Zech. 9:9.) It was 

in fulfilment of the prediction that Jesus rode upon the ass. 

The Jews were familiar with this prophecy, and for long centuries 

had been waiting for Messiah to fulfil it. It was necessary, 

according to the divine program, that our Lord should 

literally, actually, do what the prophets had foretold, that 

Israel might be without excuse in their rejection of him: so 

that in the future, when their blindness shall be turned 

away, when the eyes of their understanding shall be opened, 

when they shall look upon him whom they have pierced 

and mourn for their rejection of him, they will find themselves 

without excuse, they will realize that the Lord had 

performed unto them as his covenant people all his good 

promises, and that the fault of their rejection was entirely 

of themselves; that they were not in the condition of heart 

to receive their King; that whereas he was meek and lowly 

of heart they were proud and boastful; whereas he was 

pure and unselfish, they were impure and self-seeking and 

not fit for the Kingdom. In a word, God did for natural Israel 

everything that he had purposed and promised, and 

certified thereby that the fault was entirely theirs. 

The multitudes accompanying the Lord seemed to 
catch the spirit of the occasion, and while they shouted 
"Hosanna to the son of David," the Messiah, they made him 
a royal pathway for his beast, some spreading their garments, 
others getting branches of trees. It had been a custom 

R3851 : page 282 

amongst various peoples for long centuries to thus treat 
their honored rulers. In countries where flowers abounded 
these were used, in others the branches of trees, and in some 
instances the garments of their admirers and loyal subjects 
were thus used. We cannot suppose that all of this multitude 



were saints, though doubtless many of them outside of 
the apostles were sympathizers with Jesus. That it was not 
the apostles themselves who instigated and carried on this 
proceeding is shown by the fact, narrated by another evangelist, 
that certain Scribes and Pharisees in the multitude 
came to the disciples and suggested that they call the attention 
of the Lord to the matter, pointing out to him the impropriety 
of such proceedings. 

The modesty of our Lord in respect to his Messiahship 
is noteworthy. Not on a single occasion we know of did he 
announce himself as Messiah. His highest claim at any 
time was that he was the Son of God, a claim and title permissible 
to any of his true disciples throughout the Gospel 
age since Pentecost. In every instance his honor as Messiah 
was mentioned by others and simply not disputed by the 
Lord. For instance, on the first occasion when Jesus inquired 
of his disciples, "Whom say men that I am?" and later, 
"Whom say ye that I am?" when Peter, speaking for them, 
replied, "Thou art the Messiah, the Son of the living God," 
Jesus indicated his assent by the words, "Blessed art thou, 
Simon-Barjona, for flesh and blood hath not revealed it 
unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven." Now it was 
the multitude that heralded him the son of David, the Messiah, 
and he merely held his peace— only when others objected 
did he declare that the shouting was necessary to the 
fulfilment of the prophecy which declared that there should 
be a shout, saying, "Shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, 
thy King cometh unto thee: he is just, and having 
salvation: lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt 
the foal of an ass." The third place where his Messiahship 
was referred to was before Pilate, who asked him, "Art thou 
a king then?" He answered, "To this end was I born and 
for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness 
unto the truth." 

"HOSANNA IN THE HIGHEST" 

Had this procession and the shoutings of kingly honor to 
our Savior any meaning outside of being a testimony to 
the Jewish nation— a presentation to them of their King— to 
be accepted or rejected? They had no other meaning at the 
time, but indirectly they have a lesson for us spiritual Israelites 
at the end of this age; because we find that the divine arrangement 
is such that the history of natural Israel, from 
the death of Jacob down to this event, was typical of spiritual 
Israel's experiences from the death of Jesus down to his 
coming in glory, presenting himself to his people. The declaration 
of the prophets is that he must offer himself to "both 
the houses of Israel"— the fleshly house and the spiritual 
house. As in the fleshly house there were true and untrue 
Israelites, so also in the spiritual house of this Gospel age, 
"Christendom," there are both true and untrue Israelites, 
professedly waiting for Messiah and his Kingdom. 

Natural Israel waited 1845 years for the Lord to come 
as their King, to establish righteousness in the earth, and to 
use them as his channel for blessing to all mankind according 



to the terms of the Abrahamic Covenant. When Messiah 
came they were unready to receive him and unfit to be his 
co-laborers— except the few Israelites indeed whom he gathered 
out of that nation and constituted the nucleus of the 
new nation. When the Jewish nation, natural Israel, were 
cast off, rejected, the Lord began the selection of spiritual 
Israel out of all the nations as he had foreseen and foretold. 
Nominal spiritual Israel waited a similar period of time, 1845 
years, from the death of Jesus to the time when he was due 
to present himself as King. 

A host of Scriptures unite in the testimony that our 
Redeemer presented himself to spiritual Israel at the date 
corresponding to this triumphal entry into Jerusalem and 
presentation to natural Israel, viz., in 1878 A.D. (for prophetic 
testimony on the subject see MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vols. II. and 
III.) At that date also we believe nominal spiritual Israel 
— Churchianity, "Babylon"— was rejected after the same 
manner that the Jewish nation was rejected. True, Christendom 
does not realize this rejection,— neither did natural 
Israel realize its rejection and that its house was left desolate, 
left to go to destruction. As the 37 years following our 
Lord's rejection of natural Israel brought them to the utter 
destruction of their city and polity, so we anticipate that 37 
years from 1878 will bring "Christendom" to its destruction 
in the great time of trouble predicted in the prophecy. 

CLEANSING THE TEMPLE 

We are still in the time when spiritual Israelites are deciding 
for or against Messiah— accepting him as their present 
Lord and King, or rejecting him; shouting in their hearts 
"Hosanna to the son of David, who cometh in the name of 
the Lord," or, on the other hand, amongst those who become 
embittered as they hear the message. Those who receive 
him will surely have an antitype of the blessed experiences 
which came to the Lord's true people at Pentecost. The 

R3851 : page 283 

antitype will be immensely greater and grander than the 
type, nothing short of full change from the corruptible to 
incorruptible conditions in the First Resurrection. The others, 
unready of heart to receive the Lord and the blessings, 
will have their share in the great time of trouble with which 
this age will terminate and which will prepare mankind in 
general for the glorious Millennial reign of righteousness 
promptly to be ushered in. 

As soon as Jesus had sentenced the Jewish nation to 
destruction saying, "Your house is left unto you desolate: 
ye shall see me no more until that day when ye shall say, 
Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord," he 
ceased all efforts in connection with that nation— their trial 
was ended as a nation, but still he sought the individuals 
who were of the proper condition of heart. He proceeded 
to the Temple and cleansed it of its merchants and money 
changers, driving them out with a scourge of cords. He 



was backed by the authority which belonged to any Jew in 
any station of life, but was additionally backed by his own 
kingly presence and the multitude which thronged about 
him, which would have been ready to support him with 
physical force: all this of course aside from his heavenly 
power. 

THE ANTITYPICAL TEMPLE CLEANSING 

To our understanding the chief force of this feature was 
its typical one— illustrative of a great truth now applicable 
to spiritual Israel. The Temple built by Herod was only 
the type. The true Temple is the Church of the living God. 
This Church Temple may be considered from two standpoints: 
(1) The Church of glory in the future, of which 
the Lord's faithful ones of the present time are the living 
stones, now being chiseled, prepared. (2) The Church in 
its present condition of humiliation, imperfection, more properly 
the tabernacle in which the Lord dwells. As there 
were strict regulations governing the worship and worshipers 
in the types, so there are positive regulations in God's 
Word for those who constitute the priests and Levites doing 
the services of the tabernacle in the present time, preparatory 
to the establishment of the glorious Temple of the 
future. 

The Scriptures clearly indicate that in the end of this 
Gospel age God purposes a cleansing of his sanctuary, his 
temple— Christendom. There will be nothing in or connected 
with the Temple in glory that will need to be 
cleansed, nothing impure, nothing that defileth will enter 
therein; but the Temple, the Church of the present time, 
stipulated to be composed merely, solely, of the consecrated 
believers, has become a mixed multitude, so that under the 
name of Christian and Church are many persons and parties 
thoroughly unchristian, connected with the things of this 
world on a purely selfish basis. The Lord proposes a 
cleansing of this sanctuary, as testified through the Prophet 
Daniel— unto 2300 days [years], then shall the sanctuary be 
cleansed. That was merely a typical cleansing which our 
Lord accomplished in the typical Temple; the antitypical 
cleansing is the one of real importance and we are living 
now in this time of cleansing. (See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. 
III., Chap. IV.) 

The type gives us a suggestion respecting the character 
of the cleansing, that it mainly affects those who make merchandise 
of holy things— those who are associated with the 
Lord's work for selfish reasons, because "their bread is buttered 
on that side," because they can have more honor of 
men, more of the advantages and comforts of life, and better 
business prospects by reason of their identification with 
Churchianity. All of this class must be driven out: the 
Lord himself will see to the work. The Lord's house is not 
to be a house of merchandise. The Lord seeketh such to 
worship him as worship him in spirit and in truth, and not 
those who seek the loaves and fishes or any earthly advantage. 
He will therefore present the truth in such a form that 



it will be a blessing to the proper class, and separate all of 
the improper class by a measure of odium in connection with 
the King and his faithful. At the present time the Lord, 
the Truth, with a whip of small cords, is injurious only to 
those who are in the Temple for purposes of merchandise, 
and not injurious to others. There are money changers 
today in the nominal Temple who are robbing the people by 
accepting salaries for that which is not food, who, while 
professing to teach the way of the Lord and receiving honor 

R3852 : page 283 

of men and other emoluments, are really misrepresenting the 
Lord and his Truth. All such will be separated from the true 
Temple class, all such will be angry with the Master and 
his followers, as were the merchants and money-changers in 
the typical Temple, and they will have their sympathizers 
also, as they did. 

THE TEMPLE A DEN OF THIEVES 

Thieving, robbery, is usually done secretly, deceptively. 
The thief usually represents himself as the very reverse. 
He poses as an honorable man; but slyly, under cover, he 
secures to himself that which is not properly his. Is not 
this the case with very many professedly Christian ministers 
and teachers and elders in various quarters of Churchianity? 
Are there not many who pose as ministers of the cross of 
Christ and of the Word of God who deny the Word of God 
and to whom the cross of Christ is foolishness? Of this 
class are those who tell us that they are Evolutionists; that 
instead of man falling from God's likeness and needing to 
be redeemed by the blood of the cross and needing the second 
coming of the Lord to restore him, the very reverse is 
their conception of truth, viz., that if man has fallen at all 
he has fallen upward, that he has no need to be redeemed, and 
that to look for the second coming of the Lord for the salvation 
of the world is foolishness. Are not these men receiving 
money under false pretenses? and is not such a system of 
thievery the very worst kind in the world? Is not this an 
open robbery? Do they not rob God in that they detract 
from his honor? and do they not rob the people in that they 
take from them money and honors, etc., while deceiving 
them, selling them that which is not bread, which satisfieth 
not? 

The Father's house, his Church, should be composed 
solely of those who worship him in spirit and in truth. It 
is meet, it is proper, that all others should be cast out, and 
the Lord will see to this now because the due time for it 
has come. The sanctuary shall be cleansed; then in due 
time the glory of the Lord will fill it— the Royal Priesthood 
will be changed and become the Temple of glory, honor, 
dominion and power, from which will proceed the blessing 
of the world of mankind. 

The people in general were thoroughly aroused by the 
triumphal entry and then the scourging of the money-changers. 



R3852 : page 284 

To the inquiry, Who is this? came the answer, "This 
is Jesus, the Prophet of Nazareth of Galilee." The news 
spread, and the poor and the lame of the city began to flock 
to the temple. Doubtless they had heard before about this 
great Prophet, and many of them found this their opportunity 
for receiving a blessing at his hands. So it will be in 
the future, when the spiritual Temple will have been fully 
cleansed, and the Lord of the Temple will be in it in power 
and great glory, the healing and blessing of all the families 
of the earth will be in order and will be accomplished— all 
who will may then be blessed. 

The shoutings of the multitude on the way had doubtless 
ceased, yet the children in the Temple had apparently 
taken it up, and doubtless without any particular meaning 
were singing over and over, "Hosanna, hosanna, to the son 
of David." This illustrated how by and by the praises 
of the Lord shall fill his Temple, and the Pharisees who 
heard the children were annoyed by it. We may presume 
that they endeavored to stop them unsuccessfully, and then 
appealed to the Master, as the one whose authority would 
be recognized, to rebuke them; but he answered them this 
was fulfilling prophecy again, as it is written, "Out of the 
mouths of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise." 
What the more highly favored and intelligent of natural 
Israel did not appreciate and failed to proffer the Lord 
caused to be accomplished even at the mouths of babes. 
Indeed, everywhere we find that earthly wisdom is apt to 
misinterpret divine purposes. Very frequently, therefore, the 
Lord makes use of the weak, the poor, the ignorant, instead. 
Let us, dear brethren, whatever our opportunities 
and talents, seek to be as little children, not guided by 
worldly wisdom merely but "taught of God," that we may 
now in the proper form herald our Master the Messiah, and 
in every sense of the word cooperate with him in his work 
and be accounted worthy as faithful ones to be associated 
also in the glory of the Kingdom. 



R3852 : page 284 

TEACHING WITH AUTHORITY 

-MARK 12:13-27.-SEPTEMBER 16.- 

Golden Text:— "Render unto Caesar the things that 
are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's." 

TODAY'S lesson considers the events of the last 
day of our Lord's public ministry. As already 
noted, he rested at Bethany over the Sabbath 
and participated in a feast to his honor that (Jewish) 
Sabbath eve. The next day, the first day of the week 



—Sunday— he rode on the ass, making a triumphal 
entry into the city of the great King. Mark informs 
us that he visited the Temple on that occasion, looking 
about on the condition of things, and that it was the 
next day, Monday, that he drove out the money-changers, 
etc. Now we come to the day following, Tuesday, 
the last day of his public teaching. Note the record 
thus: John 12:1 informs us that the Feast at Bethany 
was "six days before the Passover"— Sabbath; Mark 11:1 
records the events of the next day, Sunday; Mark 1 1:2-19 
relates the events of Monday; Mark 14:1 shows 
that Wednesday and Thursday intervened before the 
Passover Feast began. 

PERPLEXITY OF THE JEWISH RULERS 

The leading men of all the various sects and parties 
were in perplexity how to deal with Jesus. They 
believed him to be an impostor, because his claims 
seemed to them to be absurd, contrary to all worldly 
wisdom, the only kind which they possessed. True, 
they recognized that he was a brilliant man, that he 
had great force and power with the common people. 
But they said to themselves, "Although he does not publicly 
claim to be the Messiah he nevertheless gives that 
intimation— promising his disciples participation with 
him in the Kingdom when he shall be exalted to power 
—and is leading the people to believe that by and by 
the long-expected Kingdom of God will be established. 
He is making headway, his miracles being especially 
effective in supporting his claims; he is establishing 
thus a new sect, a new party, that will prove antagonistic 
to all present sects and parties, and diminish our 
influence with the people. Although we have differences 
of opinion on many subjects we are all striving 
together for the favor of the great Roman empire, under 
whose control we are now. We are seeking to 
have greater and greater liberties and privileges, and 
if this new party succeeds it will diminish our influence 
at Rome and appear to the emperor and senate like a 
rebellion. The Romans already have that opinion of 
us as a people, that we are rebellious, etc., and we 
have been endeavoring to allay that sentiment and 
establish confidence in the stability of our religious 
system and its power over our people. This new religious 
system, therefore, threatens not only the prosperity 
of our various denominations but also the prosperity 
of our nation. Jesus should be killed for the 
good of the cause: as patriots we owe it to ourselves 
and to the whole nation and its future welfare." 

We are informed that they sought to kill him, and 
that privately they had determined this from the time 
of his calling Lazarus back from the tomb. His triumphal 
entry at the head of a multitude shouting, 
"Hosanna to the son of David," increased their concern 
and their determination against him. His driving out 



of the money-changers, etc., from the Temple was a 
further manifestation of his consciousness of his power 
with the common people. Apparently there was only 
one way to get to him: the people evidently would not 
stand by quietly and see him injured. Whatever was 
to be done must be accomplished in a quiet and stealthy 
manner and quickly. Moreover, the people had a 
reverence for the Roman soldiers, and it would be desirable 
therefore to have him executed under Pilate's 
decree. But how could they bring the matter before 
Pilate? What charges could they make? It was the 
people who had proclaimed him king and not himself. 
They must if possible get him to commit himself to 
some treasonable statement, on account of which they 
could bring him before Pilate as an enemy of the Roman 

R3852 : page 285 

empire, and thus have him legally executed in a manner 

which the public could not resist. The Romans 

permitted the Jews to govern themselves, merely stipulating 

for tribute and loyalty to Rome; and Pilate 

with his soldiers resided at Jerusalem, not to interfere 

with Jewish laws and customs, but merely to preserve 

the peace and the dignity of Rome. 

AN ENTANGLING QUESTION 

With a view to getting Jesus to commit himself as 
an opponent of the Roman Empire, two groups of Jews 
came to Jesus with a question. The Pharisees in a 
general way held that the Jews as the people of God 
were to be the rulers of all other peoples, and that 
they should never pay tribute, taxes, to other rulers. 
Their teachings on these lines, however, were privately 
given, for fear of being apprehended as traitors to 

R3853 : page 285 

Rome. The Herodians, on the contrary, were Jews 
who took sides with Herod, and stood firmly and boldly 
and publicly for the suzerainty of the Roman Empire, 
claiming that it was to the advantage of the people of 
Israel to be under the Roman power, and that the paying 
of tribute was right and proper. The common 
people were understood to specially favor the view 
held by the Pharisees and were opposed to the view of 
the Herodians. Representatives of these two classes, 
coming to Jesus in public where he was teaching and 
where the common people could hear the question and 
note the answer, hoped to get him to do one of two 
things: either declare with the Herodians that the tax 
was right and proper and thus break his influence with 
the common people, or publicly to side with the Pharisees 
and common people, denounce the tax tribute, declare 
it improper and contrary to the divine will, etc., 



and thus make declaration that under no conditions 
then prevailing could the instigation of insurrection 
amongst the Jews in opposition to the tribute tax be 
construed as traitorous. 

Note the subtlety of the entire program: they addressed 
Jesus, saying, "Teacher, we know that thou 
art true and carest not for any one: for thou regardest 
not the person of man, but of a truth teachest the way 
of God." Here all the stress was laid upon his courage 
to utter truth, to be faithful to God at any cost, to 
be a teacher of the people on whom they could thoroughly 
rely, fearing nothing for himself. All this was 
so stated in order that the Master in the presence of 
the multitude might be compelled to give a straightforward 
answer to the question they were about to 
put, and that answer they fully believed would be one 
that would convict him of treason. Then came the 
question: "Is it lawful [according to the Law of Moses] 
to give tribute unto Caesar or not?" Shall we 
give or shall we not give? 

A HEAVENLY-WISE REPLY 

Our Lord understood the situation in an instant 
and said, "Why tempt ye me?"— Why do you try to 
entrap me? Look at the motives in your own hearts 
and judge of how much sincerity or falsity is there. 
Get a lesson out of this matter that will do you good; 
show me the tribute coin. They handed him a silver 
penny or denarius of Tiberius Caesar, stamped with 
the likeness of Caesar and an inscription concerning 
him, just as coins of today in Europe bear the image 
and superscription of the reigning sovereign. Jesus 
inquired of his tormentors, "Whose image and superscription 
is this [on this coin]?" They replied, 
"Caesar's." Then he gave them the answer to their 
question, saying, "Render unto Caesar the things that 
are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's." 

Jesus did not go into the question of how much 
advantage the Jewish nation was reaping from the 
protection afforded the Jews against the assaults of 
other nations. He did not attempt to declare that justice 
was connected with every feature of the tribute 
tax, but he did sum up the matter in those few words, 
"If Caesar has some just claims against you, render to 
him accordingly— this will not interfere with God's 
just claims against you, which you should be equally 
ready to meet." This answer was not merely an evasion 
of the question: it was an answer in the full 
sense, probably far beyond what they could fully comprehend; 
but they did comprehend that they had failed 
to entrap him, that he had answered their question in 
a manner which would never have occurred to them, 
that he had a wisdom far beyond theirs and all natural 
earthly wisdom— he had the wisdom from above, 
first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy of entreatment, 



full of mercy and good fruits.— Jas. 3:17. 

ADMONITION APPROPRIATE TO US 

The Scriptural assurance that all things work together 
for good to them that love God is illustrated in 
this matter. The Pharisees, the Herodians, intended 
evil to the Lord and his apostles, their teachings, etc. 
—they designed their overthrow. But in the Lord's 
providence the very reverse of this resulted. A lesson 
came to the common people who heard, a lesson which 
doubtless bore fruit in any who were in a right condition 
of heart; but the lesson was especially profitable, 
we are assured, to the apostles and to all of the Lord's 
followers since. Its lesson is that we are not called 
upon to war with carnal weapons against the powers 
that be— that all the followers of the Lord Jesus are to 
seek peace and pursue it, endeavoring to do good unto 
all men as they have opportunity, especially to the 
household of faith, and to speak evil of and to do evil 
to none. 

To the disciples this would imply that the affairs 
of the world may be safely left with the world, under 
the Lord's supervision, for he is able to make even the 
wrath of men to praise him; the remainder he can restrain, 
and in due time all of his gracious purposes 
will be accomplished. (Psa. 76:10.) Until that due 
time shall come we are with patience to wait for it, 
knowing that in the end it will come and will not tarry. 
The Lord's due time for the changes in the world's affairs 
is what we are waiting on, and meantime we are 
occupying, using, our talents and opportunities, not in 
fighting worldly battles either by tongue or pen or 
with other earthly weapons, but fighting the good fight 
of faith, laying hold upon eternal life, whereunto we 

R3853 : page 286 

are called, that we may thus be prepared by the trials 
and difficulties and sacrifices of the present time for 
the glorious share in his Kingdom reign and blessing 
which the Lord has promised to us as his followers if 
we are faithful. 

If Caesar commands taxes and they are general 
we are not to dispute them. When the Lord's time 
shall come, when Caesar no longer shall collect taxes 
from the heirs of the Kingdom, it will be manifest to 
us, for then Caesar will have no power or authority to 
collect these. If Caesar merely gives us liberty to vote 
it is not at all necessary that we should accept or use 
that liberty; should he by and by command us to vote, 
it would be proper for us to comply and use our best 
judgment. But in the absence of any command or 
compulsion it would seem that those consecrated to be 
followers of the Lamb, to walk in the footsteps of Jesus, 
would have plenty to do in following the Lamb 



whithersoever he goeth— in fulfilling the terms of their 
consecration as members of the body of Christ, in doing 
good unto all men as they have opportunity, especially 
to the household of faith. 

WHAT WE RENDER TO GOD 

What we shall render to God depends upon who 
we are and what we see and know respecting him and 
his will. The world in general realizes some responsibility 
to a Creator or First Cause, but their enlightenment 
being limited their responsibilities are correspondingly 
limited. Those who have seen and heard 
and tasted that God is gracious, that his favor has been 
manifested in the redemption price paid at Calvary, 
have greater privileges than their less enlightened 
neighbors and correspondingly greater responsibilities. 
To these it is but a reasonable service that they 
should present to the Lord the little all that they possess 
in this present life, and this becomes a still more 
reasonable matter when they learn that God has sent 
forth during this Gospel age a special message of invitation 
to joint-heirship with his Son in the Kingdom. 
Those who are thus enlightened and who possess any 
measure of wisdom should, it would seem, joyfully lay 
aside every weight and besetting sin and earthly ambition, 
and strive to attain to the gracious things of the 
divine promise to the seed of Abraham.— Gal. 3:29. 

The Prophet, speaking for this class of holy favored 
ones of this Gospel age, the consecrated, inquires, 
What shall we render unto the Lord for all his benefits 
to us? What would be the proper course for such to 
pursue in their relationship to God? The Lord 
through the Prophet gives the correct answer, saying, 
"I will take the cup of salvation and call upon the name 
of the Lord." (Psa. 116:12,13.) The cup of salvation, 
as our Master explains, has a two-fold significance: it 
implies that we all share with him in his cup of suffering, 
of self-denial, of self-abasement for the sake of the 
Lord's cause in this time when sin abounds, when the 
prince of this world rules in the hearts of the majority, 
when darkness covers the earth, society, and gross 
darkness the heathen. We have the promise that those 
who drink of the Lord's cup now will also drink of his 
cup of rejoicing and blessing and refreshment in the 
Kingdom. 

In other words, in the divine order these two features 
are indissolubly joined, "If we suffer with him we 
shall also reign with him," if we partake of the trials 
and difficulties and oppositions incidental to faithfulness 
to the Lord, we shall have a share with him in the 
glory, honor and immortality by and by; but if we refuse 
the cup of trial and discipline and experience and 
suffering of this present time we are thus also incidentally 
refusing and passing by the cup of glory and 
blessing of the Millennial age and of eternity. Let us 



take the cup, let us appropriate it, let us render unto 

the Lord our God our reasonable service— a full consecration 

of heart and life. And this appreciation of a 

reasonable service will doubtless continue to increase 

before the mental vision: as we go onward we will perceive 

greater privileges and opportunities of sacrifice, 

and as we measure up to these will get clearer and better 

and grander views of the coming glories, and also our 

heavenly rewards. 

"WHOSE WIFE SHALL SHE BE?" 

When the Pharisees and Herodians withdrew, discomfited 
by our Lord's wise answer, representatives of 
another sect, the Sadducees, came with a question to 
entrap him. To appreciate their question we must understand 

R3854 : page 286 

that the Sadducees were a class of Jews well 

educated, intellectual, but utterly lacking in any faith 

respecting a future life. Whether or not they believed 

in a God, we are not informed, but that they did not 

believe in invisible angels or spirit beings of any kind, 

and that they denied that there would be a resurrection 

for mankind more than for the brute beast was 

clearly stated. These were worldly-wise men who believed 

that their countrymen were laboring under a 

foolish delusion in expecting any blessings in the future. 

They held that when a man dies that is the end 

of him. The Sadducees presented a question which 

they thought would show up the weakness of Jesus' 

position before the people, and incidentally also the 

weakness of the theories of other Jews. 

Their question was probably a suppositious one, 
though stated as a fact. They cited the Jewish Law 
respecting Jewish marriage stated in Deuteronomy 25:5-10. 
The object of that law seemingly was to prevent 
the obliteration of any family. The suppositious 
case was that under this law one brother married and, 
dying without children, the second brother married his 
wife, and so on until the seven brethren had married 
the one woman, each in turn. Now the query was, 
Whose wife should she be in the resurrection, since 
she was the wife of the seven during her earthly life? 
The question was intended to show the absurdity of 
believing in a resurrection, that it would occasion all 
kinds of confusion, etc. 

Our Lord's answer was, Is not your difficulty, your 
error, this— that ye understand not the Scriptures nor 
the power of God? If you sufficiently appreciated the 
power of God you would know that he who is able to 
raise the dead is able also to order and direct all the 

R3854 : page 287 



incidental affairs connected with the resurrection of 
mankind. If you had a proper appreciation of God's 
character you would have faith in him and would not 
stumble over such a trivial matter as this. Leave it 
with God. Let me explain, however, that when they 
shall rise from the dead they will neither marry nor be 
given in marriage, but will be like the angels in heaven, 
sexless. This was a new thought to them. 

Our Lord did not attempt a particular answer to 
their question, knowing (1) that they were not sincere 
questioners, and that such an explanation would be 
like casting pearls before swine; (2) furthermore, it 
was not yet time to give an explanation of many of the 
details respecting the resurrection. Many of those 
details belong only to the spiritual, and could not be 
understood by any except those begotten of the Spirit, 
and the Spirit begetting could not come until Pentecost, 
and Pentecost could not come until after the Lord 
had paid our penalty with the sacrifice of himself and 
had ascended up on high and appeared in the presence 
of God on our behalf. 

From our standpoint, however, we see that our 
Lord, without designating the resurrection of the 
Church or the resurrection of the world, stated the 
matter broadly in such a way as to apply to both. 
For instance, those who will constitute the Church, 
and who will be changed from earthly to heavenly 
nature in the First Resurrection— "changed in a moment" 
—will be Spirit beings like unto our Lord, and 
like unto the angels also in respect that they will be 
sexless. As for the world, which will not be changed 
from earthly to heavenly nature, and will not experience 
a resurrection change in a moment, but a gradual 
change or uplift, progressing step by step during the 
thousand years of the "times of restitution," it will 
also be true that when they shall have attained that 
world and shall have attained the resurrection from the 
dead they will neither marry nor be given in marriage, 
but be sexless. That is to say, the restored human 
family will, during the period of restitution, lose their 
sexual distinctions, and at the end of the thousand 
years be all of them in perfection, like Adam was before 
Eve was taken from his side. 

"NOT THE GOD OF THE DEAD" 

Having answered their question that the resurrection 
difficulties they anticipated arose from a failure to 
appreciate the divine power then in control, our Lord 
passed onward in the argument to show that they did 
not grasp the spirit of the Scriptural testimony. They 
had reasoned that the Old Testament said very little 
about resurrection anyway. Our Lord proceeded to 
show them that there were various features of the 
Scriptures which indirectly taught the resurrection 
without mentioning it in so many words. He pointed 



them to the time when the Lord appeared to Moses and 
spoke to him from the burning bush, saying, "I am the 
God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob. 
Jesus' argument with the Sadducees was that 
since Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were at this time dead, 
for God to thus speak of them implied a resurrection of 
the dead, implied that he still recognized them in some 
sense or degree, that they were not extinct— that God, 
for instance, would not speak of being the God of a 
dead camel or a dead dog, because he had made no 
provision for a resurrection of camels, dogs, etc., but 
his provision for the resurrection of the human dead is 
a fact, and constitutes a full explanation of his statement 
here— that he is still the God of Abraham, Isaac 
and Jacob. 

We live in a day when Satan's delusions through 
Platonic philosophy has gained a large control over the 
world. All the heathen today believe that death is not 
death, but an entrance into a fuller life, and Christian 
people in general so believe, some of them even using 
this passage of Scripture to demonstrate their belief, 
saying that if God be the God of Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob they could not have been dead in any sense of 
the word, but must have been alive somewhere, they 
know not where. We answer that these also err in not 
giving proper attention to the Scriptures, which teach 
not that the dead are alive, but that there shall be a 
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and of the 
unjust. This is what our Lord taught, and this is 
therefore what all of his followers should believe if 
they would have the full blessing intended for those 
who contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to 
the saints. Note that our Lord so expresses it: his 
argument is based upon and introduced by the words, 
"As touching the dead that they arise, have ye not 
heard," etc.— he does not say "as touching the living 
that they shall arise," for how can the living arise? it 
is the dead who need a resurrection. The Scriptures 
never suggested the absurdity of the resurrection of 
the living, but continually assure us of the resurrection 
of the dead, both the just and the unjust.— Acts 24:15. 

Every doctrine of the Bible is intimately associated 
with the statement that the wages of sin is literal, actual 
death— not merely the death of the body, but "the 
soul that sinneth it shall die." (Ezek. 18:4.) The 
death of the soul was the penalty upon Adam and upon 
all of his race; hence our Lord redeemed our souls 
from the tomb (Psalm 49: 15), and the redemption price 
he gave was his own soul, his own being, when "he 
poured out his soul unto death," "he made his soul an 
offering for sin." (Isa. 53:10,12.) Since it is the souls 
of men that are redeemed the resurrection is to be a 
resurrection of the souls, and the resurrection of our 
Lord, we are told, was a resurrection of his soul, as 
foretold by the Prophet and confirmed by the Apostle, 
"Thou wilt not leave my soul in sheol," hades, in the 



tomb.-Psa. 16:10; Acts 2:31. 

While it is unwise to push this feature of the Truth 
to the front because of the prejudice that exists in the 
minds of so many of the Lord's people, and because it is 
proper that we should be wise fishers of men, nevertheless 
it is absolutely indispensable to an appreciation 
of the divine plan that all should come ultimately 
to see that this is the fundamental teaching of God's 
Word, and to build the proper faith structure in harmony 
therewith. Adam died and we in him— Christ 
died as our Redeemer, and thereby made possible the 
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust, 
as promised in God's Word. We who now are called 
have the special invitation to be of the just, the justified, 
the acceptable with God— to have part in the First 
Resurrection and be the kings and priests to reign 
with our Lord on the earth, to bless the world and to 
grant to mankind in general the gradual uplifting or 
raising up out of sin-and-death conditions to the full 
perfection of human nature lost in Adam and redeemed 
by the precious blood. 



page 289 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVII SEPTEMBER 15 No. IS 
A.D., 1906-A.M., 6034 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 291 

The Jew! The Jew! The Jew! 291 

Zionists Taking New Courage 292 

"Gather My Saints Together Unto Me" 292 

Report of One-Day Conventions 293 

The 1906 Conventions (Poem) 294 

Wonderful Words of Life 294 

A Christian Soldier's Battle 295 

The Fight for Liberty 296 

The Fruit of the Spirit 298 

Not Far From the Kingdom 299 

How to Love God Perfectly 300 

Knowledge Necessary to Love 301 

His Pilgrim Labors Ended 303 

page 290 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKERSTR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ABOUT PILGRIM VISITS. 



Many of the little groups of friends throughout the country 
have not sent in answers to queries in May 1 TOWER, because 
they thought their requests sent last January were sufficient 
for the year. We remind all that the publication of the 
queries is of itself a notification to them to send new requests, 
no matter when they asked for Pilgrim visits previously. Look 
up the issue referred to, and if you have not answered those 
questions please do so at once. 

MISSIONARY ENVELOPES 



These are now in stock in large quantity. Every letter you 
send through the mail may be a more or less potent messenger 
of the Truth, even on its outside, by the use of these envelopes. 
They catch the attention not only of those to whom they are 
addressed, but postmen and others have an opportunity, and 
sometimes the curiosity, to read their message of peace— the 
gospel in condensed form. Price, 25c per 100, postpaid. 



R3854: page 291 



VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE JEW ! THE JEW ! THE JEW ! 



SPIRITUAL Israelites, who recognize that according 
to the Word of God natural Israel is yet 
to play an important part in the world's 
affairs, naturally watch keenly everything transpiring 
throughout the world affecting the Jews. Noting that 
the favor to Spiritual Israel meant the disfavor of 
natural Israel, and that the completion of Spiritual 
Israel would mean the return of natural Israel to divine 
favor (Rom. 11:25-32), we more than others were 

R3855 : page 291 

prepared to look for and to apply the prophetic promises 
which belong to fleshly Israel. Thus it was that thirty 
years ago we were preaching the regathering of natural 
Israel to Palestine before A.D., 1914. Others mocked, 
and even orthodox Jews assured us that they did not 
expect such things for several centuries. Not for fifteen 
years after that did Dr. Herzl and Dr. Nordau and 
others dream of and organize the Zionist movement 
for the reoccupation of Palestine by the natural descendants 
of Abraham, who, the Apostle says, are still 
"beloved for the fathers' sakes." 

Just as the persecuted Jews of Russia were beginning 
to look for a place of refuge, and were debating colonies 
in South America, United States and elsewhere, some 
going to Palestine— the door to the Promised Land was 
suddenly closed by the edict of the Sultan of Turkey 
in 1892. That very prohibition led the Jews to look 
to the land of their fathers with greater intensity than 
ever, and the Zionist movement took form and took 
hold of the hearts of the Jews all the world over. The 
closing of the "door" led to the greater desire to enter 
it, and a Zionist fund was started, ostensibly to purchase 
the land. But only the poor Jews have faith in the promises 
of the Law and the prophets— the wealthy ones, 
generally unbelievers, refused their millions to the 
poorer Zionists and loaned it instead to the persecutors 
of their race. 

As years rolled on and the Zionists became more 
and more enthused, their plans were laid before the 
Sultan by Dr. Herzl, and it was said that all of their 
funds were proffered for concessions in Palestine looking 
toward the establishing there of a Jewish State, but to 
no avail— Palestine remained closed. Then the British 
Government offered specially favorable terms for a 
subordinate Jewish State south of Palestine, in Africa, 
and this drew off the interest of some, but only the 
more whetted the desire of the others for the Promised 
Land. Then came the death of Dr. Herzl, their great 



leader, and no one seemed to fill his place, and Zionism 
began to faint by the way. Now, suddenly, without 
the influence of a great leader, without the cooperation 
of the millionaire Jews, without the expenditure of one 
dollar, the Sultan has lifted the embargo on Jewish 
emigration to Palestine as suddenly as he placed it, and 
without ado or explanation. To us who are watching, 
this all reads, "Not by might, nor by power, but by my 
Spirit [power, influence] saith the Lord." God is behind 
the movement, and the Jews will yet realize this, and 
the meek among them will rejoice therein and learn 
to lean less upon the arm of flesh, and more upon the 
arm of the Lord. 

Meantime the Jews are charged (no doubt justly) 
by the Russian autocracy with being largely responsible 
for much of the trouble of that revolution-shaken 
land. No doubt they will on this account be more 
and more made the scapegoat of the situation— the 
Government conniving at their persecution by the 
revolutionaries. If this persecution has gone on even 
when Jewish bankers loaned money to Russia, may it 
not be expected to be intensified when these shall refuse 
further loans, as is now generally anticipated? The 
intelligent opposition of the Jews to the present reign 
of legalized anarchy may lead to a forcible expulsion 
of the Jews as a popular remedy. 

England, alarmed at the situation in Egypt, and 
by the efforts of the Sultan to encourage a "Holy War" 
by the Mohammedans, has viewed with alarm the building 
of a railway from the Sinaitic Peninsula into Palestine, 
lest it should give the Sultan a military advantage 
and endanger the interests and political value of the 
Suez canal. It is easy to believe that England therefore 
would be pleased to see the Jews, a friendly race, enter 
Palestine in considerable numbers. Some of the English 
people are manifesting a Jew-hatred, and saying that 
England has all the Jews she wants. 

The Roman Catholic press, commenting on the 

R3855 : page 292 

verdict that Dreyfus was not guilty of treason, claims 
that he was acquitted because the Jews are in control 
of the French Government and responsible for the 
annulment of the Concordat, which for so long period 
has existed between France and the Roman Church. 
She too, therefore, would be glad to be rid of the Jews 
in France, and may some day connive at their persecution. 
The Scriptures declare that at this time God 
will not only drive Israelites out of all the nations 
whither they have been scattered; but also that hunting 
and fishing for them he will see that at the proper time 
they shall return to "their own land."— Jer. 16:15,16. 

Germany is trembling with fear that what is 
now being enacted in Russia may ere long be her portion. 
The Socialists of Germany are expressing their 



sympathy with their brethren of Russia as loudly as 
prudence will permit. The German Emperor fears that 
the success of the Russian revolutionists in forming a 
Republic, or even the formation of a very liberal monarchy, 
would endanger his own autocratic powers, if not 
encourage the overthrow of the Empire. There is a 
serious Jew question in Germany, too; and possibly the 
Kaiser may make himself further illustrious by taking 
some public step favorable to the disposition of the 
Jewish question— in harmony with prophecy, though 
entirely ignorant thereof. 

A little longer and the plan of God will be complete, 
and we shall know as we are known. But, meantime, 
the "watchers" will take comfort from the evidence 
we have, that all these and other matters of prophecy 
are reaching fulfilment, and that on time. 

ZIONISTS TAKING NEW COURAGE 



The death of Dr. Herzl, the acknowledged leader 
of the Zionist movement, was surely a great shock 
thereto. However, we should look for the Lord's 
providence in the matter, and now it appears. 
Dr. Herzl was bent on the formation of a Jewish 
State with chartered rights, which the Sultan of 
Turkey, the ruler of Palestine, was not willing to 
grant. Synchronously with the death of Dr. Herzl 
conditions in general changed: the Jews, under a new 
leader, Dr. Warburg, have abandoned present political 
aspirations almost at the same moment that the Sultan 
issued his edict permitting the settlement of Palestine 
by Jews. This is in full accord with the prophecy, which 
shows that a Jewish State cannot be restored until the 
gathering of Spiritual Israel beyond the vail— "until 
the fulness from among the Gentiles be brought in." 
-Rom. 11:25. 

The following report of the American Zionist Convention 
in July, from the Jewish Exponent, will be read 
with interest:— 

"There are three important subjects that will ever 
be linked with this convention— practical work in Palestine, 
financing the Federation and official antagonism 
toward Territorialism. The scholarly address of Professor 
O. Warburg and the report on Palestine came as 
an entire surprise. It was like a thunderbolt from a clear 
sky, or I should say a sunbeam from an otherwise 
cloudy and threatening heaven. Yesterday the Zionist 
forces were in utter despair; the idea of a Jewish State 
in Palestine seemed but a forlorn hope, which had died 
with its originator. 

"Today a new leader has arisen. Dr. Warburg 
showed them this land, almost in their grasp. There 
was no need of a tramp in the wilderness, there was no 
need for a shower of miracles. They could go in and 



possess the land immediately. Yesterday they could 
only see their hopes realized through 'the Jewish 
State.' Chovevi Zionism, much as they favored it 
because it kept them occupied, was distasteful to them; 
it gave them but the faintest hope. Today they see their 
Zion through 'Practical Work in Palestine.' Dr. Warburg 
cast aside the Herzlian doctrine; he tells them, 
first develop the country, then you are worthy of the 
State. Nor is this plan one of mere lesser colonization, 
one that proposes merely to plant little agricultural 
communities until the land shall overflow with their 
members. It proposes a thorough commercial, industrial 
and cultural, as well as agricultural development 
of the country. Its scope is only limited by a lack of 
political acknowledgment, and this it considers of least 
importance, even though Herzl laid the greatest stress 
on it. 

"Political recognition shall merely adorn this edifice, 
whereas Herzl demanded it as the pillar of his State. 
Though the declaration of the Federation orders the 
'Actions Comite to watch and take advantage of political 
opportunities,' yet it cannot be denied that political 
Zionism has been subordinated to 'the principle of 
active and immediate work in Palestine,' whereas the 
direct opposite was true with Herzl at the helm. No 
matter what future events this change may bring, 
whether it be disastrous or beneficial, time alone will 
judge; but the immediate effect of the change is already 
apparent. It has blown new life into the movement. 

"The new impetus it has given Zionists for renewed 
effort can hardly be overestimated. It will require some 
time for a general realization of the stupendous effect 
of this change. During the coming year our forum will 
be occupied with discussions on the Palestine Society, 
the Palestine Industrial Syndicate, the Bazalel and 
kindred movements. Our press will echo with questions 
of museums, art galleries, colleges, olive trees, Palestine 
railroads and mines and weaving industries. The keynote 
of this whole new phase of Zionism is, 'Go in and 
possess the land.'" 



R3856 : page 292 

GATHER MY SAINTS TOGETHER UNTO ME 

AS THE TIME for the "general assembly of the 

Church of the Firstborn" draws nearer, the 

desire of the consecrated to meet together 

to "build one another up in the most holy faith" seems 

to increase. This applies to the little local gatherings 

in various parts, as well as to the "One Day Conventions" 

and to the "General Convention." We rejoice 

that this is so, and hail it as one of the proper signs of 

brotherly love and general growth in grace and knowledge. 



Once we inclined to begrudge the railway fares 
and other expenses, but now we are learning that there 
is a degree of economy in temporal matters, which fosters 
a money-loving disposition which is a foe to grace and 
tends to spiritual poverty. "The liberal soul shall be 
made fat." (Prov. 1 1:25.) It is a good sign to find 
God's people spending their earnings for the spiritual 
welfare of themselves and others. 
The second of our General Conventions of the year 

R3856 : page 293 

(at St. Paul, Minn.) is in the past, and many of our 
readers have already had verbal reports from those 
privileged to attend it. Nevertheless it is appropriate 
that the TOWER also set forth a summary of its prominent 
features. 

Opening August 13, and closing Sunday the 19th, 
the Convention week was one round of spiritual enjoyment, 
participated in by about one thousand WATCH 
TOWER readers— of whom probably 700 were privileged 
to be in attendance during the entire session, 
while the remainder came and went at times better 
suiting their convenience, but always we believe with 
regret that they could not be more with the friends 
and with the Lord, whose presence was preciously 
realized throughout. 

We cannot report here the various heartfelt testimonies 
given by the dear friends who came together 
at their own expense from twenty-eight States, including 
Canada and Scotland, but you have our word for it 
that they were heart-cheering. Very quickly those who 
had never met or even heard of each other were "well 
acquainted" and friends, bound with a tie of the Spirit 
warmer and stronger than any tie of blood: others who 
had met previously had no less joy in renewing their 
fellowship and greetings. Perhaps a dozen of those who 
attended the Asbury Park Convention were so enthused 
thereby that they came also to St. Paul. 

All of our sessions were in the Armory Auditorium, 
except the publicly advertised discourse of Sunday 
afternoon, which was held in the new "Peoples' Church" 
—the largest in St. Paul. Both auditoriums were secured 
to us free by the business men of St. Paul at a 
cost to themselves, we understand, of $350. A vote of 
thanks was unanimously accorded them at our last 
session. "The Peoples' Church," we might remark, is 
known as very "liberal" in its religious tenets— how 
liberal may be judged from the fact that its beautiful 
and expensive stained glass windows represented donations 
from people of various denominations: Roman 
Catholics presented one representing a Pope, while 
the Presbyterians were represented by John Knox's 
features, the Methodists by Wesley, the Lutheran's by 
Luther, and the Free Thinkers of all shades of thought 
were represented by Huxley, Spencer and Confucius. 



And were not we represented? Yes ! by a splendid ideal 
likeness of our Savior and Lord, the founder of our 
Church. The public service held in the People's Church 
had of course the largest attendance, the audience 
being estimated at 1800. 

The addresses of the Convention were delivered 
by Brothers A. E. Williamson, John Edgar, A. E. Burgess, 
H. Samson, J. D. Wright, O. L. Sullivan, G. Draper, 
W. M. Hersey, W. E. Page, E. O. Loe, H. E. Hollister, 
J. A. Bohnet, G. LeFerry and C. T. Russell. They all 
discussed the old, old story— some emphasizing one 
feature, some another, each in his own style. It was the 
one "Song of Moses and the Lamb," rendered in different 
parts, but all in the one key of "Love divine, all 
love excelling, joy of heaven to earth come down." 
There was not a discordant note, because all took their 
keynote and time from the great Master of all, of whom 
the Apostle declares, "This Salvation began to be 
spoken by our Lord and was confirmed unto us by 
them that heard him"— the apostles. Such oneness 
is quite unusual, and is generally secured in conventions 
held by others by having manuscripts of what the 
speakers will say examined by a committee beforehand. 
But we needed no such restriction, because more and 
more, as the Lord intimated it would be, we find, "Thy 
watchmen shall see eye to eye." (Isa. 52:8.) Nor 
should we fail to remember the word, "They shall be all 
taught of God." (John 6:45.) The fact that the Great 
Teacher is present superintending the "harvest" work 
is, we believe, a further assurance along this line. We 
comfort ourselves with the thought that his eye, his 
rod and his staff are guiding his sheep from grace to 
grace and from knowledge to knowledge. Hence it is 
not astonishing that we find, as was predicted, that "the 
path of the just is as a shining light— shining more 
and more unto the perfect day." Little details may, 
indeed should be, expected to grow clearer day by day, 
but all the fundamentals of our faith super-structure 
are unchangeable. 

One of the interesting features of the Convention 
was the baptism service. The Baptists kindly granted 
us the use of their auditorium and pool, and 118 were 
immersed in symbolization of their full consecration of 
their all to the Lord— even unto death. 

Two other items of general interest were: (1) The 
Chatauqua salute given Brother Russell on his arrival 
on Tuesday morning, followed by a hand-shaking reception 
in which about 600 participated; and (2) The Love 
Feast, which closed the Convention. In front of the 
platform, ranged in line, gathered all the speakers of 
the Convention, with them those who led Praise and 
Testimony services, and the Elders of the St. Paul and 
Minneapolis class. Past these, shaking their hands 
and bidding good bye, came (1) the Colporteurs and 
intending Colporteurs; (2) The regularly chosen Elders 
present from various congregations; (3) "Bible House" 



assistants and others from Allegheny; (4) Those present 
of the St. Paul and Minneapolis Church; (5) All 
the remainder of the audience. It was a grand climax 
to a grand Convention. 

A little later, when the Editor of this journal and 
others arrived at the R.R. depot, they found a company 
of about 50 brethren and sisters awaiting their 
departure. We parted, singing, "Blest be the tie that 
binds," and "God be with you till we meet again." 



REPORT OF ONE DAY CONVENTIONS 

En route to the St. Paul Convention, Sunday, Aug. 
12, was spent as appointed, with the dear friends at 
Chatham, Ont. We had a delightful season. The afternoon 
meeting for the public was held in the Opera 
House, and was well attended— the audience being 

R3857 : page 293 

estimated at about 600. Excellent attention was given. 
The evening service was an address to the interested. 
The discourse many of our readers already have seen 
in public prints. 

At Cumberland, Md., we had a splendid season of 
mutual refreshment on August 26. First came the 
opening rally 10 to 12 a.m., a splendid "Testimony 
and Praise" refreshment, participated in by nearly all 
present. In the afternoon the public service was the 
largest we ever had there. The Academy of Music was 
well filled— the estimate of numbers being 1,400, who 
gave close attention. Next morning we learned that 
a well-known infidel of the city was going about proclaiming 
that he had finally heard a reasonable gospel 

R3857 : page 294 

preached. The night subject was printed in the daily 
journals, and you have it. 

The Terre Haute, Ind., One-Day Convention proved 
itself a blessing. The opening rally from 9.30 to 1 1 a.m. 
was truly a season of refreshing. Besides the local 
class there were delegations from various places within 
the circuit of one hundred miles; and their united testimonies 
to the Lord's goodness as well as their prayers 
and praises were comforting and encouraging every 
way and to all. Brother Russell addressed the gathering 
from 1 1 to 12.15 noon when we adjourned for refreshments. 
The topic of the discourse was "The grace of 
God that bringeth salvation." (Titus 2:11.) It was 
duly reported in the usual newspapers, which many of 
you receive regularly. The afternoon subject for the 
public, "A Cure for Infidelity— To Hell and Back," was 
given a very attentive hearing by about 1500 very intelligent 



looking people. 

McKeesport, Pa., only about 15 miles from Allegheny 
and Pittsburg, was given a One-Day Convention 
from a desire to preach the truth to more of its citizens. 
The afternoon session for the public was attended by 
about 1200. The evening discourse to the interested, 
which was reported in the secular journals, was from 
the text, "All have sinned and come short of the glory 
of God." (Rom. 3:23.) The earnest attention given by 
many leaves room for the hope that some of the Lord's 
jewels were brought in contact with Present Truth by 
these meetings. 



R3856 : page 294 

THE 1906 CONVENTIONS 

Behold how they gather from East and from West, 

From North and from South they come; 
No visible emblems nor banners are theirs, 

Nor loud rolling beat of the drum. 
But with faces alight with the hope which is theirs, 
With the love which sustains, and the promise which cheers, 

They herald the kingdom to come. 

Unknown to the world, as their "Head" was unknown, 

And willingly sharing his cross; 
Believing the kingdom long-promised is near, 

Are parting from all earthly dross. 
The "sun" fast arising now gladdens their eyes, 
And just within reach seems the rich cherished prize, 

For which they count all else but loss. 

Yes, here they assemble, these uncrowned kings, 

On the Master's business intent; 
All humbly and meekly pursuing their way, 

In his service willingly spent. 
And the world knoweth not, as they knew not of Him, 
What honors are theirs who are serving their King, 

And full on his mission are bent. 

And who shall say that they met there alone? 

For were there not forms more fair, 
Of those who have heard their Master's "Well done!" 

Rejoicing with him "in the air"? 
Invisible yet, our dim eyes can not see; 
Still, hovering o'er us their presence may be, 

And we shall soon be with them there. 

Full soon shall that Greatest Convention be held, 

The faithful ones all to be there; 
Our Master presiding in glorious garb, 

And we in his glory to share 
There highly exalted to sit in his throne, 



To lift up the billions down-trodden so long. 

"Oh, what must it be to be there." A. J. M. 



R3860 : page 294 

WONDERFUL WORDS OF LIFE 

-SEPTEMBER 23. -REVIEW - 

"And they were astonished at his doctrine, 
for his word was with power."— Luke 4:32. 

THIS LESSON is set apart as a review for the past 
quarter. We leave it for each one to review as he 
may find opportunity, and here merely offer a few 
remarks respecting the Golden Text above. The text brings 
to our recollection the words of Oliver Wendell Holmes, 
illustrating the power of the Truth and its effect upon those 
who are not of the Truth— not of the light but of darkness. 
We quote:— 

"THE TRUTH" 

"Have you ever, when walking about out of doors, 
found some big flat stone that has lain no one knows 
how long, just where you found it, surrounded by grass that 
forms as it were a little fence around it— and have you not, 
obeying some sort of feeling, thought that it has been there 
long enough, put your stick or your finger or the foot under 
its edge and overturned it? 

"What a scene, and what an unexpected and disagreeable 
surprise for a little colony, the very existence of which 
you did not imagine before you observed the sudden confusion 
and anguish of its inhabitants when overturning the 
stone! No sooner is the stone overturned, and the 
wholesome daylight entered to the compressed and light shy 
society of creeping things under it, than every one of them 
possessing legs— and many of them have a whole lot— run 
wildly about and push against each other and everything in 
their way, and it ends with a universal general rush for the 
subterranean hiding places from a circuit poisoned by the 
sunlight. 

"Never imagine that you can overturn an old lie without 
causing a terrible confusion and alarm among the sickening 
little world living under it! 

"Every real idea and every real subject bring one or 
another to gasp. And having regained the breath he will 
probably begin to misuse it for blasphemy. These are the 
best proofs you can get that you have expressed a truth for 
which the time was ripe." 

LIGHT, TRUTH, MAKES MANIFEST 

From time to time the Lord has allowed the world to 



follow its own wisdom into dense darkness, and then has 

suddenly turned on the light, producing very much the effect 

described in the foregoing illustration. It was thus in 

Elijah's day, and through many of the prophets God turned 

on the light and brought corresponding testings. But at 

our Lord's first advent, when the great light came into the 

world and was displayed in the midst of those who had 

claimed to be the people of God, the children of the light, 

it demonstrated that many of them were really children of 

darkness who loved not the light, loved not the truth. Similarly, 

in the days of the Reformation through Luther, Knox, 

Wesley and others, the light was turned on, and the accumulated 

errors and darkness were removed, to the advantage 

of those who loved the light, but to the disturbance of 

those who loved the darkness. And today conditions are 

very much the same: the light of Present Truth finds comparatively 

few even in enlightened Christendom to appreciate 

the riches of God's grace and take a fuller view of the 

love and mercy of God, manifested in the great redemptive 

work of Christ, to be accomplished in the "times of restitution 

R3860 : page 295 

of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets."— Acts 3:19-21. 

In every case it has been the Word of God that has 
caused the disturbance, the commotion. Whether sent 
through the prophets of old or through the apostles and reformers 
of this age it has been God speaking from heaven— 
and his Word is quick and powerful searching beyond any 
human message. It will separate, it will distinguish; it will 
find the Truth hungry, it will separate the others; it is the 
light of which the Apostle declared. Whatsoever doth make 
manifest is light. The attitude assumed by the people 
toward the light, the Truth, demonstrates better than all 
their professions would do whether they are of the light or 
of the darkness. In our imperfection of judgment we might 
suppose that some were children of light who really are not 

R3861 : page 295 

of the light, and we might presume some to be children of 
darkness who are really different at heart. The Lord knows 
them that are his, he demonstrates who is on his side and 
who on the side of darkness; let us be content and let the 
sickle of truth do the separating in the harvest work; and 
let us not be self-willed and self-opinionated, but waiting 
on the Lord. Let us wait patiently on him to bring about 
the separation with divine wisdom and love— we know that 
his plan is the best in the end. 

"ASTONISHED AT HIS DOCTRINES" 

It is an old adage that truth is stranger than fiction. 
The fallen condition of the human mind and heart seems to 
lead us to accept as more reasonable its own imaginings of 



others rather than the direct clear statement of the divine 
Word. Hence, whenever the Truth has been published the 
effect has been, as here stated, that the people were astonished 
at the doctrine, had never heard of such doctrines before, 
never had matters so clear. All the theories of men 
are confusing, blurred, inconsistent when compared with the 
wonderful divine plan of salvation. We are not surprised, 
therefore, indeed it becomes the evidence of the truthfulness 
of our position, that we find similar conditions today. Many, 
as they hear of the glorious plan of the ages, make just such 
a remark as our text, that they are astonished at the teaching, 
its beauty, its power, its reasonableness, the way it 
glorifies God, the way in which it explains circumstances 
and conditions in the present time, birth, death, our hopes, 
our fears, the world's ignorance and the coming time of 
blessing and turning away of the curse and of darkness, and 
the shining in of the Sun of Righteousness with healing in 
its beams, bringing in "times of restitution." No less wonderful 
is the message respecting the high calling, the join t-heirship 
with Jesus in the heavenly things which eye hath 
not seen nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart 
of man. (1 Cor. 2:9.) More and more we are convinced 
that the eyes of our understanding must be anointed in 
order that we may appreciate the lengths and breadths and 
heights and depths of the love of God, which passeth all 
understanding. 



R3857 : page 295 

A CHRISTIAN SOLDIER'S BATTLE 

--GAL. 5:15-26; 6:7,8.-SEPTEMBER 30.- 

MANY sing, "Onward, Christian Soldier, battling for 
the right," who but imperfectly comprehend the 
meaning of their words, the signification of the 
Christian battle. But it is a battle of freedom in the highest 
and best sense of the expression. In ignorance the battle is 
often misrepresented before the public mind. To give an 
illustration, the newspapers recently told of how a 
colony of emigrants from Europe had killed one of their 
number for a violation of some of their social regulations, 
and how they were very much surprised when the officers of 
the law made investigation. They thought they were coming 
to a free country! They were surprised to learn that 
freedom here is understood only to mean literally to do 
right— liberty under the laws framed and approved by the 
majority. This illustrates in large measure the anarchist 
condition of the natural mind in its untutored condition. 
Civilization, basing itself partly on an appreciation of 
the principles of justice and partly upon the lessons of history, 
attempts so to shape the laws of the land as to secure 
the rights of all. It is not surprising, however, that— with 
selfishness a ruling element in all hearts by nature— neither 



the laws nor the practices of the most civilized are perfect: 
that is to say, the largest amount of protection and the largest 
amount of individual liberty are not always secured. 
When we consider that the lawmakers and executives are all 
imperfect, biased, selfish, we are properly amazed at the 
amount of justice we find in the world and the amount of 
liberty. If all the lawmakers were saints, fully in harmony 
with the divine arrangements and merely limited by the 
imperfection of their mortal bodies, we could not expect 
much better laws than we find in the world; and were it 
not that the Scriptures clearly show us that the Church, as 
kings and priests of the future, will be absolutely perfect in 
every respect and backed by divine wisdom and power, we 
could not anticipate for the Millennium anything much better 
than we now possess in the way of governmental 
machinery. 

As we compare the various degrees of civilization 
throughout the world, and note that the wisest and best 
laws and wisest and best execution of them and the greatest 
true liberty of the people within reasonable bounds are 
found in those nations which have most reverenced the 
divine message, the Bible, it is a strong argument that the 
Word of God has not only influenced the "little flock," who 
take it most seriously, and lay aside every weight and hindrance 
and worldly ambition to run with patience in the 
footsteps of Jesus, but it has influenced the minds of many 
who have never taken this step of full consecration. In a 
word, the liberty wherewith Christ makes free is not the liberty 
of license but the liberty of reason, of justice and of 
love; and in proportion as any one has received the spirit 
of the divine teaching, in that same proportion he is a free-man. 
We thank God, therefore, for the measure of national 
liberty which prevails throughout the world, even while we 
see clearly from the prophecies of the Scriptures, as well as 
written on the pages of the daily press, that a great misinterpretation 
of liberty is rapidly spreading throughout the 
world, which will eventually wreck the present civilization 
in anarchy. 

THE HIGHEST CONCEPTION OF LIBERTY 

The civilized world, like a school, divides itself into 
various classes, some more and some less advanced: the lowest 
class totally misapprehend liberty, thinking of it merely 
as license, self-will, and failing to recognize the fact that 
selfishness being in control and interests conflicting, its conception 
of liberty is unreasonable and injurious. The second 
class appreciates liberty, and more reasonably submits 
itself wherever necessity compels, and no more. With these 
it is a matter of policy and not of principle. One class approves 
liberty for the masses, because otherwise the masses 

R3857 : page 296 

would rebel. It lengthens its own rope of privilege to the 
extent that the majority permit. Selfishness controls in 



every granting of liberty, and in every attempt to secure 
more liberty and privilege for self these would be granted 
to others. Merely the conflict of interests at the present 
time preserves to the world the measure of liberty which it 
now enjoys. 

The third class has a conception of liberty which neither 
of the other two classes can understand or appreciate 
—the liberty to serve and to do good to all men along the 
lines not of selfishness but of love for all. This Christian 
ideal is to the world in general foolishness. While they 
have grown to respect the great Teacher and his apostles 
who set forth this Christian view of liberty, they feel privileged 
to denounce as foolish the living representatives of 
this same doctrine— that the perfect law of liberty is love 
and service to God and our neighbor. Those who advocate 
and practice love from this Scriptural standpoint are by 
their fellows "counted fools all the day long," denounced 
as impractical, unsophistical, and sometimes reprobated as 
hypocrites. 

THE FIGHT FOR LIBERTY 

All the liberty there is in the world today has been 
paid for: none of it has been attained without sacrificers. 
Why? Because selfishness is so entrenched in the race that 
those who possess power, authority, privilege, opportunity, 
would hold these for themselves to the disadvantage of others, 
to the enslavement of others, were not the rights and liberties 
fought for. Looking back over the history of nations, 
without approving of wars, every reasoning mind can see, 
nevertheless, that only through wars have liberties come to 
the race. The mistake that is being made by many today is 
the supposition that humanity would ever be able to attain 
the condition of absolute equality and unselfishness through 
laws or wars or any other means within the power of Adam's 
race. 

The Scriptures point out to us that there is a limit beyond 
which we must not expect selfish humanity to make 
progress— that any progress beyond that limit must come 
from on high, through the establishment of the Kingdom of 
God's dear Son; that while wealth and influence and talents 
will yield to the pressure of the masses for their own 
protection and aggrandizement, they will not yield everything, 
but would permit the entire social structure to dissolve 
rather than to submit to a general equalization, as is 
the aim of Socialism. Hence Socialism, while not intending 
anarchy, will produce anarchy; while striving for greater 
liberty and universality of blessings of earth it will effect a 
wreck of all these. Thanks be to God that his program is 
that on this wreck of present institutions he will establish 
the true reign of liberty on the plane of love, under the 
guidance of the Master and his joint-heirs. 

THE CHRISTIAN'S FIGHT 

If the world's liberty has required fighting for, much 



more may we expect to battle for those who take the still 
higher ground of the Bible, and who strive for the "liberty 
wherewith Christ makes free." (Gal. 5:1.) For although 
this very Scripture declares that Christ gives this freedom, 
the Word shows us that he gives it only to those who desire 
it and who will fight for it. Their battle is not to be with 
carnal weapons which the law of love forbids, yet their 

R3858 : page 296 

warfare is to be mighty through God to the pulling down of 
strongholds of error. Against what, then, do they battle? 
We answer that their chief fight is against the fallen tendencies 
of their own beings. They find that, through the long 
centuries of the fall, sin has become inbred and entrenched 
in their flesh to such a degree that it necessitates a warfare 
in the new mind. They get the new mind or disposition 
through hearkening to the word of the Lord, which, 
while speaking peace and forgiveness of sins through faith 
in Christ, invites to a newness of nature and a joint-heirship 
with Christ through a full consecration of all to the divine 
service— to the service of righteousness and truth. The 
making of the consecration on the part of the believer was 
his entering upon the career of a good soldier of the Lord 
Jesus. It was his engagement to battle against sin and 
selfishness everywhere, according to the rules laid down by 
the chief Captain. 

To the surprise of every soldier he finds that some of 
his greatest battles are within. True he finds the world an 
opponent to his full devotion of time and talent and influence 
to the service of the Truth. The world is not prepared 
for such an extreme, which more or less reproves it of sin 
and selfishness: the world, therefore, sneers and cries 
"hypocrite," "saint," etc., and seeks to turn aside the consecrated. 
To be a good soldier he must be prepared for this 
and have on the sandals of preparation afforded by the Gospel, 
else the difficulties strewn in his path by worldly opposition 
would soon make him so footsore that he would be 
disposed to turn back notwithstanding the term of his enlistment 
—"even unto death." The Adversary also is a foe 
who must be reckoned with, and whose subtle attacks may 
be encountered in various ways. The Christian soldier has 
the assurance of his Captain that all the arts of the Adversary 
are known to him, and that all his interests shall be 
guarded so long as he is loyal to his Captain and faithful to 
his consecration and enlistment. 

But, as we have said, the chiefest of all the Christian 
soldier's opponents is the human foe— the weaknesses and 
cravings and demands and subtle persecutions, etc., of the 
fallen conditions of his own mind and body. To his surprise 
he finds himself a slave to his own weaknesses, and 
that he must battle daily, hourly almost, for victory, in order 
to attain fully the liberty wherewith Christ makes free indeed. 
From this standpoint all battles against our own 
fleshly weaknesses, our own selfish instincts and propensities, 
are battles for liberty, battles for right, battles on the 



Lord's side. Our great Captain is not so much wishing us 
to fight his battles as wishing us to fight the good fight of 
faith in ourselves, and in this matter he is ready to assist us, 
and without him we can do nothing. True, our battles extend 
beyond ourselves sometimes when, either amongst the 
Lord's brethren and the Church, we need to battle for the 
Truth, the right, or in our contact with the world we may 
sometimes find hostilities necessary. 

"IF YE BITE AND DEVOUR" 

Amongst the Lord's people, even in the apostles' day, 
there was a tendency at times to fight each other rather than 
to fight the devil and the spirit of the world and the weaknesses 
within. The organs of combativeness and destructiveness, 
which would serve a Christian soldier in good stead 
if directed against his own weaknesses and blemishes, are 
sadly out of place when, ignoring his own weaknesses, he 
merely becomes contentious with the brethren— often over 
nothing, or over questions whose importance he exaggerates, 
because of his contentious spirit. Such should remember 
the Scriptural statement that greater is he that ruleth his 
own spirit than he that taketh a city. (Prov. 16:32.) The 
Apostle refers to that misdirection of Christian energy which 
bites and devours one another, and tends to the destruction 
of all that is spiritual amongst the Lord's people. Not that 
the Apostle favored slackness as respects the important 

R3858 : page 297 

principles of the divine revelation, for he himself urged that 
we contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the 
saints. (Jude 3.) But this earnest contending is not to be 
done in a biting and devouring manner— it is to be with 
patience and long suffering, brotherly kindness, love. 
The Lord's people have enlisted as New Creatures, 
Spirit begotten, to walk [to live] not after the flesh but 
after the Spirit, and must continually recognize this 
fact, and keep watch that they are walking in line with 
the spirit of truth, and must know that in so doing they 
will not be fulfilling the desires of their fallen flesh. 
The Apostle states this as a positive rule, without 
exception, that the flesh, the natural inclinations, 
tendencies, lusts or desires, are contrary to the Spirit, 
and likewise the Spirit desires are contrary to the flesh. 
These two desires being opposed one to the other we 
cannot gratify both, and whichever is gratified it will be 
so at the expense of the other. If we ever want to attain 
to the true liberty wherewith Christ makes free we 
should know that it can only be by a persistent warfare 
of the new mind against every sinful tendency and 
inclination of the old nature. It is not the new will warring 
against the old, for the old will we have reckoned 
dead. It is the new will warring against the flesh, which 
the old will used to control, and which flesh still has its 
evil tendencies. 



The new will, therefore, needs all the sustaining 
strength and assistance which it can secure. Many of 
these are provided for it as food, nourishment, strength, 
through the Word of God, whose exceeding great and 
precious promises are given in order that the new will 
may be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might 
through faith, and conquer in all of its battles with the 
flesh. 

The Apostle's declaration, "Ye cannot do the 
things which ye would," is in full accord with all our 
experiences. We can sometimes do as we would in some 
things, we can gain the victory over the flesh; but there 
are certain weaknesses, failings, blemishes in our flesh 
which are so powerful that the new mind never gets 
as complete a mastery over them as it desires. Nevertheless 
in all the battles being waged the new mind 
grows stronger and stronger while the flesh grows 
weaker and weaker. The Scriptural proposition, however, 
is that we must expect to have more or less of 
these battles until our dying moments. Thank God 
that will be the end of the strife, for in the resurrection 
we are promised new bodies, perfect, complete, in which 
the new mind will be able to exercise itself without 
conflict. That is the rest which remains for the people 
of God, and associated with it will be various other 
blessings, honors, dignities and responsibilities which 
the Lord has promised. 

"YE ARE NOT UNDER THE LAW" 

The Jewish Law was prominent before the minds 
of the early Church, because the majority had come to 
Christ through Judaism. The Law had its requirements 
and exactions and condemnations, and it was difficult 
for the early Church to comprehend the liberty which 
was properly theirs in Christ. Their minds would waver 
as between the gift of grace in Christ and the rewards 
of the Law, and hence they were continually in trouble 
because of a realization of the imperfection of their 
flesh. The Apostle urges the point that those who have 
accepted Christ are no longer under the Law Covenant, 
hoping for eternal life under its impossible conditions. 
The Law could only approve that which was perfect, 
and while believers realize that their hearts, their wills, 
their intentions, are perfect, they realize also the imperfection 
of their flesh. 

The Apostle's argument therefore is, "If ye be led 
of the Spirit then are ye not under the Law." (Gal. 5:18.) 
That is to say, You who have accepted Christ, 
and who are now walking according to the new mind 
to the best of your ability, are following the lead of the 
Spirit, and you have nothing to do with the Law, and 
it cannot condemn you as imperfect because of your 
fleshly weaknesses, for you are protected under the robe 
of Christ's righteousness, and the divine arrangement 
is that so long as you are following the Spirit, following 



the new mind, seeking to walk not after the flesh but 
after the Spirit, that long you are justified, approved 
of the Lord, and the imperfections of your flesh that 
are contrary to your best endeavors are not charged to 
your account, but to the Lord Jesus' account. Those 
unwilling imperfections were all laid upon him who 
bore our sins in his own body on the tree, as his perfections 
have been applied to us through faith to cover 
those unwilling blemishes. 

"AGAINST SUCH THERE IS NO LAW" 

While the Law Covenant was nailed to Jesus' cross 
it does not mean that there is no law covering the Lord's 
people. The very essence of the divine law is love for 
God and for man, and the Apostle points out that our 
course as Christians walking after the Spirit of Christ 
would be condemned by no law of God; but on the contrary, 
if neglecting our consecration to the Lord we 
walk after the flesh, there would be condemnation 
against us because judged according to the Spirit, the 
intention of our hearts, we are either approved or disapproved 
by the divine law of love. 

The works of the flesh the Apostle enumerates, and 
they are all violations of the law of love under which 
the New Creatures in Christ are being examined; they 
all come under the head of selfishness and imply injury 
to our fellow-creatures. He enumerates these: adultery, 
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, 
witchcraft, hatred, variance, malice, wrath, strife, divisions, 
heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, 
and such like. The Apostle points out that anyone 
begotten of the Spirit who walks, that is who lives, 
along the lines of these works of the flesh need have no 
hope of any share in the Kingdom of Heaven. He does 
not say that all such would share in the Second Death, 

R3859 : page 297 

but we know of a surety how such conduct persisted 
in would ultimately result in the Second Death. It is 
sufficient for our purpose, however, to leave the matter 
where the Apostle does, and to note that there is no 
prospect for a share in the Kingdom for any who do 
these works of the flesh and of the devil. 

It is unfortunate for some that they seem unable 
to realize the scope of this testimony; they seem to think 
of adultery, drunkenness and murder as being the crimes 
that would debar from a share in the Kingdom. They 
overlook the fact that the Lord defined adultery to be 
a desire to do evil where only the opportunity is lacking; 
that he defined murder as represented in that 
condition of heart which hates a brother. They overlook 
the statement of the Apostle in this very list that 
the spirit of variance, the spirit of ambition and jealousy, 
the spirit of envy and division, are spirits of the 



flesh and in opposition to the New Creature led by the 

R3859 : page 298 

holy Spirit. O, if all of the Lord's people could have 
in mind these searching tests and apply them to their 
own lives, what a profit would result, what a blessing, 
what a fleeing from these weaknesses of the old nature, 
what a fighting against them for the liberty of the New 
Creature and its final attainment to glory, honor and 
immortality with their Lord in the Kingdom ! 

THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT 

Having pointed out to us what would constitute 
walking after the flesh, the Apostle next indicates the 
conditions and experiences which should assure the 
Lord's people that they are not only soldiers of the 
cross and followers of the Lamb, but that they are 
fighting a good fight, gaining victories over the flesh. 
He suggests that if we are begotten of the Spirit and 
guided thereby there will be a fruitage in our life which 
will be manifest to ourselves and should to some extent 
also be apparent to others. This "fruit of the spirit is 
love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, 
faithfulness, meekness, temperance." 

There is no law of God against these things, these 
qualities, these characteristics of the new nature, and 
very rarely will any law amongst men be found in 
opposition to them, although indirectly those who 
practice these things will be unpopular with the world 
as well as with the adversary and have trying experiences 
as a result— experiences, however, which persevered 
in will work out a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory. On the contrary, he who lacks 
such fruit in his heart, in his mind, in his experiences, 
lacks the evidence which he should have of his faithfulness 
as a good soldier in warring against the old 
nature. He lacks therefore the full assurance of faith, 
without which as a New Creature he could not have 
peace and joy. It will be observed that all these fruits 
of the Spirit are contrary to selfishness. If the Lord's 
people could but come to the place where daily, morning 
noon and night, they would have self-examinations to 
see to what extent they are growing these fruits of the 
Spirit and to what extent they are rooting out the 
works of the flesh, it would be to the comfort and joy 
of all who are in the right condition. Though it might 
be to the discouragement of others, it would be a discouragement 
which eventually would be to them advantageous 
and in the end would hinder them from 
making shipwreck. 

"CRUCIFIED THE FLESH" 

Pursuing his subject, showing why we should fight 



against our natural desires and inclinations toward 
things that are selfish and sinful, the Apostle declared 
that they that are Christ's [his consecrated ones, prospective 
members of his Bride] have crucified the flesh, 
with the passions and lusts thereof. What does he 
mean?— that those who have accepted Christ as their 
sin offering, believing that the crucified one paid their 
ransom price, have counted their flesh in as though 
crucified with Christ, saying, Since sin cost the crucifixion 
of our Redeemer we will be opposed to sin and 
dead to sin forever. The thought is that whoever has 
clearly and intelligently accepted Christ as his Savior 
from sin will be so opposed to sin that he will count 
his own flesh as condemned to death and be hoping for 
the new body, the spiritual, and be willing that his flesh 
should die a lingering death until the last gasp, so strong 
will be his opposition to sin and everything allied therewith, 
so strong will his sympathy be with God and the 
Redeemer, and the holiness which they represent. 

"If we live in the Spirit let us also walk in the 
Spirit," the Apostle adds. That is to say, begotten of the 
Spirit we reckon ourselves New Creatures, spirit beings, 
not yet perfect. To us old things are passed away, the 
things of sin, and all things have become new in harmony 
with the exceeding great and precious hopes 
which have been begotten in us by the Lord's promises. 
If these be true, let us walk, let us live our daily life 
accordingly, in harmony with this thought— as New 
Creatures in Christ, not as men energized by their ambitions 
or projects, not as taking pleasure in the things 
contrary to the new nature. 

"PROVOKING ONE ANOTHER" 

As before suggested, while our difficulties arise 
from our own fallen flesh, they are apt to manifest 
themselves in the affairs of the Church. The old spirit 
of selfishness inclines to be ambitious for influence, 
power, authority, glory amongst the brethren, overlooking 
the fact that such vainglory and envyings are 
entirely contrary to the Spirit of the Lord, by which 
we have been begotten— entirely overlooking the fact 
that while this ambitious spirit dominates us in any 
measure we are unfit for the Kingdom and will have 
proportionately less and less of the Lord's favor and 
blessing and guidance in our hearts and heads. Hence 
the Apostle urges, "Let us not be vainglorious, provoking 
one another, envying one another." Whoever 
manifests a vainglorious spirit tempts another in the 
same direction through retaliation, and thus there is a 
provoking or inciting to an evil course; whereas the 
Apostle urges, on the contrary, that the New Creatures 
in Christ should provoke or incite one another to love 
and good works, that would be to their mutual advantage 
and development. 



"GOD IS NOT MOCKED" 

The compilers of this lesson here introduce Galatians 6:7,8 
very appropriately. The theme is the same. 
We might succeed in deceiving ourselves, possibly 
succeed in deceiving others into thinking that we are 
spiritual, walking after the Spirit, while really heady, 
highminded, vainglorious and envious, but, says the 
Apostle, we could never deceive God. For such to claim 
that they were walking after the Spirit and not after 
the flesh would be mocking God, would imply that God 
could not read the heart and discern the motive. And 
the Apostle suggests that in God's arrangement we are 
sure to reap the very crop we sow. If, in our daily intercourse 
with the family, the brethren and the world, we 
allow the envious, selfish, vainglorious, ambitious spirit 
to control, with more or less of anger, hatred, strife, 
and dissension, we may surely expect the legitimate crop 
will not become the reverse of this; instead of finding 
ourselves in the resurrection copies of God's dear Son, 
we will find ourselves wholly unfit for the company of 
the elect. 

But, on the other hand, if we sow to the Spirit- 
that is, if in the daily affairs of life we seek to have our 
hearts and minds in full accord and sympathy with the 
Spirit or the Lord, as presented to us in his Word and 
exemplified in our Redeemer and the apostles— then 
we may have the assurance with God that he will not 
forget us however weak we may be, however insignificant 
according to the flesh, but we will be remembered 
of him in the resurrection and be granted a share with 
all the overcomers in his Kingdom; we will reap of the 
Spirit the spiritual body, as the Apostle intimates, "For 
he that soweth unto his flesh shall of the flesh reap 

R3859 : page 299 

corruption; death, but he that soweth to the Spirit shall 
of the Spirit reap life everlasting." We are to remember, 
however, that this sowing and reaping is done by the 
New Creature, the new mind, the new will, and not by 
the flesh. However weak and imperfect the flesh may 
be, God judgeth us not thereby. On the contrary, he 
looketh upon the heart, upon the intention, upon the 
will, and his reward or condemnation will be according 
to what our hearts have desired and endeavored. He 
will count us as victors if loyally and firmly we endure 
hardness as good soldiers, faithful to the end. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

Those who arranged the lesson series designed this 
for a lesson on temperance, and chose as the Golden 
Text, "Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging." 
(Prov. 20: 1 .) While we trust that few if any of the 
readers of this journal need special exhortation along 



this line, we do desire to express our full sympathy with 

the temperance cause. From our standpoint of observation, 

intoxicating liquors, while not the root of all 

evil, may well be said to be the root of much of the crime 

of our day. Surely no consecrated child of God could 

feel that he was in line with the divine will if, yielding 

to his appetites, he became intoxicated. If he did not 

feel ashamed of himself surely the hearts of all right-minded 

saints would burn in sympathy for him. The 

cost of alcoholic beverages consumed in so-called Christendom 

is enormous, and nothing could better demonstrate, 

we think, that the name "Christendom," signifying 

Christ's Kingdom, has been misapplied. When 

Christ's Kingdom shall rule the world, we believe that 

a great change will be effected along the lines of temperance. 

The cost of intemperance is not merely measured 

by the cost of the liquors consumed, but also by 

the crimes and the diseases attendant. 

OUR NATIONAL DRINK BILL 

The American Grocer prepares yearly an estimate 
of the drink bill of the people of the United States. 
These figures, while not official, are recognized as being 
the best data obtainable on the question. Of course, 
much of the work is estimated, as is shown by the statement 
that liquor is figured on the basis of sixty drinks 

R3860 : page 299 

to the gallon, the average price per drink being taken 
at seven and a half cents. The entire drink bill for 
stimulants is placed at the enormous total of almost 
one and one-half billion dollars, far more than the 
bonded indebtedness of the United States, and almost 
three times the ordinary yearly expenditures of the 
Government, exclusive of the postal item. On a per-capita 
basis this means more than eighteen dollars a 
year, the more harmless stimulants, such as tea, coffee, 
and cocoa, accounting for less than three dollars, while 
alcoholic beverages make up the remainder. Of course, 
no small part of this drink bill goes into public treasuries 
either as internal revenue, as custom duties, or 
to the various municipalities in license fees, etc.; but 
the drink bill is a great burden on the people, a burden 
that cannot be fairly measured by the cost alone of the 
liquors consumed. To the over indulgence in alcoholic 
stimulants must be attributed the greater part of the 
crime and poverty in the country. Were those all 
reckoned into the accounting, our national drink bill 
would be advanced from its present figures, large as 
they are, to a total that would be appalling.— Boston 
Herald, May, 1905. 

"Rot of barley, rot of corn. 
That's where Alcohol is born, 



To his rotten nature true, 
To rot is all that he can do. 
Rotten men and rotten boys; 
Rotten hopes and rotten joys; 
Rotten slums of degradation; 
Rotten politics in the nation. 
Rotten ballots, rotten laws; 
Parties with a rotten cause; 
Nursed on nature's rotting juices, 
Rot is all that it produces." 

A story is current in the Orient of a wise old sheik, 
who gave to a young Arab prince, from whom he was 
about to part, a list of crimes, and bade him choose the 
one which seemed least harmful. The young prince 
turned in horror from murder, theft and loss of virtue, 
and told the patriarch he would choose intemperance. 
"You have chosen that," said the wise old man, "which 
will bring you all." 



R3861 : page 299 

NOT FAR FROM THE KINGDOM 

--MARK 12:28-34,38-44-OCTOBER 1 .- 

"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart." 

IN OUR study of September 15th we considered 

our Lord's answer to the Pharisees and Herodians 

and Sadducees on the Tuesday preceding 

his crucifixion. The present lesson closely 

connects with that one. A Scribe and Doctor of the 

Law, noting with apparent sincerity the wisdom of 

our Lord's replies to the Pharisees and Sadducees, 

broached the question respecting the Law— quite a 

common one among the Jews— namely, which commandment 

is the first or chief, the most important. 

It will be remembered that on another occasion a 

Scribe asked the Lord a similar question, and our Lord 

drew from him the answer by inquiring, "What sayest 

thou?" In the present instance, however, Jesus answered 

the question directly, quoting from the summary 

of the ten commandments. (Deut. 6:4,5.) "Hear, 

O Israel: the Lord our God is one, Jehovah, and thou 

shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all 

thy soul, with all thy mind and with all thy strength." 

Our attention is called to a comment on this 
Scripture set forth in a Sunday School Teachers' 
Manual, as follows: 

"This describes, designates, the God whom we are 
to love supremely. Jehovah, the God of Israel, is the 
one absolute, self-existent, eternal God, and he alone. 
He is the Creator, Ruler, Preserver, Guide, Savior, 



Father, Source of all good. One of the best services 
science has done for religion is the completeness of the 
proof that there is but one God, by proving the unity of 
material, of force, of government throughout the 
known universe. The unity of moral law is another 
unassailable proof." 

"No Unitarian can insist upon the absolute unity 
of God with more earnestness and emphasis than do 
the Trinitarians. We believe in one God, and only 
one. It would be a terrible thing if there were conflicting 
deities, some having one dominion and others 
another. There would be no peace, no safety, no exaltation 

R3861 : page 300 

of soul, no assurance of hope, no eternal 
heaven." 

NEITHER UNITARIAN NOR TRINITARIAN 

Trinitarians and Unitarians seem to have divided 
the truth between them so that neither one possesses it 
in the Scriptural sense. Unitarians, so far as the name 
belongs to a denomination, and judged by their public 
declarations, reject Jesus as the special son of God, 
who was with the Father before the world was, and who 
left his heavenly state to become a man, to accomplish 
the redemption of Adam and his race, and who having 
died for our sins has been raised from the dead by the 
Father's power, far above angels, principalities and 
powers, and every name that is named, to participate 
in the divine nature and glory and honor. From the 
Unitarian standpoint, therefore, our Lord Jesus would 
appear to have been merely a good man and a noble 
example of good living. According to this view, our 
Lord is not divine, but human. We cannot accept this 
as the teaching of the Scripture. 

We must hold to the contrary that he who was 
rich yet for our sakes became poor, not only experienced 
the humiliation but has since experienced still 
higher exaltation, so that as a result all men should 
honor the Son even as they honor the Father also. 
While we cannot admit with the Trinitarians that this 
last expression would mean that the Father and the 
Son would be one in person, we claim that they are, 
nevertheless, one in purpose, in plan, in co-operation, 
in heart harmony— one in the same sense that the 
Master desired that all of his disciples might be one 
with the Father and with himself, praying, "That they 
all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in 
thee, that they also may be one in us." The Trinitarian 
view, while nearer the truth than the Unitarian, 
in some respects is, nevertheless, wide of the truth and 
very confusing both to head and to heart, and proportionately 
injurious to the cause of the Lord. As our 
Lord's quotation from the Law clearly states, "Jehovah 



God is one God" and not three Gods. 

THE FATHER AND SON ONE IN SENTIMENT 

The Son of God is not the Father but the Son, who 
"proceeded forth from the Father," who was the 
Beginning of the creation of God. (John 8:42; Rev. 3:14.) 
Nevertheless, even before he became man's 
ransom price his close association with the Father and 
his oneness of heart and purpose with him are clearly 
indicated in the Scriptures. We are assured that he 
was the "Word of God"— the logos, the expression, 
the channel of the Father's communication. We are 
assured that while the Father was the God above all 
others, the Son, the Logos, was a God above all others, 
next to the Father but subservient to the Father. We 
are assured that he was the Father's active agent in the 
entire work of creation, so that "by him were all things 
made that were made, and without him was not one 
thing made." (John 1:1-3.) His subserviency to the 
Father is testified to by himself, "The Father is greater 
than I," "The Father hath sent me," "As I hear I 
speak." (John 14:28; 20:21.) This subservience and 
dependence upon the Father not only was true of our 
Lord while he was in the flesh and before he was made 
flesh, but is distinctly asserted of him since his resurrection 
to glory, honor and immortality to divine 
nature. 

The Apostle tells us that the Millennial Kingdom 
glory, honor and power are to be specially given to the 
Son by the Father, and that when the Son shall have 
finished that appointed work he will deliver up the 
Kingdom to God, even the Father, and the Father will 
be recognized as the "all in all" of the universe. 
(I Cor. 15:28.) Every utterance of the inspired Word 
of God is in full accord with those which we have 
quoted. For instance, we have already referred to the 
statement that he and the Father are one, and have 
shown that he meant not oneness in respect to authority 
or person but oneness in respect to their plans, purposes 
and work, he having set aside his own will to do the 
Father's will. In the same manner he desires that all 
who would be recognized as his disciples, and by and by 
constitute his Bride, should lay aside their own wills and 
be fully submissive to the Father's will, and thus be in 
the fullest harmony with the Father and the Son, 
"That they all may be one in us." In accord with this 
view we have also the statement of our Lord, "He that 
hath seen me hath seen the Father:" that is, humanity 
being of earthly nature could not see a spirit being, as it 
is written, "There shall no man see me and live." 
(Exod. 33:20.) A perfect human being would be the 
best illustration of the Heavenly Father that it would 
be possible for mankind to see with the natural eye, and 
this they did see in our Lord Jesus, the Father's image 
in the flesh. For a further and complete analysis of 



this subject the reader is referred to MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. V. 

HOW TO LOVE GOD PERFECTLY 

The definition here given of the love due to our 
Creator is all comprehensive: our hearts, our affections, 
must all reverence and love him; our souls, our being, 
our bodies, must all be controlled by love for God; our 

R3862 : page 300 

minds must similarly recognize, reverence, appreciate 
and love the Lord, and our strength of mind or body 
must recognize him as worthy of every loving service 
we can render. Not only so, but our hearts, minds, 
etc., must not be divided in their love— the Lord must 
be first with us in every sense of the word. This means 
the full consecration of time, talent, influence, everything 
that we possess— it means a condition of heart 
that is unknown to the vast majority even of those who 
are justified by faith in the precious blood, and who 
have a measure of peace with God through our Lord 
Jesus. This fulness of love for the Father represents 
not the beginning of the consecrated Christian's condition, 
but its fulness, its completeness. It represents 
not his attitude at the time he enters the school of 
Christ to learn of him, but the condition he must attain 
to before he can reach the mark or be ready for graduation 
to the heavenly condition. 

FIRST REVERENCE-LATER LOVE 

The reverence of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, 
but is not the end of it. We cannot love God 
until we have become acquainted with him and ascertained 
the lovable qualities represented in him. 
Hence the importance of the knowledge everywhere 
pointed out in the Word of God. "And this is life 
eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God, 
and Jesus Christ whom thou has sent." (John 17:3.) 
The fear or reverence of God is our first knowledge, 
and if we be rightly exercised thereby the Lord will 
reveal himself to us more and more as the one appointed 
to be the Way, the Truth, the Life— no man cometh 
unto the Father except by him. Many lessons are to 
be learned respecting the power and greatness and 
wisdom and justice of our God before we are able to 

R3862: page 301 

understand and appreciate the "love of God which 
passeth all understanding." 

If we were all perfect as Adam was perfect we 
would have little difficulty in appreciating the divine 
character, because the perfect man was created in the 



divine image and would therefore readily appreciate all 
the divine qualities and attributes; but born in sin, 
shapen in iniquity, we are all more or less fallen from 
that perfection and must learn to know our God. As 
already suggested, our fallen conditions permit us to 
learn of his wisdom, justice and power quicker than to 
learn of his love. Indeed God's love has not yet been 
manifested to the world in general. Only to a comparatively 
small number is God's love manifested at all, 
and it is seen by them only with the eye of faith. The 
Apostle declares, "Herein was manifested the love of 
God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten 
Son into the world that we might live through 
him. "-John 4:9. 

How few realize the need of this sacrifice! Such 
only can appreciate the love that was back of it and 
manifested through it. The great majority are blind 
to these things, and must wait for their appreciation of 
the love of God until the glorious time foretold in the 
prophecies, when the Sun of Righteousness shall arise 
and chase all the darkness and sin away, when there 
shall be no more curse resting upon the world of mankind, 
when Satan shall be bound and the knowledge of 
the Lord be caused to fill the whole earth— then, as one 
of the chief elements of the glory of God, will be clearly 
seen by all mankind the love of God which passeth all 
understanding. Thank God that we are so highly 
favored that the eyes of our understanding are opening 
to this great love of God in advance of the world's 
blessing and enlightenment! Nevertheless, to the 
most enlightened this appreciation of the divine 
character as the God of love came gradually, little by 
little, as we came to understand the lengths and 
breadths and heights and depths of the divine plan, 
and have come to appreciate the love that prompted 
that plan and is outworking it and guaranteeing its 
consummation to be glorious. 

KNOWLEDGE NECESSARY TO LOVE 

In proportion as we discern the perfection of the 
divine character, in the same proportion are we able 
to love the Lord with all our hearts, all our minds, all 
our beings, all our strength. The Christian who attains 
to this in his heart has surely reached the mark 
expressed by this command— the first command, the 
principal command. The Lord may permit him to be 
tried, tested and proved along the line of this love and 
to demonstrate a fixity of love, but all the time he was 
thus being tested he is at this standard of the divine 
law. There is a distinction, however, to be made 
between the heart standard by which the Lord is 
judging the Church and the fleshly standard by which 
the same persons might be judged of others. Because 
of the weakness of the flesh, the heart love for the Lord 
might at times not be fully and clearly expressed so 



that it would be apparent to all mankind. The world, 
which judges only by the flesh, knoweth us not. It is 
a consolation to our hearts that the Father realizes 
our love and devotion, and is judging us not according 
to the flesh, but according to the spirit, the heart, the 
intention, the new mind. And in proportion as we 
realize the imperfections of our flesh and our inability 
to show the loving devotion of our hearts and minds, 
being and strength, we should have compassion and 
sympathy with our fellow members who similarly more 
or less imperfectly manifest in their flesh the devotion 
of heart which they have professed. As the Lord 
waits patiently for us to develop the fruits of the 
Spirit, the graces of the Spirit, in our lives, so it behooves 
us to wait patiently upon the fellow-members 
of the body as they seek also to become renewed in 
thought and word and deed, sanctified wholly to the 
Master and his use. 

"THY NEIGHBOR AS THYSELF" 

Lest this Doctor of the Law should misapprehend, 
the Lord quoted from Leviticus 19:18 the statement, 
"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself," and this he 
designated as also of primary importance and second 
only to the previous statement of love to God. As 
stated elsewhere, on these two commands hang all the 
Law and the prophets. In other words, the keeping of 
these two would touch upon, cover and include every 
item of the divine law. As spiritual Israelites, therefore, 
it is appropriate that we notice this as well as the 
other command. Indeed we hear the Apostle John 
as the mouthpiece of the Lord declaring, "If any man 
say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: 
for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, 
how can he love God whom he hath not seen?"— 
I John 4:20. 

It is well that we keep this test clearly before 
our hearts lest we deceive ourselves. Love, the greatest 
attribute in the world, stands related to all the other 
things in the universe. While God should be first in 
our hearts and affections, nevertheless our love for 
God is more difficult to measure than is our love for 
man. Love is opposed to selfishness and does not even 
"seek her own" rights, although it may be necessary 
that love be restrained and ruled at times by justice 
and wisdom. What a grand lesson on all that is implied 
in the word love is furnished us by the Lord 
through the Apostle in I Corinthians, 13th chapter. 
There we are not only shown what elements of conduct 
are loving, but what elements are contrary to love— 
which elements of our characters should be cultivated 
and which should be restrained, subdued, mortified. 

Our Lord's questioner was evidently sincere. He 
perceived not only the wisdom of the Lord's reply to 
those who were seeking to catch him, but now he had 



a grand illustration of that wisdom when applied conscientiously 

to the most important of all doctrines— 

the most important features of the divine law. His 

reply was, "Of a truth, Master, thou hast well said, 

for there is but one God and there is none other but he: 

and to love him with all the heart, and with all the 

understanding, and with all the strength, and to love 

his neighbor as himself, is much more than whole 

burnt offering and sacrifices." Jesus, beholding his 

candor, gave him an encouraging word, which should 

have been of great assistance to him, saying, "Thou 

art not far from the Kingdom of God." 

One sincerely recognizing the truths just enunciated 
must surely have been of honest heart, and hence 
of the kind whom the Lord would be pleased to have 
enter the Kingdom class by full acceptance of him as 
their Redeemer and by a full consecration of their 

R3862 : page 302 

every power and talent to his service. This would be 
the practical outworking of this great commandment, 
fulness of love for God that would lead to endeavors to 
serve and please him in every possible manner, and 
their love for fellow men that would have delight in 
telling the good tidings of great joy which shall be unto 
all people. We read that after that no man durst ask 
Jesus any question. This was possibly because his 
ministries and teachings as divinely intended had 
reached their fulfilment, accomplishment, or possibly 
it may signify that all classes of his religious opponents 
held the Master in such awe and respect that they 
feared to attempt further questioning, which could 
only result disastrously to themselves, showing their 
own deficiencies and making him the more prominent 
as the great Teacher. 

"KEEP YOURSELF FROM IDOLS" 

Quite a good many of the Lord's earnest followers 
realize the danger which besets us all of rendering too 
much love and homage to an earthly creature, and thus 
to some extent robbing God of what is his due. This 
seems to be the Apostle's thought in the above expression. 
He had no thought of Christian people 
becoming worshipers of sticks and stones, but he did 
appreciate the fact that the human heart may consecrate 
itself to serve wealth or fame; and some of the 
Lord's people, keeping themselves from such idols, are 
in danger of putting too large a proportion of their 
love upon wife or husband, parent or child, brother or 
sister, and thus idolizing them and bringing an earthborn 

R3863 : page 302 

cloud between their hearts and the Heavenly 



Father. It is well to be on guard and to remember 
that, however much we may love others, the Lord must 
have all our hearts in the sense that he would be first 
and chief, and that if it were necessary every earthly 
tie might be broken, however tender, rather than the 
tie that binds our hearts to the Lord. 

When in such fear, when realizing ourselves in such 
danger, let us remember that there would be two ways 
of correcting the difficulty: the one would be by breaking 
off some of our love for earthly objects and conditions, 
the other by increasing our love for the heavenly. 
It surely would be in line with the divine arrangement 
that we should be discriminating as respects our loves 
for earthly things, to discern whatsoever things are 
just, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are 
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things 
are of good repute, and discouraging all others as unworthy 
of us as New Creatures in Christ. This would 
not, of course, mean that we should hate anybody, 
though it might mean that we would properly be 
separated from some whose influence would be to the 
contrary of these divinely appointed guides and sentiments. 
With our earthly love all centered upon good 
and noble persons, and especially appreciating these 
because of their relationship to that which is perfect, 
to the Lord and his standards, we should then measure 
the love for these with the love for the Father, and 
determine that the love for God must be cultivated 
more and more, until it shall far outreach and outweigh 
any earthly love, however precious. From this 
standpoint we would love our dear ones of earth no less, 
but the heavenly Father proportionately so much 
more. This we may be sure would be the right attitude 
which the Lord would most approve. 

KEPT FOR THE MASTER'S USE 

This thought is presented in a poem quoted by 
Miss Havergill in her work entitled, "Kept for the 
Master's Use." 

"I tremble when I think 
How much I love him; but I turn away 
From thinking of it, just to love him more;— 
Indeed, I fear, too much." 

"Dear Eleanor, 
Do you love him as much as Christ loves us? 
Let your lips answer me." 

"Why ask me, dear? 
Our hearts are finite, Christ is infinite." 

"Then till you reach the standard of that love, 
Let neither fears nor well-meant warning voice 
Distress you with 'too much.' For he hath said 
How much— and who shall dare to change his measure— 



That ye should love as I have loved you. 

O sweet command, that goes so far beyond 

The mightiest impulse of the tenderest heart! 

A bare permission had been much; but he 

Who knows our yearnings and our fearfulness, 

Chose graciously to bid us do the thing 

That makes our earthly happiness, 

A limit that we need not fear to pass, 

Because we cannot. Oh, the breadth and length, 

And depth and height of love that passeth knowledge! 

Yet Jesus said, As I have loved you.' 

"O, Beatrice, I long to feel the sunshine 
That this should bring; but there are other words 
Which fall in chill eclipse. 'Tis written 'Keep 
Yourselves from idols.' How shall I obey?" 

"Oh, not by loving less, but loving more. 
It is not that we love our precious ones 
Too much, but God too little. As the lamp 
A miner bears upon his shadowed brow 
Is only dazzling in the grimy dark, 
And has no glare against the summer sky, 
So, set the tiny torch of our best love 
In the great sunshine of the love of God, 
And, though full fed and fanned, it casts no shade 
And dazzles not, o'erflowed with mightier light." 

"BEWARE OF THE SCRIBES." 

His opportunities for teaching his apostles were 
rapidly passing, and our Lord, sitting in or near the 
Temple, said to them, "Beware of the Scribes, which 
love to go in long robes and to receive salutations in the 
market places, and the chief seats in the synagogues, 
and the chief places at feasts: which devour widows' 
houses and for a pretense make long prayers: these 
shall receive the greater condemnation." 

Our Lord did not say that all of the Scribes, all of 
the learned Doctors of the Law, had the disreputable 
qualities he reproved. More properly we might understand 
him to mean: You have been taught to honor 
and respect the learned Scribes or teachers of your 
nation, but take heed to those of them who have the 
characteristics I have just denounced. They are far 
from the Kingdom condition; their selfishness is manifest 
in the ways I have enumerated, and proportionately 
they are lacking in the traits which would have 
the Father's approval either under the letter or the 
spirit of the Law. 

We might make two applications of this lesson to 
our own times: one would be that we are not necessarily 
to reverence and follow Doctors of Divinity, but are 
to be discriminating in regard to the respect we have 
for them and their teachings. We are not to think 
that those who manifest a self-seeking spirit, the highest 



place in the Conference, who boast of their learning, 
whose special adorning is not of the meek and quiet 
spirit, but of the long robes of profession, who love to 
receive recognition in public places and to be called 
Rabbi, Reverend, etc., and to be made very prominent 
before the people; these should not be regarded as 

R3863 : page 303 

proper exemplars or patterns. Rather we should look 
away from such, realizing that the Lord despises not 
only the proud but the selfish, and shows his favors to 
the humble and to the lowly. Another lesson for us 
would come still closer home to every reader of this 
journal. 

In Spiritual Israel those who are instructed in the 
true knowledge of the Lord's Word should be overcomers 
of the spirit of the world, the spirit of selfishness. 
If any such find in themselves any of these enumerated 
characteristics which the Lord condemns, he should 
flee from the sin as he would from a contagious disease. 
For instance, if he finds himself greatly influenced by 
the opinion of others respecting his clothing, if he finds 
in himself a self-seeking spirit, a selfish disposition to 
grasp the best for himself on all occasions, and love of 
public praise and of recognition, titles, etc., let such 
beware. Whether he has a greater or less degree of 
earthly learning, or a greater or less degree of heavenly 
learning, he is in a dangerous condition if he has the 
selfish tendencies which the Lord here enumerates. 
Especially is he in need of divine grace to help him out 
of the horrible pit of selfishness if he finds himself so 
devoid of love as to be willing to take the goods of 
others without proper recompense, whether they be 
widows' houses or what not. The more one knows, 
the more of a Scribe he is, the greater will be his condemnation 
if the characteristics here set forth by our 
Lord are his. 

GREAT AND SMALL GIFTS TO GOD 

We have seen the kind of love for God and man 
which the divine Law stipulates; we have seen how 
some of the most prominent of those professing to be 
teachers of the divine Law come far short of the divine 
standard, as in the case of the Scribe in the illustration 
just given. Our Lord next presented his teachings 
from still another standpoint: he would show his disciples 
that they must not measure the divine approval 
along earthly lines, but must remember that the Lord 
looketh on the heart; that many who are esteemed 
amongst men are an abomination in his sight, and some 
not esteemed amongst men are his jewels. He pointed 
out the poor widow who had just cast two mites into 
the treasury of the Temple, and he declared that her 
gift, although insignificant from the human standpoint, 



was greater in God's sight than many of the larger 
gifts, because she had given of her penury. Others 
had given from their abundance what they would little 
miss: she out of her nothing had given that which would 
cause her considerable self-denial. Here, then, is the 
Lord's appreciation and estimate of our sacrifices in 
response to our love for him. Whoever loves another 
will seek to serve him and be willing to render service 
at an expense that would be proportionate to his love. 

The wealthy can give liberally and be blest in 
giving, but the poor are to remember that the Lord 
highly esteems the spirit of their hearts when they 
desire to serve him and his cause. Their humble 
efforts are appreciated by the Lord even though man 
might despise them and consider them insignificant. 
Our Lord's judgment was that the poor widow had cast 
in more than they all from the standpoint of divine 
appreciation. What a thought is here for every one of 
us: however small our talents, however few, however 
limited are our opportunities for service, our offerings 
are not despised, but on the contrary are credited proportionately 
to the real spirit of sacrifice prompting 
them. What an encouragement is this to all who have 
the right spirit of love for the Lord and desire to be his 
self-sacrificing followers. The Scribe with much ado 
and outward show of reverence and love for God got 
the reward which he sought— the approval of his 
neighbors or those of them who were deceived by his 
various, pious mannerisms. This poor widow, however, 
unnoticed and disesteemed of the multitude, 
would be sure to have the Father's blessing and favor 
and love; and her procedure mentioned favorably constitutes 
encouragement to ourselves and to all who 
desire to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth. 



R3860 : page 303 

HIS PILGRIM LABORS ENDED 

ON September 13, our dear Bro. J. N. Patten, well 
known to many of our readers as one of the "Pilgrims," 
laid down his cross and we surely believe 
entered "beyond the vail," a spirit made perfect in 
the "First Resurrection." How blessed at such times to 
be able to realize that we are living in the "harvest" 
time, in which such a "change"— "in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye"— is the Lord's provision for the last 
"members of his body." We hearken to the message, 
"Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord from henceforth! 
Yea, saith the Spirit; they rest from their labors, 
but their works follow with them." 

How blessed to think of "the rest that remaineth 
for the people of God," as well as to enjoy a goodly 
share of it even while yet in the enemy's country: yet 



how blessed, also, is the thought that our present opportunities 

for using our mortal bodies in the service 

of our Lord and his cause are but the prelude to the 

greater and more satisfactory works of grace we shall 

be privileged to engage in with our dear Redeemer 

throughout the glorious "times of restitution of all 

things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets 

since the world began."— Acts 3:19-21. 

Privileged to see our Brother shortly before his 
death we discerned that he was just at the border and 
spoke a few words of comfort and joined in prayer for 
God's will to be done and his gracious arrangements 
perfected, and requested that he bear our greetings to 
those "on the other shore;" expressing the hope that 
ere long we will all be gathered home. Thus we were 
enabled to rejoice together, even in the presence of the 
foe. Surely the Apostle said truly,— "We sorrow not 
as others who have no hope;"— nor do we sorrow as do 
those with vague and uncertain hope. Our faith sings 
while we weep,— 

"How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord, 
Is laid for your faith in his excellent Word! 
What more can he say than to you he hath said, 
You who unto Jesus for refuge have fled?" 

Dear Sister Patten was ceaselessly in attendance 
on her husband, and as he sank to rest with her hand 
upon his forehead and a sweet smile illumining his face, 
she sang to him in low tones those two precious hymns: 
"Sweet peace, the gift of God's love," and "I shall see 
him face to face." 



page 305 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVII OCTOBER 1 No. 19 
A.D., 1906-A.M., 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 307 

Practical Results of the Church Federation 

Movement 307 

To Purify the Sons of Levi 308 

Trials from Unexpected Quarters 309 

"Love is the Fulfilling of the Law" 310 

A Lesson for All Leaders 31 1 

Wise and Foolish Virgins 312 

Two Classes of Virgins 313 

"Give Us of Your Oil" 314 

Before Christ's Mercy Seat 315 

The Parable of the Talents 316 

Faithfulness Doubly Rewarded 318 

Berean Bible Study on Love 319 

page 306 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



NEW MOTTO CARDS 



We have new full lines of Motto Cards, put up in $1 packages. 
If you desire large cards, so specify; otherwise we will 
send the medium and small sizes and the more of them. We 
supply these at about cost. German Mottoes ($1 pks.) we send 
direct from Germany. 

"CALAMITIES" FOR VOLUNTEERING 



In view of recent great calamities, it is suggested that some 
who have covered their field with the 1906 Volunteer tracts 
might like to go over the ground again, using the tract, "Calamities, 
Why God permits Them!" We are preparing half a million 
and can soon begin freight shipments. Specify how many 
you will distribute carefully. They are free to our subscribers. 

"VOLUNTEER" TOWERS IN SWEDISH 



We have good quantities of Swedish literature for general 
circulation as Volunteer matter. We cannot send these by 
mail except in small lots, but where 2000 or more are ordered 
in one lot we can send by freight, charges prepaid. Order all 
you can use judiciously amongst the Swedish people of your 
neighborhood. 



R3864 : page 307 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



PRACTICAL RESULTS OF THE CHURCH FEDERATION 
MOVEMENT 



THE following, clipped from a pamphlet entitled 
"Liberty," we esteem worthy of presentation 
in these columns. 

"No movement inaugurated during recent years is 
probably of greater significance than the Inter-Church 
Federation movement. It is one which cannot fail to 
be attended with tremendous consequences, and, if 
followed to its logical outcome, will terminate in results 
which ought to cause every thoughtful person to shudder 
in advance. 



"The outcome of this federation movement has 
been plainly outlined in the 'sure word of prophecy.' 
History also illustrates, by similar movements, its 
meaning. 

"Concerning its importance, the chairman of the 
Inter-Church Federation Conference, recently held 
in New York City, said: 'This is one of the most 
notable assemblies of believers in Jesus Christ that has 
ever been seen. John Calvin wrote to Cranmer, archbishop 
of Canterbury, and declared he would cross any 
sea to make such a union effective. The dream of the 
great reformer and the great archbishop has met with 
realization in these latter days.' 

A BIBLE PROHIBITION OF CONFEDERACY 

'"Say ye not, A confederacy, to all them to whom 
this people shall say, A confederacy; neither fear ye 
their fear, nor be afraid.' (Isa. 8:12.) It is evident, 
from the context of this passage, that God's professed, 
people inaugurated this federation movement against 
which he warned them, because they had departed 
from him, and 'refused the waters of Shiloh that go 
softly,' and 'vexed his holy Spirit.' 

"The rejection of the holy Spirit lies at the foundation 
of every Church federation which has blighted the 
prosperity of the Church during her history. The only 
union the true Church has ever sought is a union with 
Jesus Christ, the great Head of the Church; and when 
such a union has been maintained, mighty power has 
attended it. As evidence of this, one has but to revert 
to apostolic times, when the Church went forth 'fair 
as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army 
with banners.' 

"Years ago much power attended revival efforts, 
conducted by such men as Professor Finney, President 
of Oberlin College, and later, by Mr. Moody and others. 
These old-time revivals were attended with a harvest 
of souls; but they are largely now things of the past. 
Many ministers deplore the absence of spiritual power 
which prevails to such an alarming extent at the present 
time. Realizing keenly the weakness and lack of spiritual 
life which characterized the once Spirit-filled Church 
with a power which brought conviction to sin-sick souls, 
churchmen are seeking for some remedy by which the 
Church may regain her former power. 

"The means by which this restoration of former 
power is sought is a gigantic Church federation movement, 
through which the Church may secure the power 
of the State to institute moral reforms and enforce her 
decrees. To many, at first thought, this may seem an 
innocent, harmless, and desirable thing. For this reason 
we desire to submit a few of the inevitable practical 
results of such a union. 

"One of the results of this movement was outlined 
by a prominent delegate at the conference, as follows: 



"I trust that one of the practical results of this 
conference will be the organization of a force that lawbreakers, 
and lawmakers will respect and heed when 
great questions of morals are involved. Our gospel is 
the fulfilment of the law. It is our province, in the name 
of our Supreme King, and seeking the good of mankind, 
to ask rulers to respect the code of our kingdom. Rulers 
may ignore sects, but they will respect the Church. 
This federation will compel an audience, and it will 
speak with power if it will put aside its differences and 
make its agreement its argument.' 

"When the end has been attained for which they 
have been seeking, we will have a parallel to that which 
existed in the fourth century, when the bishops of Rome 
were united in compelling the Emperor Constantine 
and others to yield to their demands concerning the 
settlement of 'grave moral questions,' among which 

R3864 : page 308 

was chiefly the enforcement of Sunday observance by 
law. 

A CHURCH TRUST 

"Another result of the evil principles underlying 
this proposed Federation will be a veritable Church 
union, or trust; and the same tactics will doubtless be 
employed by it as are common to other unions. Freedom 
to preach the gospel will be denied. Any denomination 
not conforming to the creed, rules, and regulations 
of this religious trust, will be regarded as an unlawful 
rival. This was indicated by one speaker at the recent 
conference, who said: 

'"No community in which any denomination has 
any legitimate claim, should be entered by any other 
denomination through its official agencies without 
conference with the denomination or denominations 
having said claims. A feeble Church should be revived, 
if possible, rather than a new one established to become 
its rival.' 

"This is an age of unions and confederacies. Every 
department of the commercial world is being bound together. 
The power which is being wielded by these 
unions in securing their desired ends has exerted an 
influence which the Church, in its worldly condition, 
has been unable to resist. On this point a prominent 
speaker at the recent Inter-Church Federation Conference 
said: 'The two words which express the principle 
that rule to-day in the business world are co-operation 
and economy. Apply these two thoughts to 
the work of the Church. Our sects and denominations 
have often been sources of rivalry and competition, 
and they have left the Church as a whole weakened and 
shorn of its power. We have not presented a united 
front against a common enemy, but have too often fired 



into one another's camps Co-operation through 

a closer federation is the need of the hour.' 

"It will readily be seen from this proposal that any 
denomination which does not belong to the union, would 
at once be considered a 'rival,' or, in a more characteristic 
term familiar to all unions, a 'scab.' This 
would at once arouse endless animosities and controversies 
between the union and the sects which are not 
connected with the federation, or union. Such a course 
would result only in the federated churches bringing 
pressure to bear upon those who refuse to yield to their 
demands, which would be nothing short of religious 
persecution. Again it will be seen that the only safe 
union for the Church, the only true union, is a union 
with Christ." 



R3864 : page 308 

TO PURIFY THE SONS OF LEVI 

"Who shall abide the day of his coming? Who shall 
stand when he inspects? For he is like a refiner's fire and 
like fuller's soap: and he shall sit as a refiner and 
purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi 
and purge them as gold and silver, and they shall 
offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness." 
-Mai. 3:2,3. 

BLESSINGS have come to us through an appreciation 
of the teaching of the Scripture respecting 
the great day of trouble coming upon 

the whole world of mankind— especially upon Christendom. 
Truly the Scriptures teach a time of trouble 
such as was not since there was a nation, because of 
which even now, as our Lord prophesied, "Men's 
hearts are failing them for fear, and for looking after 
those things coming upon the earth." We do well that 
we rejoice that this day of trouble coming upon the 
world as a thief and a snare has not so come upon us, 
but that we already by faith see many of its details and 
the glorious outcome, the establishment of the Kingdom 
of God under the whole heavens. We fear, however, 
that this great trouble upon the world, which in some 
sense we hope to be "accounted worthy to escape," 
has so filled the mental horizon of some of the Lord's 
people that it has hidden from their attention another 
kind of trial which is especially for the Church, and 
which must reach us and test us and prove us before the 
world's day of trouble is ushered in. It is this day of 
trial upon the Church, this special testing of the elect, 
that is referred to in our text. 

PRIESTS AND LEVITES 



The house of Levi, the priestly tribe, typified the 
household of faith of this Gospel age. As the priests 
constituted the highest order or class amongst the 
Levites, so the Royal Priesthood, the Lord's consecrated, 
the saints of this Gospel age, constitute the highest 
class amongst the spiritual Levites, the household of 
faith. When, therefore, the Lord through the Prophet 
declares the testing and purging of the house of Levi it includes 
all of the "Household of Faith," the "Little Flock" 
and the "Great Company." The end of this age is the time 
for the Lord's inspection of the entire household of faith, 
and properly enough the inspection begins at the top 
of the house, begins with the saints, but will extend to 
every consecrated one. The two classes subjected to 
the fiery trials of the Refiner are represented by the 

R3865 : page 308 

gold and silver. The gold represents those whose 
loyalty to the Lord will specially demonstrate itself in 
their love and zeal to lay down their lives for him, for 
the truth, for the brethren. These are the gold class, 
whose portion as the Bride class shall be joint-heirship 
with the great King of kings and Lord of lords in his 
universal empire for the blessing of all the families of 
the earth. The other class, represented in our text as 
the silver, will be the class less precious in his sight, the 
great company of Revelation 7, also spoken of in 
Psalm 45 as "the virgins, her companions, that follow" 
the Bride into the presence of the King of glory. 

If the words, "Who shall stand when he inspects?" 
bring to our hearts an anxious throb, relief comes to us 
again with the thought that although the inspection 
will be most critical, most searching— although the 
trying in the fire will separate the dross completely and 
purify both the gold and the silver— nevertheless he 
who thus inspects, who thus tries, who thus purifies, 
who thus refines, is our Lord and Master, who bought 
us with his precious blood, who has assured us of his 
love and sympathy, and has promised with the Apostle 
that he will not suffer us to be tempted above that we 

R3865 : page 309 

are able, but will with the temptation also provide a 

way of escape; and he has assured us that all things 

are working together for our good, because we love God 

and have been called according to his purpose.— 1 Cor. 10:13; 

Rom. 8:28. 

TRIALS FROM UNEXPECTED QUARTERS 

If we knew in advance just how each trial of faith 
and love and devotion to principle and loyalty to the 
Lord and to the brethren would come we might be prepared 
to meet it, and correspondingly it would be less 



severe, and our humility, patience and love be correspondingly 

less tested. But the Lord wishes to test us 

along these very lines, and hence our trials usually come 

from unexpected quarters. This makes the trial more 

severe and proves the better the real sentiments of our 

hearts. The Lord desires to purge out of us everything 

in the nature of dross— self-will, personal ambition, 

pride: he wishes to cultivate in us loyalty to 

himself and the principles of righteousness, represented 

in his character, and exhorts us through his Word. 

Looking out at Christendom in general we hear the 
Prophet's declaration that "a thousand shall fall at thy 
side"— at the side of the body of Christ, the Church. 
And we see that falling in progress, falling from faith in 
Christ as the Redeemer, falling into Evolution, Higher 
Criticism, Christian Science, etc. But now we are 
looking closer at home to the members of the body, to 
see which of these will be able to stand the tests of our 
day— "Who shall be able to stand?" (Rev. 6:17) inquires 
the Apostle. "Who shall stand when he inspects?" 
is the inquiry of the Prophet in our text. The 
intimation evidently is that the inspection will be so 
crucial as to test all of the saints. 

Because the WATCH TOWER, by the Lord's gracious 
arrangement, has such an outlook over the harvest 
field, such contact with all the little flock of the Lord's 
people through the mail, through the pilgrims, through 
the colporteurs, we perhaps better than others can 
discern that the great Refiner's fires are already burning 
and that the gold and silver are being tried. And 
O, what sorrow it gives us at times to behold some not 
standing well the testing of this hour. We love all of 
the Lord's dear ones who are now in the furnace of 
trial; we are sure that the Lord himself, the Refiner, 
loves them still more. If these have pain and sorrow, 
as we discern tendencies of weakness, disloyalty to the 
cause; ambition for name and fame or position, desire 
to be greatest, tendencies to lord it over God's heritage 
—if we are pained by these things, grieved, disappointed 
in some, shall we suppose that the great Refiner 
is indifferent? Nay, verily! It is written of him that 
having loved his own, he loved them to the end; and 
we see from the narrative that he was very patient and 
slow to cut off the self-seeking, ambitious, truth-selling 
and Lord-selling Judas. And the more we attain to 
the Master's character and likeness the more sympathy 
we will have with all who are out of the way, and who, 
unless recovered, will be surely cut off from membership 
in the body, as our Lord indicates— even though, 
as the Apostle declares, they may be saved so as by 
fire, as members of the "great company."— 1 Cor. 3:15. 

"REBUKE WITH LONG-SUFFERING AND PATIENCE" 

It is impossible for us to write to all who seem to be 
in danger, for two reasons: (1) Time would not 



suffice; there are other duties of the hour; (2) If they 

will not hearken to the Word of the Lord, if they will 

not hear Jesus and the apostles and Moses and the 

prophets we need not expect that they would hearken 

to us. Hence the most proper course for us seems to be 

to occasionally give such words of warning as these foregoing, 

that although they may have a savor of death 

unto death to some yet we hope that they may have a 

savor of life unto life to others. 

Strange as it may appear— yet in full accord with 
all the records of the past— these fiery trials, these sittings, 
seem to find in many cases the most dross amongst 
the leaders of the flock. Perhaps it is merely because 
they are more conspicuous, perhaps just as many who 
are not in so great prominence will really fall, be consumed, 
"suffer loss," and be "saved so as by fire." 
The Lord alone is able to read the heart and to discern 
the thoughts and intents, and it is his will that now 
every member of the household of Levi, the household 
of faith, should be purged, purified, refined; and the 
fiery trials of our day are his own arrangements, his 
own fannings, that he may accomplish the work in 
harmony with the divine arrangement. 

DAWN, Vol. VI. we believe, like the other volumes 
of the series, came out in its due season, and no doubt 
the Lord is using it to some extent as the earthly bellows 
wherewith to kindle the refining fires of this time. 
In that volume as in the others we endeavored to set 
forth not our own thoughts but the teachings of the 
Word, and this in some instances seemed to arouse a 
spirit of anger and resentment in the hearts of some of 
the leaders where there should be only love out of pure 
hearts and appreciation of the glorious liberties of the 
Church. We did nothing more than our duty in calling 
the attention of the brethren to the fact that the 
leaders are not the lords of the flock, and that any 
leader who assumes a lordly position endangers his 
own standing in Christ as well as hinders the progress 
of the flock in the liberty wherewith Christ made us 
free. And any of the Lord's flock who co-operate 
with such ambitious leaders are doing them injury as 
well as rendering an unauthorized subserviency injurious 
to themselves and the others associated with 
them in the study of the Word. 

"TO ERR IS HUMAN, TO FORGIVE IS DIVINE" 

It is written, "To err is human," and we know that 
though begotten of the Spirit we all have the treasure 
of the new nature in earthen vessels, therefore are 
liable to err. Realizing this we should not deal harshly, 
unkindly, toward leaders who are inclined to usurp to 
themselves leadership in the Church of God without 
appointment by the Church; or inclined to override 
the right of others after they have been regularly 
chosen. Nevertheless, kindly, gently, firmly, the congregation 



should hold control of all of its affairs, and 

see that the leaders recognize that the voice of the congregation 

is the voice of the consecrated. This will be 

to the advantage of all: it will assist the leader in keeping 

humble, in remembering that he is merely a member 

of the Church, which is the body of Christ, and that 

in the Lord's providence he serves the Church because 

they desire him to do so and consider such to be the 

will of the Lord. This will help to keep the leader from 

being puffed up, haughty, from speaking arrogantly of 

R3865 : page 310 

the congregation as "my people," "my Church," "my 
class," "my work." It will help him to recognize that 
it is the "Lord's people," the "Lord's Church," the 
"Lord's class," the "Lord's work," and that it is a 
favor, an honor, to be its servant and not at all within 
his province to be its ruler, its "boss." 

This course benefits the congregation also, teaching 
them their responsibility to the Lord and to his 
cause to be in proportion as they uphold and give approval 
to the one who as leader or servant of the congregation 
is their representative. Whatever the leader 
does that is wrong is the fault of the majority of that 
congregation, and the realization of their responsibility 
means the strengthening of their characters, the broadening 
of their minds and in general their preparation 
for the Lord's service here and hereafter. It should 
even grate upon our ears to hear an elder in a discourse 
address the congregation in the second person saying, 
for instance, "You ought not to do this." It should be 
considered by all elders, all recognized teachers in the 
Church, the leaders in any sense, that they do not 
speak of the congregation as of a different class from 
themselves, as in the nominal Church there is 
the usual style of recognizing the clergy as one class, 
the laity as another. On the contrary the better form, 
the humbler form, would be for the leader to address 
the congregation as including himself in the exhortation, 
as for instance to say, "We should not do" thus 
and so. 

"LOVE IS THE FULFILLING OF THE LAW" 

If the spirit of love were largely developed in all 
of our hearts it would require no discussion of this 
subject from either standpoint, but we are only partially 
developed in the fruits of the Spirit: hence our 
difficulty, and hence also the great importance of helping 
one another, so that our relationship together as 
fellow-members of the one body may be as helpful as 
possible to all. And when any feeling of criticism is 
aroused in our hearts in respect to the course of a 
leader, it would be the proper, loving course to say to 
ourselves— Well, perhaps if I were just in the leader's 



place I might do no better than he does in the matter 

R3866 : page 310 

of keeping my body under— in the matter of walking 
humbly with the Lord and with the brethren— in the 
matter of exemplifying the perfection of love, which 
seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, is not 
puffed up, thinketh no evil.— 1 Cor. 13:5. 

When we realize that ambition was the cause of 
Satan's fall, that it was the cause of mother Eve's disobedience, 
that it has been the cause of the stumbling 
of many of the noblest ones of God's people in the past, 
the lesson should not be lost upon us, whatever our 
station. It should give us sympathy for the leaders 
and the greater trials and temptations to which they 
are exposed, and to the leaders it should give greater 
alertness, care, watchfulness, lest they should be in any 
measure overcome by this fault, which has harmed so 
many in the past and which evidently is so grievous a 
one in the sight of the Lord, for the Lord resisteth the 
proud but grants his favors to the humble.— Jas. 4:6. 

Another point, we must never forget that as 
the will of the leader should not be taken as the mind of 
the congregation unless it has so expressed itself, so 
likewise we should not for a moment suppose that the 
will or judgment of any other member should be taken 
as the judgment of the entire congregation. If then 
any brother conscientiously esteems that the leader of 
a meeting is not following the wisest or best Scriptural 
course, he may indeed go to the leader privately, 
kindly, lovingly, and give him his opinion, but it does 
not follow that the leader must follow this opinion. He 
might say, "This is the opinion of one, and my own is 
the opinion of another no less worthy of credit," and 
he might properly enough hold to his own opinion or 
modify it slightly. It is the voice of the congregation 
as a whole that should be sought on any subject, and 
which should decide every subject in the Church according 
to the understanding of the consecrated ones 
respecting the divine will as heard from the Word of 
God. 

A DANGER FROM THE OTHER SIDE 

Neither should any one too hastily conclude that 
his view of matters is sounder or better than that of 
the leader. On the contrary, the fact that the leader 
has been chosen by the congregation as the one best 
fitted of its number to look after its interests should 
have weight, and the brother or sister who thinks he or 
she has reason for difference of judgment respecting 
certain matters should hesitate a little, reconsider the 
matter, weigh it carefully, try to see it from the standpoint 
of the leader, if he or she can so find it in the 
Scriptures. If after all he or she feels certain, it is not 



his or her duty nor his or her privilege to harass the 
whole company by trying to impress his or her views 
suddenly, hastily, vehemently. His or her moderation 
should be manifested, as the Apostle says, "Let your 
moderation be known to all men." (Phil. 4:5.) He or 
she should approve what could be approved of the 
leader, and in objecting to certain features of his course 
it should be done in all kindness, moderation and 
brotherly love, and surely with meekness. 

The public acts of a public servant are subject to 
the examination and criticism of the public, and likewise 
the open teachings and open conduct of the leaders of 
the Church are open to criticism by their brethren, 
but the spirit of love and sympathy should always prevail, 
and nothing should be done through strife or vain 
glory, and any one criticizing an elder with the evident 
view of supplanting him should be viewed the more 
critically himself, and all should recognize that the selfish, 
self-seeking spirit is a dangerous one, inimical both 
to the interests of the individual and the interests of the 
congregation. The brother who is in the right condition 
of heart to be a leader amongst the Lord's humble followers 
should manifest humility in word and manner— 
in everything. Others need not be frowned upon nor 
openly rebuked, but they should not be encouraged— 
they should not be put into places of influence in the 
Church lest it injure them and others who would come 
under their influence. 

"LET PATIENCE HAVE HER PERFECT WORK" 

Do not be too hasty in acting in connection with the 
Church's interests. Be sure first that your own 
motives are good, pure, loving toward the one you 
criticize; be sure that you have no sympathy with evil 
speaking; be sure that you are seeking merely the 
liberties of the Church which the Lord proposed— that you 
are seeking merely the welfare of the Church in respect 

R3866 : page 311 

to the times, places and character of meetings and 
leaders; and be sure that you are as anxious that others 
should have liberty to express their sentiments as you 
are solicitous that your own liberties of expression be 
not overridden or ignored. 

It is rarely advantageous to have one leader or 
elder only in a congregation for a number of years in 
succession, unless it be very small or otherwise unavoidable. 
Some who begin humbly enough with a 
desire to be servants of the Church and with feelings 
and expressions of their own unworthiness of the 
privilege and incompetency for the service, if continued 
in the position year after year come thereby into sore 
trial and testing, and are in danger by and by of coming 
to feel that they own the position, and that the selection 



of any one else for the service would be an insult. 

This of course is entirely wrong, yet we have an illustration 

in Scriptures along this line. We read, "Now 

Moses was the meekest man in all the earth." Doubtless 

this had to do with the Lord's choice of Moses as a 

leader for his people. For forty years the nation of 

Israel looked to him in every emergency, and it should 

not surprise us at all that at the close of that forty 

years the meekest man in all the earth was too arrogant 

to be allowed to go into the land of Canaan. Moses 

was deprived of the privilege of entering Canaan because 

he was not sufficiently meek— because, having 

lost so considerably of his original meekness, he smote 

the rock in the wilderness, saying, "Ye rebels, must I 

bring you water out of this rock?" 

A LESSON FOR ALL LEADERS 

If the meekest man in all the earth and one of the 
greatest men in the world's history was thus overcome 
by the circumstances of his position amongst the 
people, it should not surprise us if we find that in Spiritual 
Israel some who start out meek and humble become 
more or less arrogant, too, and talk about what 
they do and must do, and assume that the others are 
dependent upon them for the water of life. Whenever 
we look at this picture of Moses it should say to us all, 
especially to all leaders, "My soul, be on thy guard!" 
Only a frequent looking to the Lord and a realization 
of this danger and a continual strife against it can keep 
us safe at our Redeemer's side— at the side of him who 
was meek and lowly of heart— the great Teacher who 
endured such contradiction of sinners against himself 
(Heb. 12:3), and with such meekness— laying down 
his life in immersion, in loving service— seeking not 
his own welfare and honor, but humbling himself even 
unto death, even the death of the cross. The Apostle 
showing this exclaims, "Humble yourselves, therefore, 
under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you 
in due time." Exaltation, influence, place, power, 
authority in the Church, now bring extra trials and 
extra sacrifices as well as extra dangers. The higher 
one is up the more careful he must be lest he miss his 
footing and fall. 

Sometimes a congregation may have its patience 
sorely tried by an elder who, possessing good traits, 
good qualities, persists in "running" the Church according 
to his own conceptions and ignores the desires 
of the Church. If the objection to the elder, leader, be 
along the lines of immorality or along the lines of false 
doctrine as respects fundamentals laid down in the 
divine Word— for instance, the ransom— then steps 
should be promptly taken, as a congregation is responsible 
before God and men on these points. Laxity 
on these lines cannot be brooked; the matter should 
be firmly dealt with by the congregation. But if 



doctrinally, or at least on the fundamentals, the leader 
be found loyal to the Lord and his Word and to the 
harvest message, and if he be above reproach in the 
eyes of those of the congregation who know him most 
intimately, and if the difference merely be along the 
lines of his unwillingness to conduct services of a character 
or at a time or at places which the majority have 
requested, it might in the interest of peace be the wisest 
course to continue such an elder until the expiration of 
the term for which he was elected. 

Then at that election, without becoming too personal 
or saying an unkind word to him, the congregation 
owe it to themselves, to the Lord and to the Truth 
not to elect him again to any such place of absolute 
control. This would not mean that the brother should 
be dropped from leadership entirely, but that the particular 
meetings he desired to lead and the character 
of the meetings should be understood, and his election 
should be along those lines, so that there could be no 
misunderstanding in the future, and others possessing 
some qualifications for service in the company should 
be sought with the expectation that the Lord, who has 
the entire situation in his eye, probably has others in 
preparation to fill the breach. 

"BE YE KINDLY AFFECTIONED" 

If this kindly and gentle reproof of the brother's 
course leave him still self-willed and arrogant and indisposed 
to serve the congregation according to their 
ideas, it would be wise to drop him entirely from leadership 
for a time. But let nothing be done through 
strife or vain glory— let not an unkind word be expressed. 
Rather remember the services of the past; 
he should be esteemed for those services. Do not be 
afraid that matters will all go to wreck without some 
one human being having control. While esteeming 
every brother and servant in the Lord very highly and 
in proportion to their works as well as their characters, 

R3867 : page 311 

we should ever remember that the Lord himself is our 
Shepherd, our Bishop, our Pastor, our Leader, and that 
we are his sheep. If the congregation feels such a 
dependence upon any one person for its spiritual comfort 
and refreshment and edification there is something 
wrong, and the sooner matters in such a case come to a 
crisis the better it would probably be for all. Those 
who have gotten started in the Truth can build one 
another up in the most holy faith, edifying one another 
and assisting one another in various kinds of Berean 
Scripture studies, and they would probably make much 
more progress in so doing than if they continued to 
allow leaders to lord it over God's heritage and to 
manage the Church contrary to the wishes of the 



majority. 

We emphasize the word majority because so frequently 
minorities attempt to rule. Our thought is 
that the loving consideration of the different members 
of the body for each other should so exercise their sympathies 
and loving co-operation that the majority 
would be quite willing to agree to some recognition of 
the desires and preferences of the minorities— with 

R3867 : page 312 

individuals even. In other words, majorities are not 
to be selfish, and to determine that because a majority 
gives the authority therefore it would be proper to 
exercise that power to the ignoring of their brethren of 
somewhat different views. Union of heart means that 
each and all will ignore some of his or their own natural 
tastes and preferences wherever principles of the Word 
of God are not involved. 

We need not tell you, Beloved, that every word of 
this article is written with a heart full of brotherly love 
and a desire for the edification of the Lord's dear 
people, and without any personal animosity or other 
evil impetus or desire. We seek your good. We are in 
touch with the entire field, and know the sifting and 
testing that is going on, and desire to lend a helping 
hand to the injury of none and the blessing of many. 
Consider these things and note our further suggestions 
along the same lines in the sixth volume of the DAWN 
STUDIES. 

Recurring to our text we remark that the very 
thought that we are in the presence of the great Refiner, 
the very thought that he is supervising the fiery trials 
through which all of the house of Levi must now pass, 
should quicken us, energize us, put us on guard. We 
are under his inspection. The intimation is that this 
is the final testing, and that those who are refined by 
present experiences, purged of pride, ambition, selfishness, 
meekness of heart, will surely be received into the 
Kingdom. There the humble will be exalted to glory, 
honor and immortality. Can we wait for this? Can 
we not afford to humble ourselves? Do we not desire 
so to do? Will we not all unite our hearts and minds 
and prayers and efforts to the intent that this work of 
humbling may progress in our own hearts, and that thus 
the spirit of humility may be shed abroad in the whole 
Church, from the humblest to the most prominent of 
its servants? 

"AN OFFERING IN RIGHTEOUSNESS" 

The expression of our text, "an offering in righteousness" 
may be viewed from two different standpoints, 
both true. (1) We may understand it to 
signify a right offering, a proper offering, an acceptable 
offering; or (2) we may also understand it to signify 



an offering in the interest of righteousness or justice, 
in the sense that the sin offerings of Israel, the Day of 
Atonement, were offerings in righteousness or to effect 
righteousness— to effect cancellation of sin. 

Both thoughts are true: we have presented our 
bodies living sacrifices and God has accepted them in 
Christ, but with the understanding that we would be 
conformed to the image of his dear Son, that we would 
attain to the character likeness of Christ under his 
instruction and guidance and blessing and assistance. 
If now we fail to attain this, if pride or ambition or any 
other thing hinders our development in the likeness of 
the Lord, our offering will not be acceptable and we will 
not have a place in the highest glory to which we have 
been called. Likewise we have seen that the Church 
is filling up that which is behind of the afflictions of 
Christ; that as the body of Christ whom the Head is 
guiding in sacrifice we were represented in the Atonement 
Day offerings by the Lord's goat of sin offering. 
The offering made by our Lord, of which we are granted 
a share, by which he justifies the world, shall ultimately 
bring in everlasting righteousness to all those who 
will come into accord with him. We are still in the 
time when we are expected to share in this sacrificing— 
"If we suffer with him we shall also reign with him," 
otherwise we shall not. We are very desirous, therefore, 
that we should be enabled to offer the acceptable 
sacrifice represented in the type, that we thus might 
have membership in the body of Christ in glory and in 
the great work of blessing all the families of the earth. 
Shall we not all conclude more earnestly than ever 
before that the matter at stake is of the greatest value? 
and shall we not all with fresh zeal allow the Lord in 
his providences and by his Word to purge our hearts 
from all dross and to fill us instead with his meek and 
quiet Spirit? 



R3867 : page 312 

WISE AND FOOLISH VIRGINS 

-MATTHEW 25:l-13.-OCTOBER 14.- 

"Watch, therefore, for ye know neither the day 
nor the hour when the Son of man cometh." 

PROBABLY on the last Sunday of his earthly 
ministry our Lord foretold the destruction 
at Jerusalem, the scattering of his followers, 
a long period of wars, rumors of wars, etc., and finally 
his second coming, as recorded in Matthew, 25th chapter. 
This information was most appropriate to the 
apostles at this very time, for their expectation had 
run in a different direction— they had been expecting 



the exaltation of the Lord as the Messiah, and that 
Jerusalem would be the seat of his empire. They had 
asked, When shall these things be? and, What shall 
be the sign of thy presence? and Jesus, in his great 
prophecy of Matthew 24, had explained these matters, 
indicating to them that his second coming would be 
in strenuous times, when, if it were possible, the very 
elect would be deceived— in which, as it was in the 
days of Noah, so it would then be in the days of the 
Son of Man, that the multitude of the world would be 
eating and drinking, planting and building, marrying 
and giving in marriage, and be unaware of the storm 
impending and the consummation of the age preparatory 
to the beginning of the new age, of his Kingdom. 

To impress the matter upon their minds, he gave 
the parable of the ten virgins— five wise and five foolish. 
The scene of the parable is laid near to the close of the 
Gospel age, as is indicated by its opening statement, 
"Then shall the Kingdom of heaven be likened unto 
ten virgins, who took their lamps and went forth to 
meet the Bridegroom." The parable has not been 
applicable all the way down through the Gospel age, 
but to our understanding is applicable now, because 
we are living in the end of the age, at the time when the 
Bridegroom will be present— at the time when the 
wise virgins will go in to the wedding and the foolish 
will be excluded. The understanding of this parable 
at the present time, therefore, should be meat in due 
season to all who are the Lord's true followers. 

Throughout the Scriptures the Church is represented 

R3867 : page 313 

as a Bride in preparation for her marriage. The 
Bridegroom uniformly is the Lord Jesus, to whom belongs 
the entire inheritance, and the opportunity 
granted to the Lord's followers in the present time is 
that of becoming his Bride and joint-heirs. They have 
no status or relationship to the King eternal except 
as they obtain it by union with the King's Son. The 
type of this in the Old Testament is a very beautiful 
one: Abraham typified the Heavenly Father, very 
rich; Isaac typified our Lord Jesus, the seed of promise, 
the heir of all; Abraham's servant, sent to call a 
wife for Isaac, beautifully typified the holy Spirit, 
which, during this Gospel age, has been selecting the 
Church, of which the Apostle says, I have espoused 
you as a chaste virgin unto one husband, which is 
Christ. -2 Cor. 11:2. 

Throughout the Gospel age this Church, under 
the guidance and protection of the holy Spirit, has 
been approaching the Father's house of many mansions, 
the heavenly Kingdom, the glorious conditions 
promised in joint-heirship with the Bridegroom. If 
we rightly understand the matter we are now at the 
end of the journey, and the Bride class, typified by 



Rebecca, is putting on the vail and alighting from the 
camel and being received by the heavenly Bridegroom. 
As the entire matter has occupied a long period of 
nearly nineteen centuries, so the coming features are 
occupying several years for their accomplishment. 
Soon the Bride will be with the Bridegroom and in 
the Sarah tent— joint-heirs with him in the Abrahamic 
Covenant. It is in harmony with this that the Apostle 
assures us that "if ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's 
seed, and heirs according to the promise."— Gal. 3:29. 

Several of the Lord's parables related to this marriage 
of the King's Son, and his last message to the 
Church tells us of how ultimately the Bride, the Lamb's 
wife, shall shine forth resplendent in the Kingdom, 
and she is symbolized by the New Jerusalem. The 
announcement is there made, too, of the Marriage 
Supper of the Lamb after the Bride, the Lamb's wife, 
shall have made herself ready. (Rev. 19:7-9.) John 
the Baptist as a prophet referred to this relationship 
between Christ and the Church, saying, "He that hath 
the Bride is the Bridegroom; but the friend of the 
Bridegroom when he heareth his voice rejoiceth greatly. 
This my joy is fulfilled." John realized that he was 

R3868 : page 313 

neither a member of the Bride class nor was he the 

Bridegroom. He recognized Jesus as the Bridegroom, 

and was glad to be honored of God as the servant of 

the Bridegroom and Bride to give the introduction. 

The high position John will occupy in the future, as 

one of the faithful prophets of whom our Lord said 

there was none greater, is assured; but we have the 

Lord's assurance that the least one, the humblest one 

in the Bride class of this Gospel age, the least one in 

this Kingdom class, will be greater than John the Baptist, 

because these are to be joint-heirs in the Kingdom, partakers 

of the glory, honor, immortality, while John 

and the faithful of the past will be upon the earth plane 

as representatives and princes of the Kingdom amongst 

men. -Matt 11:11; Heb. 11:39,40; Psa. 45:16. 

TWO CLASSES OF VIRGINS 

Having the parable then located before our minds 
as belonging somewhere about the present time, we 
note the fact that it refers only to virgins— pure ones. 
The parable does not refer to the world at all, nor even 
to nominal Church people. Both of its classes represent 
Christians, the Kingdom of heaven class, believers, 
consecrated believers, believers who have heard the 
Gospel of the Kingdom, who are expecting the King 
at his second advent and who have lamps, and who 
get from their lamps light, information and instruction. 
These two classes of pure ones, separate from the world, 
informed respecting the Bridegroom's coming and 



Kingdom and waiting for them, represent the two 
classes of the consecrated— the "Little Flock" and the 
"Great Company," the "more than conquerors" and 
the conquerors "through great tribulation." (Rom. 8:37; 
Rev. 7:14.) These are the same two 
classes that are represented in the Tabernacle type by 
the two goats, one of which became the Lord's goat 
for the sacrifice and the other the scapegoat, only that in 
the Tabernacle type the goats represented the two 
classes all the way down through the Gospel age as 
well as particularly at its close, while the two classes 
in the parable under consideration represent the Church 
only in the present time in the end of this age. 

Evidently the Lord's object in giving the parable 
was two-fold: first, to give a salutary lesson to the 
apostles and the entire Church of this Gospel age on 
the necessity for alertness, watching and praying, anticipating 
and preparing for the coming King and his Kingdom 
that they might be constantly ready for a share 
therein. Second, the parable was specially intended 
for us living in this time, to let us see that it would not 
be sufficient to be hoping and praying for the Kingdom 
and in a general way expecting the Bridegroom, but 
that we must be so alert and so full of enthusiasm for 
the event that it would lead us to make the wisest 
possible preparation for it, that we might not be disappointed 
at the final moment. 

SECOND ADVENTISTS IN THE PARABLE 

True to the picture of the parable, a movement 
took place amongst the Lord's people of all denominations 
in the last century, which culminated in what was 
known as the Second Advent movement. The virgins, 
the pure ones amongst Christians all over the world, 
were aroused with the thought that the coming of the 
Bridegroom was near, and a general lamp trimming, 
a general investigation of the Bible especially on that 
subject resulted. True to the parable, the expectation 
of those dear people was disappointed— "the Bridegroom 
tarried," and while he tarried "they all slumbered 
and slept." The lamps were measurably neglected 
and a general stupor fell upon this class. Indeed 
we may properly enough agree that many of the virgins 
not only slept but dreamed most peculiar, fantastic 
and unreasonable things. But by and by came the 
midnight announcement, "Behold the Bridegroom!" 

This cry has been going forth ever since A.D. 1874, 
and in response to it all of the virgin class everywhere 
are awakening and a fresh examination of the divine 
Word is in progress, the lamps are being trimmed. 
Amongst those who hear the announcement are some 
who insist that it is a false cry: they have become so 
drowsy, so overcharged with the cares of this life, so 
comfortably nestled, that although they love the Bridegroom 
and desire above all things to be ready to receive 



him, they are unprepared, refuse to investigate, and 

merely murmur to themselves, "Yes, we love the Bridegroom, 

we will surely be ready to receive him, we have 

R3868 : page 314 

long been waiting for him, but not yet, not yet. Soul, 
take thine ease; no one knows anything about the 
matter; those who are announcing the Bridegroom 
are surely in error." 

As days and weeks and years roll by more and 
more of the virgins awaken, and as they do so the 
investigation begins, the trimming of the lamps. Then 
it is discovered that some, who thought they were ready 
to enter into the joys of their Lord, find that they are 
deficient in the all-important oil, which represents the 
holy Spirit, and from which alone comes their enlightenment. 
The delay of the Bridegroom thus serves as a 
test to the virgins invited to go in with him to the marriage 
—the delay serves to prove who are the wise and 
who are the foolish. A certain amount of oil, a certain 
amount of consecration, a certain amount of the holy 
Spirit, was necessary to be counted in with the virgins 
at any stage; but a larger measure is necessary now 
in the time of the actual presence of the Bridegroom, 
in the time of actual joining in the procession— more 
truth, more light, are now due, and must be possessed 
by those who would go in to the wedding. 

The virgins merely represent the Lord's people in 
general at this time, so that many are now amongst 
them who had nothing to do with the Adventist movement 
of 1844. However, the general spirit must be 
the same, love for the Bridegroom, expectancy of his 
presence in the Kingdom and a desire above all things 
to be prepared to enter in with him before the door is 
shut. The question now then is, Who has a sufficiency 
of oil, of light, of the holy Spirit, from which this illumination 
proceeds, to be able to stand in the procession 
of the virgins who will enter in with the Bridegroom 
before the door closes? It is an important question, 
and one which appeals to every one who has his 
lamp burning. How necessary that we see to it that 
we have a good supply of the Spirit of the Lord— the 
spirit of meekness, patience, gentleness, long suffering, 
brotherly kindness, love. We may be sure that unless 
we have a good supply of these our lamps will go out. 

"GIVE US OF YOUR OIL" 

To illustrate this holy Spirit, this spirit of consecration 
which all of the wise virgins must have in full 
measure in order to maintain their light and their place 
in the Bridegroom's favor and to gain an entrance to 
the marriage, the Lord in the parable represents the 
foolish virgins as asking the wise for some of their oil, 
and then shows the impossibility of its being thus 



obtained from one another. The fruits and graces of 
the holy Spirit cannot be had for the asking; they 
must be bought in the market of experience— they 
are of gradual growth and cost painstaking care of 
words and thoughts and doings. It is because these 
fruits of the Spirit are so difficult of attainment and 
cost such a price of self-sacrifice and sacrifice of worldly 
interests that they are valuable in the Lord's sight. 

None can get too much of this holy Spirit, none 
can secure an over supply for his own use so that he 
could supply others from his abundance. The Bridegroom 
has made in advance abundant provision by 
which all those who are invited to go in with him to 
the marriage may be properly equipped, not only with 
robes and lamps, but also with the oil; and if any are 
careless in the procurement of the oil, they thus indicate 
their unfitness to be of the class who are to enter 
with the Bridegroom before the door is shut. This is 
the essence of the Lord's instruction by this parable 
—that those who hope to enter into the Kingdom and 
share its glories with him must expect to make preparation 
in advance. If they wait until the moment 
for the door to close, however willing they may be, 
however anxious, they will not be prepared— the preparation 
requires time, patience, care. 

We meet continually those who give evidence of 
being true Christians, "virgins," pure of heart, of 
intention, who are considerably interested in the 
heavenly Bridegroom, in the gathering for the marriage 
supper, but who have little light upon these 
interesting subjects. They sometimes say to us, "Give 
us of your light, tell us how you know these things, 
why you feel so sure about them while others are 
asleep. We are awake enough, but our lamps give no 
light." We answer that it is impossible to give them 
faith in these things by proxy; that there is only one 
way to obtain the light, and that is through a patient, 
persevering study of the divine Word under the guidance 
of the holy Spirit. We inform them that patient 
perseverance in well doing, in Scriptural study, in 
cultivating the fruits and graces of the Spirit, are 
necessary in order to have this oil and its light. They 
express regret, for they are so overcharged with the 
cares of this life or the deceitfulness of riches, or family 
pride, or what not, that they have not the time to give 
to their spiritual development and the study of the 
Word. We are sorry and disappointed at such; we 
would that they could enjoy with us the blessings of 
a good supply of oil and the clear light of our lamps as 
they are now shining. We can do no more than tell 
them how and where the oil, the light, must be obtained. 
We must go on in our personal preparation 
and in our hastening to hold up our lights in our 
salutation of the Bridegroom, and expressions of joy 
in connection with his presence and the anticipated 
entrance with him to the marriage. 



"AND THE DOOR WAS SHUT" 

To our understanding the wise virgins have been 
entering into the marriage since the autumn of 1878, 
A.D., and are still entering in— passing beyond the 
vail, changed in a moment, "in the twinkling of an eye." 
(1 Cor. 15:52.) Soon the entire First Resurrection 

R3869 : page 314 

will be complete, the last member being changed. 
Then and there the door will be shut and no more will 
be permitted to enter. Thank God that this does not 
signify so dreadful a condition as some of the Lord's 
dear people think. It does not mean the close of the 
door of hope, and that all outside, the foolish virgins 
as well as the world, will go down to hopeless despair 
in the Second Death. It does mean, however, the close 
of the great and grand opportunity which will never 
open again— it signifies the completion of the Kingdom 
class, the Bride class, the close of the narrow way to 
glory, honor, immortality and joint-heirship with 
Christ. 

The foolish virgins go and buy the precious oil 
and get their lamps trimmed and burning, but too late 
for the marriage, too late to be of those who will be 
the Bride, the Lamb's wife. And thus in the parable 
it is represented that when they knock the Bridegroom 
will say, "I do not recognize you as being members 
of the Bride class; you must not come in." Instead 

R3869 : page 315 

of entering into the joys of the Lord with the others 

they will be permitted for a time at least to have their 

portion in the great time of trouble which will then 

prevail throughout the world; weeping and gnashing 

of teeth, sorrow, disappointment, chagrin, will be the 

portion not only of the foolish virgins but of all the 

families of the earth in that time. We are glad to know 

that that great day of trouble will prepare the world 

of mankind for the glorious conditions of the Millennial 

Kingdom, which will then shortly be ushered in. 

The Sun of Righteousness will arise with healing in its 

beams, and many people shall go and say, "Come, let 

us go up to the mountain of the Lord's house; he will 

teach us of his ways and we will walk in his paths. 

For the law shall go forth from Mount Zion [the glorified 

Kingdom, the heavenly Kingdom], and the Word 

of the Lord from Jerusalem [from the earthly representatives 

of the heavenly Kingdom]."— Mai. 4:2; 

Isa. 2:3. 

How inconsistent the thought that the folly of 
these virgins should not only exclude them from the 
Kingdom blessings, but that even after they get the 



oil of the holy Spirit later on they should be consigned 
to an eternity of torture or loss! How unreasonable! 
how inconsistent! On the contrary, how much in harmony 
with the general divine character and program 
is this parable as we have here pictured its fulfilment. 
We can sympathize with the foolish virgins while 
we cannot commend them, but must reprove them. 
We can look forward to the time when they, as the 
great company of Revelation 7, shall wash their robes 
and make them white in the blood of the Lamb, and be 
ushered into the presence of the Lord and the Bride 
and become, as represented in Psalm 45, the virgins, 
the Bride's companions and co-laborers in the Kingdom 
work— servants before the throne, where they might 
have been, by proper love and zeal and knowledge in 
the present time, members of the Bride class, in the 
throne. 

"NEITHER THE DAY NOR THE HOUR" 

Our Lord concludes the parable with the words, 
"Watch, therefore, for ye know neither the day nor 
the hour." The revised version omits from verse 13 
the words, "wherein the Son of man cometh," because 
these are not found in any of the old Greek MSS. The 
thought, however, is practically the same— Watch, 
because ye know neither the day nor the hour in which 
this parable will be fulfilled. The watching, no doubt, 
has been beneficial to the Lord's people all through 
the Gospel age, and is still more profitable to the wise 
virgin class of the present day, because it explains to 
these their circumstances, conditions, etc. All of the 
wise virgin class should be in the attitude commanded 
in this parable; they should have a knowledge of the 
fact that the Bridegroom is coming; they should have 
lamps and a full supply of oil. Those living in this 
ready condition will be neither alarmed nor surprised 
at the message when they hear it as it is now going forth, 
"Behold the Bridegroom is present." We are living in 
the parousia (presence) of the Son of Man— the wise 
virgins are already falling into line in the procession 
and entering in to the marriage; the full number will 
soon be found and the door will be shut. All in this 
watching attitude of heart, with the full measure of 
the Spirit of the Lord in their hearts will be very quickly 
attracted by the first intimation that the Bridegroom 
is present. These, trimming their lamps, examining 
the Scriptures, will quickly discern the truthfulness of 
the announcement, and speedily prepare and take their 
places with the wise virgins. The announcement, the 
truth upon this subject, is indeed a testing, proving 
which of the professed virgins of the Lord have the 
oil in their vessels, the right spirit of humility, patience, 
love, devotion, interest in the things of the Bridegroom. 
Such and such only are desired by the Bridegroom or 
will be permitted to enter. 



In view of this it is evident that our work in the 
present time is not only to proclaim the Bridegroom's 
presence but to assist those who have the oil in their 
vessels to trim their lamps. If it is not already too late 
to go to buy the oil it soon will be, and hence our special 
care should be in respect to those who have the oil of 
the Lord's Spirit but who are still asleep or drowsy 
and need to have an announcement of his presence 
brought kindly, patiently, perseveringly to their 
attention. 

It is not the supposition of the parable that when 
the time comes that the Bridegroom's presence is 
announced the virgins will not know of it. How could 
they trim their lamps and go out to meet him and go 
in with him without assurance of his presence? The 
watching suggested therefore by our Lord refers to the 
time prior to the presence. Those virgins who realize 
that the Bridegroom has come, those who have trimmed 
their lamps, those who have joined his procession, are 
not watching for his coming, but know of his presence, 
because that day and hour has come and has not found 
them unprepared, without sufficient oil. 

Let us praise God for the blessings and mercies 
already ours, and go on faithfully rejoicing in the light 
of our lamps and in the anticipation of the glorious 
nuptial feast and the later glorious work, with the 
Bridegroom, of blessing all the families of the earth. 
He that hath this knowledge will by it be separated 
more and more from the world and its spirit, and be 
gradually more and more transformed from glory to 
glory in the likeness of the Bridegroom. 



R3869 : page 315 

BEFORE CHRIST'S JUDGMENT SEAT 

--MATTHEW 25:14-30.-OCTOBER 21.- 

Golden Text:— "A faithful man shall 
abound with blessings."— Prov. 28:20. 

THE PARABLE of the pounds was uttered on the 

way to Jerusalem, the parable of the talents 

about five days later, on the Tuesday preceding 

our Lord's crucifixion, if Matthew's account is in consecutive 

order. The two parables, although similar in 

many respects, are different. One pound was given to 

each servant by a nobleman going into a far country 

to be invested with his kingly authority, and the servants 

each increased his trust in varying degrees. 

The parable of the talents now before us is different in 

R3869 : page 316 



that one received five talents, another two, another 
one— corresponding to the varying conditions of the 
Lord's people, mentally, morally, physically, socially, 
etc. Since one pound apiece was given it follows that 
the pounds could not represent talents, opportunities, 
which are very dissimilar. The pound must therefore 
represent something that is common to all of the Lord's 
people. 

The holy Spirit is common to all the Lord's people, 
but not in the same measure, since each must receive 
it according to his capacity; therefore the holy Spirit 
could not be represented by the pound. The Word of 
God is common to all of the Lord's people, but a natural 
ability to understand the Word of God is not the 
same in all the consecrated; hence the pound could 
not represent the Word of God, the divine revelation. 
One thing, and only one, we believe, is common to all 
of the Lord's people in every sense of the word, and 
that is justification. Justification is a gift of God 
through faith in the precious blood, and is common to 
every one accepted of the Lord. It compensates for 
his weaknesses and blemishes, whether they be few or 
many; it therefore in the most absolute sense represents 
the one important blessing of God bestowed upon 
his people. Upon the use of that "pound," that blessing, 
that entrusted gift, depends the Master's reward 
in the end. The proper use of it is an investment of 
it in the Lord's service in a full, hearty consecration of 
time, influence and all to the service of the Lord. Any 
failure to use our justification will signify a complete 
loss of everything hoped for in respect to the Kingdom 
blessings and privileges of this, Gospel age. By justification 
our powers, however humble, are made acceptable 
to the Lord as though we were perfect. And 
every service we are able to render has its merit or 
value in our justification. We are not forgetting that 
we previously (Dec. 1, 1900) applied these pounds as 
signifying the holy Spirit, etc., common to all of God's 
people. We still hold to that application with the limitation 
that the holy Spirit is reckoned to us only on the 
basis of our justification. Thus it is through our justification 
that we are complete in him who is the Head of 
the New Creation and partakers of his holiness of 
spirit. 

R3870 : page 316 

THE PARABLE OF THE TALENTS 

Our lesson today deals especially with the talents, 
which undoubtedly represent the opportunities and privileges 
of those consecrated servants of the Lord who 
throughout this Gospel age are accepted as followers of 
Jesus and laborers in the vineyard. It should be noticed 
that in no way the parable relates to the world, but 
merely to the Church. While the world has certain 



talents, privileges, opportunities, these are not at the 
disposal of the household, because the world by wisdom 
knows not God, is blind to his gracious offer that they 
may become his servants, co-laborers together with his 
Son. True, the world should recognize that it is 
bought with a price, even the precious blood of Christ, 
and that it would be a reasonable service to lay down 
time, talent, energy, influence in the service of the Redeemer. 
But the world is blind and cannot realize the 
situation at present. Its opportunity will come by and 
by, when the darkness shall have rolled away and the 
Sun of Righteousness shall shine forth to fully illuminate 
the situation and cause the knowledge of the Lord 
to fill the earth. 

There are various valuable lessons taught by this 
parable, and one of these is respecting the character 
of the Church's judgment. It is admitted that those 
who have become the Lord's bond-servants are possessors 
of various talents, powers, privileges and opportunities, 
some more and some less, and it is admitted 
that these were entrusted to them as the Lord's, and 
they were made the Lord's stewards after that they 
had recognized him and accepted him as their Master 
and consecrated themselves to his service. It should 
be clearly seen then just where the responsibility begins 
which will terminate when we stand before the 
judgment seat of Christ. 

True, whatsoever a man sows he will reap. Every 
noble desire or effort will bring reward, every wrong 
course a measure of punishment in the present life, 
even before we come into the attitude of the Lord's 
consecrated ones— "bond-servants." This is true not 
only of the consecrated but of the whole world, but the 
parable does not take in the world nor the affairs of 
the Church up to the time they became the Lord's servants. 
It merely deals with them subsequently— as 
the servants. It shows that in the day of reckoning 
the Lord will ignore the affairs of our lives which preceded 
our consecration, and will merely deal with, 
reckon with, judge us, according to our use or misuse 
of our consecrated time, influence, talents, etc. 

To realize these things clearly and distinctly 
should mean to every one of us renewed zeal and energy, 
and carefulness that the words of our mouths 
and the meditations of our hearts, and so far as possible 
all of life's conduct, might testify to our faithfulness 
in the use of talents and opportunities entrusted 
to us, and might bring us the Master's approval when 
our trial time shall come. As the Apostle declares, 
"Judgment [trial, testing] must begin at the house of 
God [the Church]." (I Pet. 4:17.) This, the parable 
before us shows, will be in the end of this Gospel age. 
This trial of the Church at its conclusion will demonstrate 
who are the Lord's elect, who shall be associated 
with Jesus in the great work of the future age, 
the Millennial age, namely, the judging of the world— 



—the giving of the world a trial or test to demonstrate 
whether or not under favorable conditions and with 
clear knowledge they would be obedient to the Lord or 
disobedient— that the obedient might be blessed with 
everlasting life in perfection and the wilfully disobedient 
be utterly destroyed from amongst the people.— 
Acts3:23. 

OUR VARYING TALENTS 

We sometimes hear the claim made that all men are 
born free and equal, but there could be no greater mistake 
than this. Men are indeed born free so far as 
liberty of thought, will or intention are concerned, the 
only limitation being their knowledge or lack of it. 
But they are not born physically free, mentally free 
nor morally free. There is an incumbrance, a mortgage 
of sin and death, upon the whole human family 
which has descended from father Adam. This mortgage 
is called the curse. Some bear a larger share of 
it than others by heredity, environment. The original 
image and likeness of God has thus been marred, measurably 
effaced. If we assume that Adam as a perfect 
man had ten talents, it would be quite appropriate to 
say that not one of his posterity today, after six thousand 

R3870 : page 317 

years of falling, had more than five talents, and 

the majority much less, two talents and one talent. It 

is safe to estimate the mass of mankind as one-talented 

by nature. These talents which we possess by nature 

were transferred and became the Lord's when we accepted 

him, gave him our hearts, consecrated our all 

to his service. 

A "talent" represented 3,000 shekels of silver, and 
the shekels in turn were the great and the small, representing 
in value in our money one thousand dollars 
or two thousand dollars. In the parable the servants 
are represented as trading with these, that is, working 
with them, using them. They were left free to exercise 
their best abilities with merely the general regulation 
that these were for use, and that their faithfulness 
would be represented in the results they would secure 
from using them. So it is with the Lord's consecrated 
people; we are not specially hampered by directions 
as to how we shall use our consecrated talents, powers, 
privileges, opportunities. The Lord has a great work 
for the future, and is less interested in what results we 
shall obtain from the use of our present talents than 
in the demonstration of our loyalty and zeal. The parable 
admits that our talents at present are inferior, 
not great in the sight of our Master, and that he seeks 
to see our diligence, our faithfulness to him and his 
cause. 



TWO VIEWS, BOTH TRUE 

We may view these talents and their use from two 
different standpoints, and both will be true. (1) Our 
natural talents may be considered, first, as representing 
wealth, influence, intellectual power, education 
and public utterance. The person possessed of all of 
these we might consider to be very richly endowed indeed, 
a five-talented person; very few are in this class. 
They possess grand opportunities and proportionately 
great responsibilities. With the proper zeal in the use 
of these talents such individuals would be a power for 
good in the body of Christ, the Church. The two-talented 
man might have intellectual power and the gift 
of public utterance, but be without education, wealth, 
influence, and correspondingly his ability would be 
less. Or he might have wealth and influence and lack 
the other qualities, or possess mental power and education 
and lack the talent of public utterance, influence 
and wealth. The one-talented man might have wealth 
or education or influence, but lacking the other qualities 
would be more or less handicapped. With the majority 
of the people, however, these matters might be 
considered slightly different: as, for instance, the one 
talent might be understood to represent a small degree 
of wealth, influence, education, mental caliber and public 
ability; the two-talented man might represent 
twice as much; the five-talented man five times as 
much. Viewed from this standpoint the use of our talents 
in the Lord's service should be increasing daily, 
and each one of his servants should be able to honor 
him more and serve his cause better in every sense of 
the word each day, each year. 

(2) These talents may be viewed from the standpoint 
of our spiritual qualities, meekness, gentleness, 
patience, brotherly kindness, love. All of the Lord's 
people come short in these graces of the Spirit 
because of our fallen inheritance; because we are 
born in sin, shapen in iniquity; because selfishness 
in all of its concomitant parts, arrogance, rudeness, 
unkindness, impatience, have in large measure 
obliterated the opposite qualities, which are the likeness 
of God. Hence some that are naturally much 
impaired and very selfish, in whom the various fruits 
of the Spirit are naturally much dwarfed, might be 
considered as those possessing only the one talent of 
spiritual power and Godlikeness; others, possessing 
more, would correspond to the man of two talents, and 
others possessing this quality still more would be five 
talented. From this view of the talents, the object of 
each of the Lord's servants should be to increase these 
fruits and graces of the Spirit in his own heart and 
life, and thus, by gaining the victory over selfishness 
and sin, to be more and more a copy of God's dear Son, 
and more and more prepared for cooperation with the 
King in the Kingdom for the blessing and instruction 



of the world. 

(3) The Lord has so arranged the matter that our 
talents, viewed from the two standpoints foregoing, in 
large measure combine. The person possessing the 
largest number of talents, abilities, opportunities, 
should be the person best qualified to rule his own 
spirit and to bring its every power into submission to 
the will of God, and to cultivate to the highest degree 
the fruits and graces of the Spirit. The Lord will 
doubtless measure us according to both of these standpoints, 
but we may be sure that eventually the chiefest 
of all gifts and blessings and talents in the Lord's 
sight is love— "Love is the principal thing." It will be 
only in proportion as love of God and for our fellow 
men shall have guided the use of our talents, whatever 
they may be, that they will be acceptable in the Lord's 
sight at all. 

RECKONING WITH THE SERVANTS 

In this parable the Lord clearly taught his disciples 
not to expect the end of the Gospel age very soon, for 
the statement is, "After a long time the Lord of those 
servants cometh and reckoneth with them." It was 
doubtless best everyway that the exact time for the 
ending of the Gospel age and the beginning of the 
Millennial age should not be made known until now 
that we are in this reckoning time. In the verse just 
preceding this lesson our Lord had cautioned his disciples 

R3871 : page 317 

to be faithful and to remember that they would 
not know the exact time of his return. But surely all 
of the servants will know of the Master's return at the 
time mentioned in this parable, after he has arrived 
and has begun to reckon with them. To our understanding 
this period of time was reached in A.D. 1878, 
and all of these servants of the Gospel age have been 
rendering their accounts since. First were the apostles 
and they who fell asleep in Christ throughout the 
Gospel age, because it is written that we which are 
alive and remain should not hinder, prevent, or take 
precedence of them that had fallen asleep. From our 
standpoint, then, the apostles and others of the Church 
have already passed the inspection that is here described, 
or rather the judgment of the Church is in 
progress and the decisions and rewards will not be 
given until the last members shall have passed beyond 
the vail to render their accounts; and this we understand 

R3871 : page 318 

will be accomplished some time before October, 
1914— quite possibly sooner. 
We are not to understand from the parable that all 



who have five talents will use them wisely, effectively, 
and hear the "Well done," nor that this will be the case 
with all who have two talents, nor that the greater number 
who possess but the one talent will all fail to use 
it. On the contrary, the parable is so arranged as to 
emphasize the responsibility of even those of the Lord's 
servants who have the smallest natural ability, whose 
consecrated powers are the most insignificant. If the 
one-talented man misusing his was disapproved, it 
goes without saying that the two-talented or five-talented 
would be even more reprehensible in the sight of 
their Lord. It goes without saying also that if the 
five-talented man succeeded and received a blessing 
and commendation and reward, the one-talented man 
succeeding would receive an equal blessing of approval 
and a proportionate share of the good things 
provided by the Master for the faithful. 

FAITHFULNESS DOUBLY REWARDED 

The parable shows the Master beginning with the 
more influential and rewarding faithfulness (1) with a 
share in his favor, the "joys of the Lord," and (2) with 
a rulership or control of larger blessings and opportunities 
and talents. This statement briefly outlines 
what is elsewhere more elaborately set forth, namely, 
that the chief blessing upon the Church will be the 
manifesting to them of divine favor and love as represented 
in the glory, honor and immortality with which 
they would be clothed upon when received into the 
divine presence as participators in the First Resurrection. 
If this were all the blessing how rich it would 
be! How wonderful the thought that for faithfulness 
for a few short years in so reasonable a service— the 
service of him who loved us and bought us with his own 
precious blood— we should be counted worthy of such 
great dignity, honor and blessing everlastingly! The second 
or additional blessing is the honor of the Kingdom, 
the dominion, the privilege and opportunity of being participators 
with our Lord Jesus in the glorious work of 
uplifting the world of mankind out of present sin-and-death 
conditions. How forceful is the statement, 
"Faithful over a few things, ruler over many things." 
How abundantly the Lord does reward all of our little 
efforts in the service of truth and righteousness— in his 
service— whatever our talents, few or many. 

HID TALENT IN THE EARTH 

The one-talent man of the parable is represented 
as being strictly honest; he had not wasted the talent, 
he had not used it in ministering to the flesh, in riotous 
living of any kind. He had kept it safe, and seemed to 
feel that his Lord would commend him and say, While 
you have not brought me any return I appreciate the 
fact that you exercised great care with the talent entrusted 



to you, and hid it and kept it safely, and that 

now you are able to return it. But not so. The Master 

was angry with him and said, "Thou wicked and 

slothful servant." The point of this reproof lies in 

the fact that these servants represented only the consecrated 

and not the world— in the fact that every consecrated 

child of God in his consecration vow has agreed 

to spend and to be spent in the Master's service, whatever 

his talents, whatever his power. 

This man was admitted to the Lord's family, made 
partaker of the holy Spirit and granted a relationship 
in the body of Christ only because of this consecration 
to do and to serve, to use, to spend, to be spent. 
Hence conduct that would not be reprehensible on the 
part of the world is a violation of his covenant on the 
part of this servant. Correspondingly a punishment is 
meted out to him— his talent, his opportunity, his privilege, 
whatever it was, shall be utterly taken from him, 
and he shall be permitted to go into the time of trouble 
with which this age will end— "There shall be weeping 
and gnashing of teeth"— there will be sorrow, disappointment, 
chagrin, in every sense of the word. The 
parable does not carry the matter further to show us the 
result of this time of trouble upon this class of servants, 
unfaithful to their vows of consecration, but 
other Scriptures show us that this is a numerous class, 
"a great company," who in the time of trouble will be 
awakened from their dreamy stupor to realize that they 
have been seriously at fault, and to earnestly, tearfully, 
painfully, repent and obtain divine forgiveness 
and ultimately "come up out of great tribulation, having 
washed their robes and made them white in the 
blood of the Lamb." (Rev. 7.) They will be before 
the throne, whereas the faithful servants will be in the 
throne; they will have palm branches because ultimately 
victorious, but those in the throne, the more 
faithful, will wear the crowns. 

It will be noticed that there are two grades of faithfulness: 
the servant who hid his Lord's talent in the 
earth was faithful in that he did not waste or squander 
it riotously, sinfully, viciously. He did not repudiate 
his Master either, for he still acknowledged himself as 
his servant and the talent as not his own. The higher 
faithfulness that in the parable was rewarded went beyond 
this and represented earnest, self-sacrificing zeal 
in the Master's cause. These in the parable are the same 
that are represented by the Lord through the Prophet, 
saying, "Gather together my saints unto me, those who 
have made a covenant with me by sacrifice." (Psa. 50:5.) 
"They shall be mine, saith the Lord, in that day when 
I come to make up my jewels." (Mai. 3:17.) This 
jewel class must all be sacrificers. This is their covenant 
with the Lord— that they will sacrifice, that they 
will use their talents, opportunities, privileges, favors, 
zealously in his service, in the service of his household, 
in the service of his cause, to the honor of his name. 



After entering into this covenant with him any 
other course of conduct would be properly, as in the 
parable, designated wicked and slothful. From this 
viewpoint it is to be feared that the class represented 
by this unfaithful servant is a large one, a great company. 
While still our term for rendering our accounts 
is future, while still the opportunity for using our time 
and influence and all in the Lord's service is with us, 
how it behooves every one who has made the covenant 
by sacrifice to be vigilant, energetic, that he may ultimately 
hear the Master's precious words, "Well done, 
good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joys of 
thy Lord. Thou hast been faithful in a few things, I 
will make thee ruler over many things." 

A father illustrated this principle to his child at 
the seashore by laying a silver dollar upon the beach 
within reach of the incoming waves. Soon the sands 
were covering it and it was out of sight: then before 

R3871 : page 319 

he allowed the child to dig it up he said, "Everything 

valuable that we allow to lie unused is soon buried by 

the tide of life as this dollar has been by the tide of 

the ocean." This is a good illustration: It is not necessary 

that we dig into the earth to bury the talent; if 

we simply allow it to lie unused it will soon be out of 

sight. 

RECEIVE THINE OWN WITH INTEREST 

The words interest and usury once had the same 
meaning, but in our day this has changed, and interest 
is that payment for the use of money which is deemed 
just and reasonable, while usury signifies an unjust 
and extortionate charge of interest, the result of taking 
advantage of some one's trouble or necessity. Usury, 
therefore, in our present use of the term, implies extortion, 
and is everywhere reprehensible. The Lord's 
people are everywhere warned that they shall not be 
extortioners or unjust. The loaning of money upon a 
reasonable rate of interest may at times be of advantage 
both to borrower and lender. Nevertheless the 
Lord's injunction to his people is along the lines of 
lending rather than borrowing— especially in opposition 
to borrowing where no security of value is given. 

The Lord uses this illustration of interest, increase, 
usufruct, to represent the increase which would under 
his providential guidance naturally and reasonably result 
from our proper exercise of the talents consecrated 
to his service. We may be sure that his arrangements 
are wise, and that whoever is not slothful in business 
but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, will find his 
talents increasing to his own pleasure and profit and 
to the Master's honor. 



ONE TALENT FAITHFULLY USED 

When we remember that the large majority of the 
Lord's people are of necessity one talented, we feel 
especial interest in a little verse by John L. Shorey, 
which illustrates a faithful one-talented person. We 
quote it as follows:— 

"He couldn't sing and he couldn't play, 
He couldn't speak, and he couldn't pray, 
He'd try to read, but break right down, 
Then sadly grieve at smile or frown. 
While some with talents five began, 
He started out with only one. 
'With this,' he said, 'I'll do my best, 

R3872: page 319 

And trust the Lord to do the rest.' 

His trembling hand and tearful eye 

Gave forth a world of sympathy, 

When all alone with one distressed, 

He whispered words that calmed that breast. 

"And little children learned to know, 
When grieved and troubled, where to go. 
He loved the birds, the flowers, the trees, 
And, loving him, his friends loved these. 
His homely features lost each trace 
Of homeliness, and in his face 
There beamed a kind and tender light 
That made surrounding features bright, 
When illness came he smiled at fears, 
And bade his friends to dry their tears; 
He said, 'Good-bye,' and all confess 
He made of life a grand success." 



R3872: page 319 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY ON LOVE 
-SEE COMMENTS IN OUR JULY 1 ISSUE- 
SEPT. 30 

39. Would it be showing partiality to manifest different 
degrees of love? Z. '02-198 (1st col. par. 1 to 3); 
Z.'05-92(lstcol. par. 2). 

40. How may we "consider one another to provoke unto 
love"? Heb. 10:24; F.308. 

41. How should we apply the Golden Rule? Matt. 22:39; 
Z/99-72 (1st col. par. 1); F.375, 376; Z/98-199 

(1st col. par. 2, 2nd col. par. 1, 2); Z. '02-188 (2nd col.) 
to 189 (1st col. par. 2). 



42. How may love exercise combativeness? Z. '05-216 
(1st col. par. 1 to 2nd col. par. 2). 

OCT. 7 

43. How should the spirit of love control the tongue? 
F.291, par. 1, 2; Z/01-398 (2nd col. par. 2, 3); F.587, 
par. 1, 2. 

44. What should be our attitude toward all our fellow 
creatures? Rom. 13:8; Z. '03-121 (1st col. par. 2); 
Z/95-74 (1st col. par. 3, 4); Z/02-187 (2nd col. par. 1) 
to 188 (1st col. par. 3). 

45. What is the significance of the warning, "Love not 
the world"? 1 John 2:15,16; Z.'96-66,67; F.604, 

par. 2, to 606, par. 2. 

46. How should we examine ourselves lest our "heart" 
deceive us? F.600, par. 2, to 602, par. 2. 

OCT. 14 

47. After having reached "the mark," is activity still 
essential? Z.'01-10 (2nd col. par. 2); F.190, par. 1, 2; 
F.373,par. 2,3. 

48. What should be the leading characteristic of an 
Elder? Titus 1:7,8; Z/99-74 (2nd col. par. 1); 
F.251,par. 2. 

49. How does love enable us to be "comforters in Zion"? 
Z/04-292 (2nd col. par. 1 to 3); 296 (1st col. par. 2); 
Z/04-121 (1st col. par. 1);Z.'05-311 (1st col. par. 3. 

and 2nd col.). 

50. Why is love one of the "tests of the harvest"? Z. '04-297 
(2nd col. par. 2). 

OCT. 21 

51. Will our love be proven and tested to the utmost? 
Deut. 13:3; Z/98-40 (2nd col. par. 1); F.369, par. 1. 

52. Why does the Apostle rank patient-endurance above 
even love? Z. '01-1 16 (2nd col. par. 1) to 117 (1st 

col.). 

53. How will the law of love operate during the Millennial 
Age? Z/98-202; Z/01-39 (2nd col. par. 1, 2). 

54. What is the bond of oneness in the Divine Family? 
F.467, par. 3, to 469; Z/03-77; Z/05-139 (1st col. 

par. 2) to 140. 

OCT. 28 

55. What was the greatest manifestation of love toward 
man on the part of him who "is love"? 

1 John 4:9; John 3:16; Z.'00-3 11 (2nd col. par. 4); 
Z/04-53 (1st col. last par.); E.462, par. 1, to 463, par. 2. 

56. How should the contemplation of Jesus' life help us 
to "abide in the Father's love"? Z. '02-172 (2nd 

col. par. 2). 

57. What special experiences and practices have notably 



assisted you in developing more of the spirit 
of love? 



page 321 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVII OCTOBER 15 No. 20 
A.D., 1906-A.M., 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 323 

The Heavens Shall Roll Together 323 

A Few National Reform Utterances 323 

A Remarkable Forecast 324 

The Gathering of the Churches 324 

"She Hath Done What She Could" 330 

Anointed for His Burial 331 

Selfishness vs. Generosity 332 

"This Do in Remembrance of Me" 333 

"Take Eat; This is My Body" 333 

"Drink Ye all of It" 334 

New Wine in the Kingdom 334 

For the Remission of Sins 335 

page 322 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



Colporteurs will please use our Order blanks and direct 
letters to "Colporteur Department." 

NEW MOTTO CARDS 

We have new full lines of Motto Cards, put up in $1 packages. 
If you desire large cards, so specify; otherwise we will 
send the medium and small sizes and the more of them. We 
supply these at about cost. German Mottoes ($1 pks.) we send 
direct from Germany. 

WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT SPIRITISM? 
WHO ARE THE SPIRITS IN PRISON? AND WHY ARE THEY THERE? 

This booklet is now ready and will be supplied at 10 cents 
each: wholesale rates 50 cents per dozen are open to all TOWER 
readers who may desire to circulate these among their friends. 
In leatherette binding, 25 cents. Prices include postage. 

"VOLUNTEER" TOWERS IN SWEDISH 

We have good quantities of Swedish literature for general 
circulation as Volunteer matter. We cannot send these by 
mail except in small lots, but where 2000 or more are ordered 
in one lot we can send by freight, charges prepaid. Order all 
you can use judiciously amongst the Swedish people of your 
neighborhood. 



R3872 : page 323 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE HEAVENS SHALL ROLL TOGETHER 



IT is interesting to those who see the approaching Federation 

of Christian churches, as set forth in the 

Bible, to note the various little straws which denote 

the gradual change of sentiment on the part of the public 

into harmony with what the Bible teaches us to expect. 

For instance, how strange it seems that Presbyterians 

and Congregationalists, after fighting so long against 

all forms and ceremonies and liturgies and "printed 

prayers," should now be adopting these. The 

Congregationalist attitude toward the Church of 

England's Book of Common Prayer is thus set forth in 



their new 
BOOK OF LITURGY FOR CONGREGATIONAL SERVICE 

The Congregational attitude toward the English 
Book of Common Prayer is thus expressed by one of the 
leaders in that body: 

"Our real inheritance is in the English Book of 
Common Prayer, which gathered up the best elements 
of the service books of its time, both historic and reformed, 
and was the possession of the undivided 
English Church from which we derive. Our fathers 
used their liberty in discarding it. If we mean to 
return to written forms, we shall be using our liberty if 
we return to it, or such a modification of it as shall suit 
our modern life. We shall impoverish and not enrich 
ourselves by stepping further outside of the tradition of 
the whole Church. 

"The time is ripening for such a revision of the Book 
of Common Prayer as may serve our need."— (New Haven) 
Journal and Courier. 

A FEW NATIONAL REFORM UTTERANCES 



"We want State and religion; and we are going to 
have it."— Jonathan Edwards, D.D. In other words, 
they want a State religion. 

"Constitutional laws punish for false money, 
weights, and measure. So Congress must establish a 
standard of religion, or admit anything called religion." 
—Prof. C. A. Blanchard. And this will mean an established 
religion. 

"Our remedy for all these malefic influences is to 
have the government simply set up the moral law, and 
recognize God's authority behind it, and lay its hand 
on any religion that does not conform to it."— Rev. M. 
A. Gault. And this means religious persecution. 

They desire an amendment to the Constitution 
that will "place all the Christian laws, institutions, and 
usages of our Government on an undeniable legal basis 
in the fundamental law of the land."— Art. 2 of their 
Constitution. That is, they desire the Christian religion 
made the "legal" religion of the nation. 

"Those who oppose this work now will discover, 
when the religious amendment is made to the Constitution, 
that if they do not see fit to fall in with the majority, 
they must abide the consequences, or seek some 
more congenial clime."— Dr. David McAlister. This is 
what Rome said after Christianity, so-called, became 
the established religion of this empire. Justinian told 
the people that if they did not embrace the established 
religion, confiscation and other punishments would 
follow. 

"Give us good Sunday laws, well enforced by men 



in local authority, and our churches will be full of worshipers, 

and our young men and women will be attracted 

to the divine service. A mighty combination 

of the churches of the United States could win from 

Congress, the State legislatures, and municipal councils, 

all legislation essential to this splendid result."— Rev. 

S.V. Leech, D.D. 

A young man recently from Russia attending a 
Baptist Church service at which a resolution was offered 
urging legislation on the Sunday question arose and 
said: 

"I am from Russia, the land of intolerance, the 
land of a union of Church and State. I have seen the 
scars on the wrists of the missionaries whom you sent 
to my country,— scars made by chains placed on them 
by Russia's union of Church and State. I joined the 
Baptist Church in Russia because it trusted in God, not 
in the State. And now I come to America and enter my 
beloved Baptist Church, and hear you petitioning Congress 
for a law to bind chains on the wrists of your 
fellowmen. In the name of God, send your petitions to 

R3873 : page 324 

the throne of God, and not to the Congress of the United 
States." 

A REMARKABLE FORECAST 



In a sermon, in the year 1846, Charles Beecher 
declared: 

"The ministry of the evangelical Protestant denominations 
is not only formed all the way up under 
a tremendous pressure of merely human fear, but they 
live, and move, and breathe in a state of things radically 
corrupt, and appealing every hour to every baser element 
of their nature to hush up the truth, and bow the 
knee to the power of apostasy. Was not this the way 
things went with Rome? Are we not living her life over 
again? And what do we see just ahead?— Another 
general council! A world's convention! evangelical 
alliance, and universal creed!" 

When this state of things shall have been reached, 
then, in the effort to secure complete uniformity, it 
will be only a step to the resort to force. 

The following striking paragraphs show how 
another, with remarkable foresight, outlined this federation 
movement years ago: 

"There has been for years, in churches of the 
Protestant faith, a strong and growing sentiment in 
favor of a union based upon common points of doctrine. 
To secure such a union, the discussion of subjects upon 
which all were not agreed— however important they 
might be from a Bible standpoint— must necessarily 



be waived." 

"When the leading churches of the United States, 
uniting upon such points of doctrine as are held by them 
in common, shall influence the State to enforce their 
decrees and to sustain their institutions, then Protestant 
America will have formed an image of the 
Roman hierarchy, and the infliction of civil penalties 
upon dissenters will inevitably result." 

OUR OWN TESTIMONY ON THIS SUBJECT 

Our older readers will recall that, so long ago as 
Oct. 1881, this journal set forth that this Church 
Federation as the "image of the beast" (Rev. 13), 
was constructed in The Evangelical Alliance organized 
in 1846; and that the giving of life or living power to 
this federation might be expected by now, and that 
shortly it would prove its likeness to the original papal 
system which it imaged by violent suppression of the 
truth and persecution of its defenders. In all these 
twenty-five years the matter has been ripening, though 
nothing then seemed farther from realization. Our 
presentation on the subject in Millennial Dawn Vol. 
III., p. 1 19, is or should be in the hands of all of our 
readers. 



R3873 : page 324 

THE GATHERING OF THE CHURCHES 

-BY EUGENE WOOD- 

WE QUOTE the following from the columns of 
Everybody's Magazine, not by way of endorsing 
it, but because it gives a fairly good 
view of the way the "worldly wise" look at matters; 
and in order to the better point out the writer's 
erroneous view. Introducing the article the editor of 
Everybody's says; 

"We asked Eugene Wood, whose frank article on 
consumption set people thinking intelligently about 
the white plague, to attend the two religious conferences 
organized to discuss the unification of the 
churches, and to report what he saw and heard. This 
is his report. It is presented exactly for what it is— 
the individual impressions and thoughts of a plain-spoken 
man, who is himself a believer, but who takes 
the ground that Christianity is greater than dogma and 
more important than its sects. We submit this article 
to you, our readers, not as a contribution to theological 
controversy, for that has no place here, but in the 
sincere belief that a little "talking out in meeting" 
now and then will help the Christianity most of us 
profess, and aid morality and virtue. There are many 



new things in the world to-day. Thought is a living 
and growing thing. Modern scientific investigation 
has lightened up dark places in the annals of the race 
and we are all looking at life through different peep-holes 
from those through which our grandfathers viewed the 
eternal problem. Knowing more of the beginnings of 
religion than our ancestors, and realizing as we must 
that other men in other lands are thinking about the 
selfsame problems that are our concern, it is impossible 
not to believe that the God our forefathers regarded as 
a private possession of their particular sect is the God 
of the Chinese and the Hindus and the Mohammedans, 
as well as of us Americans and Europeans. As our 
outlook widens, we begin to see that the spirit of the 
Sermon on the Mount is of higher consequence than 
the Apostles' Creed, and that though forms may differ, 
most honest men, be they Buddhists or Confucians, 
Protestants or Roman Catholics, are struggling toward 
the same goal, looking up at the same stars, 
praying to the same God and for much the same 
things." 

The writer, Eugene Wood, takes as his text the 
words of Prof. Goldwin Smith, and begins: 

"This anxious gathering of the churches shows that 
they believe a religious crisis to be at hand. It is also a 
social crisis." 

Two extremely significant, not to say portentous, 
conferences, with apparently the same underlying purpose, 
were held in November last on nearly coincident 
dates, the New York State Conference of Religion at 
Rochester, 13th- 14th, and the Inter-Church Conference 
on Federation, in Carnegie Hall, New York City, 
15th-21st. 

To say that the underlying purpose of both conferences 
was to further the unity (either after the flesh 
or after the spirit) of the many dissident religious 
bodies will not be vividly interesting to the public at 
large. It might have been fifty years ago, when there 
wasn't much else to talk about, but being absorbed in 
weightier matters than differences of opinion as to the 
orthodox way to sharpen a lead pencil, or whether 
wetting the top of a man's head is more efficacious than 
having the water run out of his shoe-tops, the public 
has long ago dismissed the subject as impracticable and 

R3873 : page 325 

unprofitable. It is perhaps a little late in the day to 
query: Why separate organizations for the Reformed 
Church in America and the Reformed Church in the 
United States of America? Why a Presbyterian 
Church, and a Reformed Presbyterian Church, and a 
United Presbyterian Church, and a Welsh Presbyterian 
Church, and a Cumberland Presbyterian Church, and 
so on, to the end of the chapter? Why the colored 
Methodist Episcopal Church in America, and an 



African Methodist Episcopal Church, and an African 
Methodist Episcopal Zion Church? There is a Methodist 
Episcopal Church and a Methodist Episcopal 
Church South (and, I am told, some Methodist Episcopal 
churches in Baltimore that are neither one nor 
the other, but kind of betwixt and between), between 
whom there is no difference in doctrine or polity, but 
only a soreheaded poutiness about a quarrel fifty years 
old, settled forever by the rude arbitrament of war, as 
to whether the negro was ordained of God to work only 
for his board and keep, or for wages that will just about 
pay for his board and keep, if he is lucky in getting jobs 
and careful with his money. 

Conferences to make up the clothes-line fusses 
between Mrs. Cassidy and Mrs. Ryan would possess 
about the same interest for the general public, were it 
not for the notable fact that it sometimes happens that 
more comes out of the bag than was put into it. This 
is my only excuse for blackening good white paper to 
tell you what happened in Rochester and in Carnegie 
Hall on the dates I have given. 

THE PLAN OF FEDERATION 

Not by way of reporting so much as by way of 
refreshing your recollection, I will say that the Inter-Church 
Conference on Federation adopted a Plan. 
Delegates from some thirty evangelical bodies voted 
for it, and the legislative assemblies of these thirty 
religious bodies will ratify the Plan in due season, provided 
it doesn't prevent their sharpening their lead-pencils 
their own orthodox way. Then they will elect 
members of the Federal Council, four for each denomination, 
and one in addition for each 50,000 communicants. 
This Federal Council will meet for business in 
December, 1908, and once every four years thereafter. 
So there won't anything be done precipitately; we can 
rest easy as to that. "The Federal Council shall have no 
authority over the constituent bodies adhering to it; 
but its province shall be limited to the expression of its 
counsel, and the recommending of a course of action in 
matters of common interest to the churches, local 
councils, and individual Christians. It has no authority 
to draw up a common creed, or form of government 
or worship, or in any way to limit the full autonomy of 
the Christian bodies adhering to it." So we need not 
fear drastic action; we may rest easy as to that. 

To the objection that this seems a rather tenuous 
bond of union one may say that mighty empires have 
been formed of States whose first coming together was 
quite as— er— quite as— well, "cage-y." To speak of 
"Christian bodies adhering" to such a confederacy 
seems rather a brilliant metaphor than a precise statement, 
but we shall see— what we shall see. It's all 
over until 1908, anyhow. *** 



MANY SECTS-ONE RELIGION 

Membership in the Inter-Church Conference on 
Federation was representative. The delegates went 
there and voted, not as they thought as individuals, 
but as they thought their denominations thought, 
which is the same as what the most unprogressive of 
their denominations thought, the Uncle Billy Hardheads 

R3874 : page 325 

with ear-trumpets up there in the front seats. 
The fact that membership in the New York State Conference 
of Religion was individual, and that a man went 
there to represent himself, made all the difference in 
the world between the two conferences. At Rochester 
they didn't formulate a plan. I think all the voting 
that was done was on whether they should thank the 
city of Rochester for its hospitality, and whether they 
should accept the kind invitation to go to Schenectady 
the next time. Clergymen and laymen from the dissident 
bodies, Christian and Jewish, were present and 
spoke. The motto of this conference was "Religions 
are many; religion is one," and the effort was not so 
much to arrive at corporal union; not so much to constitute 
a council which should have no authority to do 
more than say that it looks like rain but may clear up 
after all, as to declare that spiritual kinship subsists of 
itself and without formulated effort— kinship not only 
between the Reformed Church in America and the 
Reformed Church in the United States of America; 
between evangelicals and the misguided but well-meaning 
creatures who think there is no hell; but also 
between Catholics and Protestants, between Christians 
and Jews— nay, more, between those whose heritage 
is the Bible, and Mohammedans, Buddhists, Jains, 
Parsees, Confucianists, Shintoists, Brahmins, even those 
who "in their blindness bow down to wood and stone. 

GOD IN IDEAL OR IDOL 

There were none of these latter present, but they 
would have been welcomed if they had come, for at this 
conference it was seen that whether a man forms a god 
with his hands and it is called an idol, or forms one with 
his mind and it is called an ideal, the Father of us all, 
in whom we live and move and have our being, knows 
how it is with us: how we grope in the darkness that is 
about us if haply we may find him. And the homage 
we pay to his broken reflection in idol or ideal he takes 
unto himself as he spake by the mouth of his prophet 
Malachi, saying, "In every place incense is offered unto 
my name, and a pure offering, for my name is great 
among the heathen, saith the Lord of Hosts." 

[This the Revised Version of Malachi 1:11, is not 



in our judgment correct. The Common Version reads: 
shall be instead of is, and thus agrees with facts and 
other Scriptures. See I Cor. 10:20. --Editor Z.W.T.] 

ROMAN CATHOLIC APPROVAL 

The air at this Rochester Conference was clearer, 
freer of the smoke of Smithfield and Geneva. Said one 
good soul: "It is of more importance that I shall understand 
your position than that you shall understand 
mine." You couldn't jaw with that man because he 
doesn't sharpen a lead-pencil the way you do. As a 
result of that spirit at Rochester, Jews learned that 
Christians, for all their insistence upon the Three Persons 
in the Godhead, can say with them the Sh'ma 
Israel, "Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is 
One," and Christians learned from Jews that Jesus was 
a typical Jew, and that what divides the creeds is not 

R3874 : page 326 

his teachings, but concessions made to heathen 
Europe afterward. 

It is matter for regret that at Rochester and at 
Carnegie Hall there was no representation of either the 
Roman Catholic Church, whose membership is estimated 
at about one-eighth of the entire population of the 
country (certainly one-third of the entire population of 
New York City is Roman Catholic), or of that unorganized 
but perhaps even larger body known as the 
Big Church, whose members loaf around home Sundays 
and read the paper. Of these two great bodies, the 
Big Church stayed away probably because it feels much 
as Noah did when a storm began to blow up. And the 
Roman Catholic Church stayed away because it knows 
there won't be much of a shower, anyway. If there 
were, there would be something about it in the "Summa 
Theologiae" of St. Thomas Aquinas. I haven't seen 
what the Roman Catholics have said of the Rochester 
Conference, but the Boston Pilot approved of the stand 
taken for the divinity of Jesus by the Federation Conference 
(meaning the shutting of the door in the face of 
the Unitarians), and the Rev. Morgan M. Sheedy in 
another Catholic paper commended the irenic spirit 
which prompted the gathering, and mentioned the significant 
fact that Catholics and Protestants found 
themselves able to cooperate in good works, as in 
associated charities. The purpose of the Federation, 
by the way, is "to promote catholic unity," but 
"catholic" and "Catholic" are not quite the same. 
Not quite. 

BIG CHURCH DOCTRINE 

The Big Church would have approved the Rochester 
Conference the more heartily of the two. For 



instance, Rabbi Schulman, of the Temple Beth-El, of 
New York, in his paper, "Our Definition of Religion," 
said that "religion is human life lived in the presence of 
God." Prof. Joseph Leighton, of Hobart College, in 
the discussion following, denied that the idea of God 
was necessary to religion, which in his turn he defined as 
"the tendency of personality to enlarge itself, the persistent 
demand for the ideal by the actual. Religion 
represents the demands of the individual for ideal 
environment," differing from philosophy mainly in 
method. This does not violently contradict the creed 
of the Big Church. 

But the most radical expression at the Rochester 
Conference was that of the Rev. Algernon Crapsey, 
D.D., rector of St. Andrew's Episcopal Church of that 
city. He was replying to the Rev. Dr. Josiah L. Strong, 
who had argued that in order that the coming generation 
should seek after righteousness of conduct it 
behooved us to see to it that the public schools taught 
these three formal dogmas: The existence of God, the 
immortality of the soul, and the future accountability 
of all men. (By the way, I hear that the proposition 
to split the kindlings for Dr. Crapsey's bonfire was 
defeated by a vote of three to two.) 

In this discussion he said: "I must take issue with 
Dr. Strong. The remedy he proposes is impracticable, 
and the three dogmas of the existence of God, the immortality 
of the soul, and the future accountability of 
all men are without ethical value. The Mohammedan 
believes all three far more devoutly, far more earnestly 
than the average Christian, and because he believes he 
murders Christians. The Russian believes all three, 
and because he believes he massacres the Jews. Those 
who have been prominent in the conduct of affairs, 
those whose wealth threatens the country now, are 
firm believers in the three propositions. If you were to 
pick out a man to-day who stands firmest for these 
three things it would be the Master of Standard Oil. 

"Every man's God— for 'God' is an abstract term 
—every man's God is the exact reflection of that man's 
moral nature. He makes his God in his own image. 
It is impossible to do otherwise. Therefore, a man's 
God to any human mind is simply the measure of his 
own ethical progress. Therefore, you will get in the 
name of God every sort of action from the sacrifice of a 
man's son upon an altar to the sacrifice of himself upon 
the cross. 

"To teach the existence of God is not to advance at 
all. It is the same with belief in man's immortality, 
because a man's notion of the life he is to live beyond 
will exactly correspond with the life he is living now. 
When we think of immortality it is with the idea of continuation, 
going on and doing the same things we are 
doing now. We seek to keep on in our own personality, 
we shrink from annihilation; our picture of the life 
beyond is a reproduction of the life we are living here. 



It is without ethical value. 

ORTHODOX INSURANCE THIEVES 

"So with the accountability of man," continued 
Dr. Crapsey. "Our notion of how we are to account for 
ourselves will accord with our ethical conception of 
what we do here. I do not think for a moment that 
those gentlemen lately so much spoken of in the public 
prints have been disturbed in their sleep, because I have 
known some of them. Those men who have taken 
$150,000 a year for not knowing anything about life-insurance 
are all real believers in God, in their own immortality 
and accountability, but their understanding 
of it is such that they can account for every dollar they 
have taken; can account to themselves, and thus 
account to God." 

That's Big Church doctrine, pretty High, perhaps, 
certainly very much Higher than Bob Ingersoll. As 
for Tom Paine— oh, well, he was a Low Churchman, 
away 'way down Low. That is, he would be nowadays. 
The essence of their doctrines is the same: That belief 
in the supernatural has no influence on conduct. But 
hark to this that follows from Dr. Crapsey: "We are 
living to-day in the midst of a great dissolution. We 
are standing by the death-bed of a great religion." That's 
Big Church through and through. 

In the discussion following, the Rev. Nelson Millard, 
D.D., said that the students of parochial schools 
where the teaching of religion is an emphatic factor were 
not more moral than those of the so-called "godless" 
public schools. He added: "In the South there is a 
very bad state of morals. Yet the South is most 
orthodox. The three points of belief in God, the immortality 
of the soul, and the future accountability of 
all men are well understood. Also, it is a demonstrated 
fact that Mammon is unimpeachably orthodox." 

AN IMMINENT CRISIS 

The Rev. Dr. Strong in closing said that he had 
been making investigations himself, and he had found 
that the hundred richest men in the United States who 
had the greatest influence in the financial world are 

R3874 : page 327 

almost without exception orthodox Church members. 

Here, at any rate, more came out of the bag than 
was put into it. What has this assumption that Mammon 
is immoral, no matter how orthodox it may be; 
what has this statement that this is an "age of dissolution," 
and that "we are standing by the death-bed of a 
great religion," to do with finding a common ground of 
unity of all faiths? What has it to do with federating 
the churches, and trying to get the scuffling sects at 



home to show the same table-manners that they do in 
the missionary field, where they do not all grab for the 
same piece at once, but carve the turkey so that it will 
go all around? Very much, very much indeed to do 
with it. "This anxious gathering of the churches 
shows that they believe a religious crisis to be at hand. 
It is also a social crisis." 

The Inter-Church Conference was less moved by 
this impending crisis than that at Rochester. Its 
getting together was more numerous and prolonged, 
but that was all. It was right after the elections, when, 
as you recollect, men heard the voice of God speaking 
through the people as it had never been heard before. 
The earth was still trembling with it. The laymen who 
spoke had much to say about the "awakened heart and 
conscience of the people" and the "new impulse toward 
civic righteousness," but all that got entirely by the 
reverend clergy, white-headed within and without. 
Their latest news on any subject is dated 1859. 

THE CLERGY BEHIND THE TIMES 

Apparently they could not discern the signs of the 
times. If they saw at all, they saw only that the 
evening sky of a dying day shines redly through the 
gloom. They wist not that it promises that the morrow 
shall be fair, fairer than earth has ever seen before. I 
heard one gentleman with a white tie whose theme was 
"Labor and Capital" make a fervent and a loud appeal 
for "a fair day's wages for a fair day's work," the open 
Bible, and the public schools. I am sure if he had had 
more time he would have said a good word for wearing 
rubbers when it is wet. And a bishop who may be 
described as the most extinct of his species squabbled 
and scolded at apartment-houses as destroyers of the 
home, and denounced the law by which a woman tied 
to a drunken, worthless hound may free herself and her 
children from him. 

To tell the honest truth, it wasn't much better at 
Rochester. The paper read that attracted the keenest 
attention was that of the Rev. Washington Gladden, 
D.D., on "The Relations of Moral Teachers to Predatory 
Wealth." He said that "predatory wealth" was that 
which has been "gained by plunder rather than by 
legitimate commerce, and which is used to promote the 
facilities of plunder. It has not been won by open and 
honorable competition, but by getting unfair and generally 
unlawful advantages; by secret agreements and 
rebates; by the liberal use of money to corrupt legislation 
and to subsidize the press; by using trust funds 
for private purposes; by arts which corrupt character 

and destroy the foundations of the social order 

It is childish," he urged, "to deny the existence of a 
class of rich men whose presence is a menace to liberty 

and a blight upon the national life The battle of 

the mart is often fierce, and men are often tempted to be 



hard and false and cruel. But the ordinary American 
manufacturer is not in intent, or in fact, a thief or a 

plunderer We may admit that he is not a 

saint, but he is not a pirate, and there are a number of 
things he will not do to win a fortune." 

And so on. The moral teacher, this being the case, 
must carefully distinguish between millions made 
honestly and millions made piratically. The truth is 
that "tainted money" taken by the moral teacher 
for his Church or charity or college does more 
harm than it does good. It isn't like taking the contributions 
of a gambler or the keeper of a house 
of ill-fame, because they are under the ban, and 
it is understood that whatever gifts they give will not 
take off the curse. But the predatory rich ought to be 
under the ban and are not. They are applauded, 
flattered, and courted; they sit in the seats of the 
mighty, which is an awful miscarriage of justice. 

Dr. Gladden's economics may be summed up by 
the statement that you have a right to beat your wife, 
only you mustn't hit her with a wagon-spoke. The 
moral teacher and panhandler may take the money 
gained by "open and honorable competition," but he 
must give back that "gained by plunder." 

GRAFT IN THE WAGE SYSTEM 

"Open and honorable competition!" What do 
our "moral teachers" think the scuffle for a living is? 
A game of tiddledywinks? If two starving men see a 
loaf of bread, is it going to be "After you, my dear 
Alphonse"? And if the two starving men see one job 
of work, will one give way to the other or will each 
underbid the other until the man that gets the job 
makes out of it just enough to keep him going? Part of 
what the Federation of Churches is to do when it gets 
started is to denounce "graft." Indeed, but what's 
the whole wage system but graft? What are profits 
but the difference between what a man earns and what 
he can live on, that difference going to his employer as a 
tip, a gratuity, a bribe— graft, if you please? And 
this employer must enter into "open and honorable 
competition" with others in the same business. Tell 
me, you American merchants and manufacturers whom 
Dr. Gladden praises so, how is it with you? Is it 
"After you, my dear Alphonse," or is it "Dog eat dog"? 
You know well enough what you hate to do and yet what 
you've got to do or go out of business. You've no 
illusions about "open and honorable competition." 
Is there such a thing? Tell me. Honestly now 

CHURCH COMPETITION 

If there were, we'll say, a dozen factories in a given 
trade, each outfitted with an expensive plant and a long 
salary list, but just managing to scrape along, working 



on half-time, we should see something doing in the 
reorganizing line right suddenly. It calls for no great 
intellect to see the similarity of a dozen denominations 
in a town, all outfitted with expensive plants, churches 
with stained-glass windows, altars, pulpits, organs, 
pews, carpets, Bibles, hymn-books, prayer-books, 
lesson-leaves; officered with pastors, lay-readers, 
organists, choristers, teachers, vestries, ushers, sextons, 
and Ladies' Aids; heated, lighted, swept, and garnished; 
running on one-seventh time and a little while after 
supper on Wednesday evenings, to very light business; 
all in debt up to the roots of their noses, and all grabbing 

R3875 : page 328 

after any stranger that appears. (I must tell you of a 
personal experience of mine. I was in my shirt sleeves 
and ragged trousers, opening up the barrel that had the 
dishes in it, when the bell rang. The gentleman in 
black I found at the door apologized for interrupting 
before we had got settled in our new home. "But," 
said he, "there's so much competition nowadays, I 
thought I'd call early and ask you to come to our 
Church.") 

The fruits of competition are skimped wages and 
scamped wares. Did you ever have to look to a vestry 
or the Church trustees for your money? I hope not. 
I know a very fine young man who, a little while ago, 
contemplated taking holy orders. His mother was 
distressed to death about it. It was terrible for her to 
think of him just throwing his life away, as you might 
say. And that brings me to another personal reminiscence. 
The rector of the parish went past the barber 
shop. "A fine man," I said to the barber. And he 
was, too, the finest all-around man I think I ever knew. 
"Yes," said the barber, "a fine man— in a mighty poor 
business. I'd be ashamed to get my living that way." 

CLERGYMEN AND CHURCH FAIRS 

And the barber isn't the only one of that opinion. 
Once in a while you get an inkling of what the clergy 
think about it themselves. Do you suppose when they 
were in the seminary, all on fire with high and holy 
enthusiasm for the souls of men, they ever thought it 
would come to trotting from hen-party to hen-party, 
from the Ladies' Aid to the Helping Hand; to rigging 
up catchpenny devices wherewith to get in the winter's 
coal, or pay the interest on the debt; to naming committees 
who should "mace" the department stores and 
the neighborhood groceries for contributions to the 
fancy-goods counter and the household counter, cash 
if you can get it, but if not, something to sell chances 
on? Do you suppose they like to do that? I know 
that some won't allow chances to be sold at Church 
fairs. They say it's gambling. I don't admire a gambler 



greatly, but I guess I think full as well of him as I do 
of a beggar. 

Do you suppose the clergy like to do this sort of 
thing? Not more than you, American merchant and 
manufacturer, like to do the things you have to do or 
get out of the business, the things we know about, but 
will not tell here. You have to; so do the clergy. 

Who can thunder at the Mammon of unrighteousness 
when the Mammon of unrighteousness is right 
down there in the best pew, when he is on the board of 
trustees and pulls the parish out of every financial hole, 
and when in an age of rampant unbelief he is "unimpeachably 
orthodox"? Who can denounce "predatory 
wealth" from the pulpit for getting "unfair 
advantages" and railroad rebates when the churches 
share the benefits of government and dodge paying 
taxes, and the clergy get transportation at half rates? 

RICH MEN'S SINS UNREBUKED 

If a son ask his father for bread, will he give him 
a stone? Ask your fathers in God for counsel. Shall 
I, as alderman, take the consideration that this set of 
capitalists wants to give me for a street-railway franchise? 
Somebody will get it if I don't. Shall I, as 
capitalist, give up to the demands of the aldermen? 
If I don't, the other set will, the set that would ask 
nothing better than to down me. What shall I do? 

It isn't because your fathers in God don't mean to 
do right, but because they don't know what is right. 
There's nothing about these problems in Suarez; there's 
nothing about them in Pearson on the Creed. All are 
very clear as to the wickedness of taking chickens off 
a roost after dark. That's a poor man's sin. But 
when it comes to the consideration of the fact that the 

R3876 : page 328 

public street is the only place in which we are free men, 

and that in every other place we exist only on the sufferance 

of our lords, who treat us as conquered people; 

that the very center of these streets solemnly dedicated 

to our common use is taken by our lords for their own 

private use, a continuous strip of the best city real 

estate, which no money could or should buy— the right 

of way of a street railroad— why, that's a rich man's 

sin. 

The experiment of Federation has been tried. 
Doubtless you have lived in a small town where there 
was a Union Church. There weren't enough Baptists 
or Methodists or Presbyterians or Lutherans or Congregationalists 
for each to maintain a separate little 
conventicle, so they all combined. Instead of a dozen 
stoves, they had one big comfortable furnace, and 
saved on the coal bill; instead of a dozen reed organs, 
or footy little heart-breaking thousand-dollar organs, 



they had one $10,000 organ that you could do something 

with; instead of a dozen preachers that hemmed 

and hawed and stumbled through their sentences, 

making a brave stagger at getting verbs to agree with 

their subjects, they had one smart, fine-looking man who 

could talk it right off. A great advantage over the 

old system. Yes, but as soon as enough Baptists and 

Methodists and Lutherans and Presbyterians and Congregationalists 

moved into town for each sect to set up 

its own conventicle, they left the Union Church. 

AT THE DEATH-BED OF A RELIGION 

Just hold that a minute, and consider another 
experiment in Federation, the Young Men's Christian 
Association. That is far from fizzling out. What's 
the difference? The Y.M.C.A. looks to the good of all, 
physical, mental, and moral. Right now. Here on 
earth. "Service" is its motto, not "support." That's 
the difference. 

The Rev. Dr. Crapsey has told us that we are 
standing by the death-bed of a great religion. Some 
of us are. An increasing number. But not all. This 
great religion is very much alive indeed, and long will 
be, to every man yet in that stage of progress in which 
he thinks that nothing is more important than that he 
save his own particular little soul. The whole world 
may well be lost if only he is not. What does it matter 
anyhow, these cruel wrongs, these black injustices, this 
trampling down of human souls and bodies by those 
who have seized the earth for their own possession? 
It will all be over in a few years, and then— a heaven of 
endless happiness. 

So long as "he that believeth not shall be damned," 
it is highly important to be "unimpeachably orthodox," 
and so to save one's soul (which is not incompatible 
with gaining the whole world, too, as Mr. Rockefeller 
has shown us). Federation with those who have 

R3876 : page 329 

different notions of the way to sharpen a lead-pencil will 
not appeal to such. 

Those of us who have risen beyond such blunt, 
frank selfishness, who turn the question end for end, 
and ask what it shall profit the world if it be wholly lost 
to save here and there a soul, will not linger in the 
death-chamber to see how long the doctor's oxygen of 
Federation defers the inevitable. 

That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and so must 
die; that which is born of the spirit is spirit, and can 
never die. All this clothes-line quarreling of the 
churches is born of the flesh, and except they be born 
again of the Spirit of the Coming Age, they cannot see 
the kingdom of God. Nicodemus saith now as of old 
time, "How can these things be? Can all the sects 



enter the second time into their mother's womb and be 

born?" And, as of old, is the answer: They must be 

born again. They must start all over, start now as in 

the very beginning with the vivid expectation of the 

speedy coming of that age in which the sword of competition 

shall be beaten into the plowshare of cooperation, 

so that in no line of effort shall we be forced to 

skimp wages and scamp wares; when our government 

in city, state, and nation shall privilege no man or set 

of men, but shall be so just that it shall be in very deed 

the kingdom of God. "Have we not all one Father? 

Hath not one God created us? Why do we deal 

treacherously, every man against his brother?" 

"EVEN SO, COME!" 

That was how Christianity started. In their little 
sodalities they had all things in common, so the Bible 
says. "The communion of saints" was no empty 
phrase to them. And why did they look so earnestly 
for His coming, expecting it any day? Because then 
that kingdom, the Life of the Coming Age, would 
spread the whole earth over. And we, too, who see the 
western sky of this dying day all flaming with the red 
glow that promises a fair morrow; we, too, who have 
heard with our ears the oracles of God, speaking to us 
in the voice of the people last November; we, too, 
whose hearts are torn with grief at sight of the miseries 
of our brothers, when the world is rich enough for all; 
we, too, who see how special privilege rots the very 
souls of those who hold it; we, too, must pray the words 
the early Christians prayed, putting our own meaning 
upon them, it is true, but longing with the same unutterable 
longing as theirs— we, too, must cry with them, 
Even so, come quickly, Lord Jesus! 



OUR VIEW OF THE FOREGOING 

In the above is set forth the sentiment of the 
worldly wise in respect to the federation of the various 
denominations. This class of thinkers usually take a 
very practical view of everything, and mix with it very 
little of faith in the supernatural. It is still fashionable 
to refer to a personal God, though a great many of the 
worldly wise have lost any real conception of such a 
being, and think of God as merely a great force or 
power in nature. Others personifying nature as a God, 
leave out all thought of a personal being of body, 
shape and parts, willing, thinking, planning, creating, 
maintaining, etc., "working all things according to the 
counsel of his own will." (Eph. 1:11.) To this type 
of mind, which is to be found in many pulpits, banking 
houses and among many of the more intelligent mechanics, 
and which is rapidly growing, the foregoing 



article will appeal strongly. The last paragraph of the 
article, for instance, illustrates our point. The writer 
sees Socialism, and he sees that there was a start in this 
direction in the early Church at Jerusalem. He approves 
of that start, not as a divine example of what 
ought to be, but as a mere suggestion of something 
greater, that men will work out for themselves shortly. 
He dreams of an ideal kingdom in which love will be 
the controlling influence, and hopes that man will bring 
this about for himself through Socialism, though perhaps 
not without trials and difficulties by the way. 

To this writer and others the voice of the people 
last November was the voice of Nature— the voice of 
Reason, the voice of Right, the voice of God. To him 
it speaks of a social revolution and the bringing in by 
Socialism of a glorious Millennium. Carrying his figure 
of speech to the closing words of the article, he quotes 
a Scripture passage respecting the Lord's second advent, 
"Even so come, Lord Jesus." Not that he 
believes in the second coming of Jesus, but that the 
expectation of the early Church— that the second 
coming of Jesus would bring the Millennial Kingdom- 
accords somewhat with the conception of the worldly 
wise, in that they are hoping for the Spirit of Jesus to 
come into the world through Socialism— hoping for the 
spirit of love to gradually take possession of the world 
and reorganize it, and bring in the new heavens and 
new earth. 

As the Prophet has declared, "God is not in all their 
thoughts"— such plans and schemes of Socialism, etc., 
are purely worldly wise and are far from the hopes and 
expectations of those who are truly the Lord's people 
and directed by his Word. From our standpoint, the 
overturning of the political machines and the investigation 
of trusts and the bringing them under a measure 
of governmental control, are all very good in their way, 
as indicating that the world in general desires righteousness 
to the extent that they can see righteousness. 
Where their earthly interests would be advantaged, 
they would welcome so-called reforms, investigations, 
better politics, etc., but otherwise not. 

Alas, the poor world does not know itself: it does 
not realize that selfishness is at the basis of its every 
move and ambition; that the number who are not thus 
moved, controlled, is so insignificantly small as to be 
without weight and influence. Nor is it our thought to 
deride any efforts toward righteousness, even though 
they be inspired by selfish motives. We merely point 
out that the true Christian view of matters is a still 
different one— is the Bible one— that it recognizes God, 
the divine will, purpose, plan, revelation, as having to 
do with and overruling all of this world's affairs. It 
sees in the present upheaval of politics, the present 
uncovering of financial scandals, etc., another force 
making ready for the great time of trouble which the 
Scriptures indicate will be fully upon us in 1915, and 



gradually approaching in the meantime. 

From this standpoint it has been necessary that the 
gross superstition of the "dark ages" should to a considerable 
extent be dissipated, that the minds of the 
people might be set free, not only from a religious 
superstition but also set free from allied superstitions 
respecting the divine right of certain families to inherit 

R3877 : page 330 

the kingdoms, the dominions of the world, and to live 
on higher places of social privilege than other families. 
All these matters are now coming in review before the 
world, and Socialism is rapidly coming to the fore as the 
world's savior, deliverer from priestcraft, superstition, 
and political and financial autocracy. The world is 
being invited to look not to him who redeemed us with 
his precious blood, and promised to come again and 
establish his Kingdom in righteousness, but to look to 
itself, to its own affairs, to its own success at the polls, 
etc., as the only hope— thus ignoring the Lord and his 
overruling providences and the divine inspiration respecting 

R3877 : page 330 

the future outcome of present conditions in a 
glorious Millennial Kingdom. 

From our standpoint the gathering of the churches 
is the fulfilment of Scriptural prediction, and the Lord's 
intelligent and faithful and consecrated people are 
warned against having any part in any such Church 
federations, the Word of the Lord being to such, "Say 
ye not, A confederacy, to all them to whom this people 
shall say, A confederacy; neither fear ye their fear nor 
be afraid." (Isa. 8:12.) It is the tares that are to be 
federated and bundled and gathered together for the 
great trouble time, which is shortly in a great revolution 
of society to set fire to all the social, religious, 
financial institutions and arrangements of this present 
time, eventuating in anarchy, which by overthrowing 
all things incompatible with righteousness will prepare 
the way for the Kingdom of God's dear Son at his 
second advent, a spirit being, in power and great glory, 
which will be manifested in various ways through 
earthly channels and agents. 



R3877 : page 330 

"SHE HATH DONE WHAT SHE COULD." 

-MATT. 26:6-13.-OCTOBER 28.- 
Golden Text:— "She hath wrought a good work upon me." 



THIS STUDY turns us back from the discourse of the 
Tuesday preceding our Lord's death to the Saturday 
night preceding his death— the close of the Jewish 
Sabbath day. In harmony with the prevailing custom, 
Jesus and his disciples and others were invited to a feast 
that evening. They had just arrived the previous evening 
from Jericho as intent upon keeping the feast of Passover at 
Jerusalem— the feast of which our Lord Jesus said, "With 
desire have I desired to eat this Passover with you before I 
suffer." (Luke 22:15.) Although Jesus had been telling the 
apostles that he was going to Jerusalem and would there be 
crucified, they seemed not to realize the matter, probably 
because he had spoken so many things to them in dark sayings, 
as, for instance, when he told them that he was the 
bread that came down from heaven, etc., and that they must 
eat his flesh and drink his blood. Perhaps the crucifixion 
suggested was also hyperbolical language; at least they could 
not realize that it would be so, even though Peter had been 
reproved for his disbelief in the matter. 

The feast was in the house of Simon the leper. Simon 
was a common name in those parts at that time, and this 
Simon was distinguished by the fact that he had been a 
leper— quite possibly he had been healed by the Lord, and 
this may have been the beginning of the intimate acquaintance 
between Jesus and the family of which Lazarus, Martha 
and Mary were prominent members. One of the Evangelists 
tells us that Lazarus was one of those who sat at the feast, 
that Martha was one of those who served, and the lesson before 
us tells especially of the work of Mary, who, while the 
Lord was reclining, approached and broke the seal of an 
alabaster box of precious perfume (not ointment, in the 
present use of the word). One of the accounts says that it 
was very precious, another that it was worth 300 pence, 
which in our money would be about $50. 

Such anointings were very rare, usually for kings or 
princes or nobles; and the disciples, under the lead of Judas, 
who seems to have been the spokesman (see John's account), 
were all filled with indignation at the waste. John tells us 
that Judas was a thief, who carried the bag, the treasurer of 
the company, and that his solicitous remarks respecting the 
use of the money for the poor were hypocritical. In any 
event we may sympathize with the other apostles for falling 
in line with his arguments, for they were all poor men, unused 
to such luxury and extravagance, and in this respect 
probably represented the majority of the Lord's people today, 
who likewise would consider a perfume bill of $50 a very 
extravagant waste of money. We are all the more interested 
to know how Jesus himself regarded the matter. We realize 
that our conceptions of matters of this kind are more or less 
biased by our own selfishness or poverty and necessity for 
economy. 

"WHY TROUBLE YE THE WOMAN?" 

Our Lord discerned at once the criticizing, fault-finding 
spirit amongst his disciples and promptly took the part of 



Mary, saying, "Why trouble ye the woman? For she hath 
wrought a good work upon me." Woman's intuition had 
guided Mary in the doing of the proper thing at the proper 
time. She realized that she owed the Master a debt that she 
never could pay, and that this costly offering of the perfume 
would be but a small tribute, a small expression of her 
gratitude. She had found in the Lord an object worthy of 
her heart devotion; she was not a woman's rights advocate; 
she found no fault with the Lord that he had not chosen her 
and Martha to be members of the company of apostles and 
to go abroad preaching his name and fame. Doubtless she 
would have gladly undertaken this work had she been so 
directed, but her womanly instincts did not lead her in this 
direction nor cause her to take offense at the Lord's showing 
a difference between the male and the female as respects the 
promulgation of his message. 

Although debarred from the honorable service of a public 
ministry of the Truth, our Lord declared, "She hath done 
what she could." She did what pleased the Lord; she illustrated 
the noblest and truest qualities of the feminine heart, 
love, devotion, fidelity; she spoke by actions rather than by 
words, and the perfume of her acts of love and kindness and 
adoration of her Lord have come down through the ages, 
filling the entire Church of Christ with the sweet odor of the 
perfume she poured upon his head and subsequently upon 
his feet. This is in accord with what our Lord prophetically 

R3877 : page 331 

declared respecting the act, "Verily I say unto you, wheresoever 

this Gospel shall be preached in the whole world, 

there also this that this woman hath done shall be told for 

a memorial of her." 

What a sweet memorial of Mary! How we all love and 
reverence her true womanhood, and appreciate the fact that 
her intuitions in respect to this anointing of the Lord were 
superior to the reasonings of the twelve apostles on the subject 
—they were too cold and calculating, too business like. 
She made up for this deficiency in the warmth of her loving 
devotion. Undoubtedly woman has filled profitably just such 
a niche as this in the Church's history during all the centuries 
from then until now. Without her part undoubtedly 
the religion of Jesus would have been much more cold and 
business like and formal than it is; but the broad, deep 
sympathy of true womanhood has helped to interpret the 
heart of Christ, the love of Christ, and has proven a blessing 
to all of the followers of the Lamb. 

"THE POOR YE HAVE ALWAYS" 

It is a miscalculation to suppose that the moments spent 
in communion with the Lord, in the study of his plan, and 
the dollars and hours spent in his service, in the promulgation 
of his Truth, are wasted, and that thus the poor have 
less. On the contrary, in proportion as any one has true, 
loving devotion to the Lord, he will have devotion to his 



service and to the poor. No one can love the Lord in sincerity 

without being the more sympathetic and the more generous 

proportionately to the poor and to all within reach of 

his benevolence. As the Scriptures admonish us, "There is 

that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that withholdeth 

more than is meet, but it tendeth to poverty"— to want 

—to poverty of soul as well as poverty of purse. (Prov. 1 1:24.) 

The Lord's followers are to be prudent, economical but not 

parsimonious, not miserly, not stingy, not hoarders of wealth. 

They are to cast their bread upon the waters; they are to do 

good and trust to the Lord for the results; they are to use 

freely the riches of the Lord as entrusted to them, both temporally 

and spiritually, and are to receive their blessing 

from the exercise or increment of these. 

This very act on the part of the devoted Mary and our 
Lord's commendation of it have doubtless been helpful to the 
Lord's people along these very lines throughout this Gospel 
age. Similarly we were once inclined to consider the One-Day 
Conventions and the General Conventions of the Lord's 
people to be entirely too expensive, to represent a waste of 
money that might have been used otherwise; but our experience 
is that there is a blessing in the using of the money 
talent— that whoever fails to do some investing, some sacrificing 
in the interest of the Truth, will surely fail to get the 
large returns of spiritual blessing. Whoever on the contrary 
seeks to use his means in serving the Truth to others and in 
nourishing his own heart receives proportionately the greater 
blessing. We are even inclined to think that the Lord makes 
up to them in temporal matters also; but should this not be 
the case— should they be the poorer in temporal matters as 
a result of their spiritual feasting— we know that spiritual 
nourishment, fatness of soul, prosperity as New Creatures in 
Christ, is by far the most important matter with which we 
have to do. It is the very object of our present membership 
in the school of Christ, association with the fellow-members, 

R3878 : page 331 

that we may grow in this very grace as well as in knowledge 
and love in the Master's likeness. 

ANOINTED FOR HIS BURIAL 

Our Lord declared that Mary's action was a preparation 
for his burial. We remember that several of the honorable 
women of the Lord's company came to the tomb early on the 
first day of the week with spices and ointment, perfume, for 
his anointing, after the custom of the time, and because they 
failed to remember and recognize his prophecy of his resurrection 
from the dead on the third day. Their motive in 
thus going was undoubtedly a proper one, and yet Mary's 
conduct in anointing our Lord before his burial was very 
much more to the point, very much more appreciated by him. 
And so it is with us: with our dear friends, the brethren and 
others. It behooves us to anoint them with kindly words, 
loving sympathies, tender expressions, while they are still in 



the valley of conflict, before they have reached the end of 
the journey. We know not how much even the very strongest 
of the Lord's followers may need a word of sympathy and 
encouragement at times, and we do our own hearts good 
when we tender such sympathy. 

We do not mean that fulsome flattery should be poured 
upon one another; but there is a wide difference between 
flattery and encouraging, sympathetic words; and who is 
there of sympathetic heart, possessing a heart filled with the 
love divine, that is not himself an alabaster box of perfume, 
which should be opened and poured upon the spiritual 
brotherhood and all of our earthly friends and relatives as 
we might come in contact with them, and in proportion as 
the blessing of the Lord would be appropriately theirs. Let 
us not forget this; let us use these opportunities which are 
ours day by day of scattering flowers in life's pathway for 
others, and perhaps as we do this the Lord will allow some 
one to scatter some flowers also for us. On the principle that 
he who watereth others shall himself be watered, he who 
helps others should never go hungry, he who comforts others 
should never lack comfort. Doubtless the Lord will see to 
it that in proportion as we have and exercise the proper 
spirit of benevolence and generosity toward others, we will 
have our share of rich blessings in return when most needed. 

"OF THE PEOPLE THERE WERE NONE WITH HIM"--ABLE 
TO SYMPATHIZE FULLY 

Very evidently at the close of his ministry our Lord was 
feeling more or less of disappointment that a larger number 
of the Jews had not received his gracious message, had not 
believed on him. Especially would this thought come to 
him as he read in the mind of Judas that he already was 
planning to be his betrayer. Moreover, he saw something of 
the same spirit of fear in the other eleven of his apostles, for 
he already knew who should betray him, and knew also that 
the others would forsake him and flee in fear in the hour of 
his distress. If his message, if his love, if his Spirit communicated 
to these men would still leave them so weak in 
many respects, it argued that he had accomplished comparatively 
little in his ministry, and that the other five hundred 
brethren might not be more devoted than the twelve. 

What a comfort it must have been to the Lord in the 
midst of these thoughts to find that there was one loving 

R3878 : page 332 

soul which did appreciate him and brought the alabaster 
box and anointed him before his burial. The joy, the comfort, 
the blessing that came to the heart of our dear Master, 
and that strengthened him for the experiences of coming 
days, was worth far more than the 300 pence. Not only was 
he willing that the matter should be told for a memorial of 
Mary, but we may safely conclude that in the everlasting 
future Mary will be ranked very high amongst the faithful 
followers of the Lord. She may not be one with the apostles 



upon the twelve thrones of Israel, but we may be sure that 
she will have some grand, some honorable place near to the 
one she loved and for whom she showed her devotion. 
An unknown writer says, "Do not keep the alabaster 
boxes of your love and tenderness sealed up until your 
friends are dead. Fill their lives with sweetness. Speak 
approving, cheering words while their ears can hear them 
and while their hearts can be thrilled and made happier by 
them; the kind things you mean to say when they are gone, 
say before they go. The flowers you mean to send for their 
coffins, send to brighten and sweeten their homes before they 
leave them. If my friends have alabaster boxes laid away, 
full of fragrant perfumes of sympathy and affection, which 
they intend to break over my dead body, I would rather they 
would bring them out in my weary and troubled hours and 
open them, that I may be refreshed and cheered by them 
while I need them. I would rather have a plain coffin 
without a flower, a funeral without a eulogy, than a life 
without the sweetness of love and sympathy. Let us learn 
to anoint our friends beforehand for their burial. Post-mortem 
kindness does not cheer the burdened spirit. Flowers on 
the coffin cast no fragrance backward over the weary way." 

SELFISHNESS VERSUS GENEROSITY 

Our lesson concludes with the account of how Judas 
soon afterwards went to the chief priests and bargained 
with them that for thirty pieces of silver he would seek an 
opportunity and betray Jesus into their hands. What a 
sharp contrast is here drawn between the love and generosity 
of Mary and the mean selfishness of Judas! The one 
was so full of love that she could not do enough for the 
great Teacher at whose feet she loved to sit, from whose lips 
she had received so many blessings, such joy of heart, and 
by whose power her brother had been recalled from the 
tomb and probably previously her father healed of a loathsome 
disease. We also should remember how much we owe 
this same Teacher, that his are the wonderful words of life 
which have brought unto our hearts joy, peace and blessing. 
By his words we ourselves have been called from the dead 
condition, for, as the Apostle declares, we were once dead in 
trespasses and sins, but now are quickened, energized, by 
the Spirit of the Lord, by the spirit of love. 

We ourselves also had the leprosy of sin, condemnation, 
were children of wrath even as others, but our sins 
have been graciously covered by the Redeemer, the leprosy 
has been cleansed, and we have been made whiter than 
snow in the sight of our Lord through faith in the precious 
blood. We, too, have learned to sit at the Master's feet and 
to enjoy his teachings, and have been transformed thereby by 
the renewing of our minds. Is it not appropriate that we should 
feel that no offering we could bring him could in any sense or 
degree express the gratitude of our hearts? Can we not also find 
alabaster boxes of precious perfume for the Master? True, 
the Head has been glorified, and the members of the body, 
too, are now passed beyond the vail, but his "feet" are still 



with us, the last members of the body of Christ are here. 
Let us hasten to do all in our power, both temporally, and 
spiritually, for the feet of Christ; let us do all in our power 
to cleanse them from earth defilement, even though it cost us 
tears; let us anoint them with the precious spikenard perfume. 
The more costly the affection and love that we bestow 
upon the members of the body of Christ, the very lowest 
and humblest of them, the better; all should be but an 
expression of the warmth of love which is in our hearts for 
Him and His. The time is passing rapidly— soon the last 
members will have crossed and be beyond the vail, beyond 
our anointing and beyond the blessed word; "She hath done 
what she could." Let us earn that expression from the 
dear lips of our Lord by faithfulness to those who now represent 
him in the world— to the household of faith, to the 
members of the body of Christ. 

FOR THIRTY PIECES OF SILVER 

Selfishness seems to lie at the very foundation of all 
the mean, ignoble deeds of our fallen nature. It was selfish 
ambition that led mother Eve to grasp the forbidden fruit, 
and it is safe to say that selfishness ever since has prompted 
to all the mean and ignoble things of the six thousand years' 
reign of sin and death. The spirit of a sound mind is what 
we should each and all strive for. This would mean, on the 
one hand, that we should not be too extravagant, and, on 
the other hand, that we should not be too parsimonious. 
But if we should err on either side would it not be safest 
and best that we should err on the side of too great generosity 
rather than on the reverse? Well did the Apostle 
write that the love of wealth is the root of all evil. This 
might include not only money but wealth of honor, name, 
influence or power. The Apostle adds, "which some coveting 
after have erred from the faith and pierced themselves 
through with many sorrows."— 1 Tim. 6:10. 

As an illustration of this class take the case of Judas 
in our lesson, selling his Master for thirty pieces of silver! 
No matter if he did reason that Jesus had said that he was 
about to die, and said that this perfume was associated with 
his burial. No matter if Judas were sure that all these 
things would happen to the Lord anyway, and thought that 
he might just as well have the thirty pieces of silver. It did 
not condone the offence. Selfishness and meanness had so 
far been encouraged in his heart that, notwithstanding his 
intimate association with the Master, his knowledge of his 
precious words and mighty acts, neither love nor reverence 
stood in the way of selfishness. 

Judas "went to his own place," the Second Death, and 
that with a realization that it would have been better for 
him had he never been born. Whoever will allow selfish 
ambitions of any kind to have control in his heart, whoever 
will not allow the Lord's grace and truth to come into 
his heart and enlarge it and fill it with love, will likewise 
go to his own place, the Second Death. The divine provisions 
are only for those who will eventually be filled with 



love, the Spirit of God, the spirit of generosity. Let us all 

R3879 : page 333 

then more and more avoid the Judas spirit, the heart of selfishness, 
money love, self love and ambition, and let us more 
and more have the loving heart of Mary and her humility, 
which not only made her willing to spend her means to 
serve the truth, but made her willing also to humble herself 
even to the extent of tears and the use of woman's highest 
ornament, her hair, in the service of her Master, her Lord, 
and that upon his humblest members, the feet of him. 



R3879 : page 333 

"THIS DO IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME" 

--MATTHEW 26: 17-30. -NOVEMBER 4.- 

WHILE holding, in common with the great majority, 
that the Memorial Supper was instituted by our 
Lord on Thursday night in connection with his 
last celebration of the Passover, and that he was crucified 
on the next day, Friday, we have no contention with those 
who suppose that these events took place on other days of 
the week. We lay great stress on the fact there accomplished 
and its significance as the antitype of the Passover 
instituted by Moses, and as the finishing of our Lord's great 
sacrifice for sins— the sins of the whole world. For these 
vital principles we are willing to contend earnestly, as they 
are part of "the faith once delivered to the saints;" but as 
respects the particular days of the week we will not contend, 
as in our estimation they are trifling matters, of no value, no 
consequence, and should therefore in no sense of the word 
disturb the minds or heart-fellowship of the Lord's people. 

Our lesson opens with our Lord's instructions to his 
disciples as to where they should prepare for him and themselves, 
as a special and peculiar Jewish family, a place in 
which to celebrate the requirements of the Law in the type 
which pointed to our Lord Jesus as the Lamb of God. Respecting 
this supper our Lord himself said, "With desire 
have I desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer." 
He did not refer to the principal feast, which lasted a week 
from the 15th day of Nisan. He was referring to the roast-lamb 
supper, eaten with bitter herbs, which preceded the 
general feast, and which reminded them of their deliverance 
from Egypt, and became the basis of their subsequent rejoicing 
as a liberated people. The upper room was provided 
for this supper. Things were made ready, and at even, at 
sundown, after six o'clock, our Lord and the twelve assembled. 
One of the accounts tells us that there was a dispute 
amongst the disciples respecting the more honorable positions 
at the supper, and that Jesus rebuked this ambitious 
spirit in them by washing their feet, thus illustrating his 



own humility of heart, his readiness to serve each and all of 
them. Thus he set them an example that he, whom they 
esteemed greatest amongst them, should be their principal 
servant, willing and ready to serve any and all. 

"ONE OF YOU SHALL BETRAY ME" 

While they were eating Jesus remarked that one of them 
would betray him, and at once a spirit of sadness spread 
over the company, and each one— feeling it incumbent upon 
him to prove his innocence of such a charge— asked, "Lord, 
is it I?" With the rest, Judas also put this question, realizing 
that if he did not also ask, it would imply his acknowledgment 
that he was the one, and in response to his inquiry 
Jesus replied, "Thou hast said,"— that is to say, "Yes, I 
refer to you." Another account tells us that Jesus answered 
the query by saying that the one for whom he would dip a 
sup would be the betrayer, and having dipped the sup— a 
piece of the lamb and a piece of the unleavened bread they 
were eating— Jesus gave it to Judas, thus indicating him 
without directly naming him. It would appear, too, that 
the other disciples up to this time had not learned to know 
Judas— that it was subsequently they ascertained that he 
was a thief, etc. 

Amongst the Jews and Arabs deceit and betrayal were 
not so very uncommon, but there was a code of honor recognized 
according to which no one would eat the food of the 
person he would in any wise injure. As food was seasoned 
with salt, it was probably this custom that was known as 
the "covenant of salt"— the covenant of faithfulness. To 
succeed in having an enemy eat at your table or take of your 
food seasoned with salt was at that time amongst those people 
the equivalent of a pledge of his lasting friendship— that 
he would never do you injury. Apparently Judas was so lacking 
of a proper spirit that he did not even acknowledge and obey 
this custom of the time— to be loyal and faithful to the one 
whose bread he ate, of whose salt he partook. Hence our 
Lord's words, "He that dippeth his hand with me in the 
dish, the same shall betray me." 

Nevertheless Jesus testified that his death was not a 
victory on the part of his betrayer and his enemies, but in 
harmony with what had been written of him before by the 
prophets. Nor are we to consider that Judas in this matter 
was merely fulfilling a prophecy irrespective of his own 
responsibility, his own wilfulness in the matter: such a 
thought is negatived by our Lord's statement, "Woe unto the 
man by whom the Son of man is betrayed. It would have 
been better for that man if he had not been born." These 
words leave no question, we think, that Judas had already 
enjoyed his full share in the great atonement work through 
the intimate opportunities he had of coming to a clear 
knowledge of the truth, and the corresponding responsibilities. 
Evidently his was the sin unto death— the Second 
Death. Hence, aside from any future existence we are to 
consider that his life was a useless, wasted one, and that its 
joys did not overbalance its sorrows and anguish when to 



the latter were added his subsequent despair and suicide. 

"TAKE, EAT; THIS IS MY BODY" 

It was after the Passover Supper, after the eating of the 
lamb with the herbs and unleavened bread, etc., that Jesus 
instituted the Memorial Supper which, with all of his followers, 
by his direction takes the place of the Passover Supper 
of the Jews. This was a new matter, and the apostles 
listened with interest to his words as he blessed some of the 
thin cakes of unleavened bread and then brake them and 
handed portions to each of his disciples, saying, "Take, eat; 
this is my body." What could he mean? During their 

R3879 : page 334 

three years in his company they had learned that he spake 
in parables and dark sayings. On another occasion he had 
declared in their hearing that he himself was the bread 
which came down from heaven, of which if a man partook 
he would live forever. Now he was handing them some 
unleavened bread and said it was his body. They evidently 
understood him to mean that this bread to them would represent 
or symbolize his body, for he told them on this occasion 
that thenceforth they should do this in remembrance of 
him— thenceforth they should remember him as the slain 
lamb and use unleavened bread to represent his flesh, and 
partake of this instead of eating as previously of a literal 
lamb. 

He could not have meant, as Roman Catholics and 
some Protestants believe, that the bread was by his blessing 
turned into his actual flesh, for he still had his flesh— he 
was not killed for about fifteen hours later. Hence all the 
arguments to this effect are foolishness and sophistry. When 
he said, "This is my flesh," it was as much a figure of 
speech as when he said a little later, "I am the vine," "I am 
the door," "I am the Good Shepherd," "I am the way, the 
truth and the life," etc. The right, sane view of the Master's 
words is apparent: he was represented in all these different 
ways. In the case under consideration the bread 
would represent him, his flesh, to his apostles and to all his 
followers throughout the Gospel age. 

As bread stands for and symbolizes all food (indeed 
wheat is said to contain every element of nutriment in its 
proper proportion), so the teaching of this symbol is that 
whoever would have the life which Christ has to give must 
accept it as the result of his sacrifice. He died that we 
might live. The rights and privileges which he surrendered 
voluntarily may be eaten, applied, appropriated by all who 
have faith in him and who accept him and his instructions 
—such are reckoned as having imputed to them the perfect 
human nature, with all its rights and privileges lost by 
Adam, redeemed by Christ. None can have eternal life except 
by the eating of this bread from heaven. This applies 
not only to believers of this present time, but also to those 
of the future age. Their life-rights and privileges must all 



be recognized as coming to them through his sacrifice. In a 
word, the bread representing our Lord's body teaches 
our justification through the acceptance of his sacrifice. 

"DRINK YE ALL OF IT" 

Next our Lord took a cup containing the fruit of the 
vine. We are not told that it was wine; therefore it is an 
open question whether it was fermented or unfermented, 
and in view of all the circumstances of our time and the requirements 
of the Lord's Word, we may feel sure that unfermented 
grape juice or raisin juice will fulfil the terms of his 
injunction. Since it is never called wine, but merely the 

R3880 : page 334 

cup and the fruit of the vine, there is no room for disputation 
amongst the Lord's followers. Each may be free to follow 
his own conscience in the matter of what kind of a fruit 
of the vine he shall use: for our part we prefer the unfermented 
as being less liable to do injury or to awaken dormant 
passions for drink in the Lord's followers. 

In connection with the cup the Lord said, "This is my 
blood of the covenant, which is shed for many for the remission 
of sins" (the two oldest Greek MSS. of the New Testament, 
the Sinaitic and Vatican, omit the word "New"). 
True, the New Covenant must be sealed with the blood of 
the Christ before it can go into effect, and it is not to go 
into effect until the opening of the Millennial age. But 
there was another Covenant— the old Covenant, the foundation 
Covenant of all covenants— namely, the Abrahamic 
Covenant, which was sealed by our Lord's death. That it 
would be thus sealed was typically represented in the figurative 
death of Isaac at the hand of Abraham and his figurative 
resurrection from the dead. The Apostle assures us 
that Isaac represented our Lord Jesus, and also declares, 
"We, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise" 
-the Oath-bound Covenant. -Gal. 4:28. 

Applying our Lord's words thus to the Abrahamic Covenant, 
which he was sealing or making sure, we see that it 
was by his death that he became the heir of that Covenant 
and all of its glorious provisions for the blessing of all the 
families of the earth. And from this standpoint we see a 
special meaning and force in Jesus' words to his followers, 
"This is my cup, drink ye all of it." Thus understood, the 
invitation to drink of the Lord's cup signifies an invitation to 
all of his elect Church of this Gospel age to partake with 
him of his cup of suffering and death— to lay down their 
lives with him that they also might have a share with him 
in the coming glories of the Kingdom, which will be the 
divine channel for the fulfilment of the Abrahamic promise, 
the blessing of all the families of the earth. 

While the eating of the bread and participation in the 
justification effected by our Lord's death and by the acceptance 
of the same, will be necessary to the whole world if 
they would have the restitution blessings purchased by our 



Lord's sacrifice, nevertheless the cup is not for the world 
but only for the Church, only for the consecrated of this 
Gospel age. "Drink ye all of it"— not only all of you drink 
of it but all of you drink all of it— leave none. There will 
be none of the sufferings of Christ left over for the coming 
age, no more suffering for righteousness' sake will then be 
known to the world— only evil doers will suffer thereafter. 
Now is the time when whosoever will live godly shall suffer 
persecution, and when all of the Lord's followers who would 
be loyal to him and counted worthy to share in his Kingdom 
glories must expect to drink of his cup. Hence again the 
Lord unites the two thoughts, saying, "Except ye eat the flesh 
and drink the blood of the Son of man, ye have no life in 
you." Those who consecrate during the present time as the 
Lord's disciples, to walk in his steps, must not only share in 
justification through faith, but must also share through sacrifice 
the cup if they would gain the life eternal promised 
to the elect who now forsake all to be his disciples. 

NEW WINE IN THE KINGDOM 

In declaring, "I will not drink henceforth of the fruit 
of the vine until that day when I drink it new with you in 
my Father's Kingdom," our Lord implies a new wine under 
different conditions at some distant date. He thus confirmed 
in their minds what he had been teaching them for some 
weeks previously, namely, that he would not at this time set 
up his Kingdom, but that instead he would suffer, be crucified, 
and that they must expect also to suffer with him; and 

R3880 : page 335 

that by and by, when the Kingdom should be established 
and himself be in glory, his disciples should be with him in 
his throne. These new thoughts in their minds were confirmed 
by the lesson now given. 

The cup in the present time must speak to them of the 
crushing of the grapes, the blood of the grapes, their Master's 
blood, the life sacrificed, poured out, and their lives also 
sacrificed with him in his service, in his cause. But the sufferings 
of this present time were linked with the glory that 
should follow by the thought that all who would drink of 
the present cup of suffering, ignominy and death would also 
share in his cup of joy and blessing, glory and honor in the 
Kingdom. This same thought should be before our minds, 
and like the apostles of old it will help us more and more to 
look forward to the Kingdom as the time when suffering for 
the name of Christ shall cease, and when the glories shall 
follow and result in the blessing of all the families of the 
earth. Our Lord here identifies his Kingdom with his second 
advent, and in no sense of the word intimates that they 
would drink of this new wine at Pentecost, nor at the destruction 
of Jerusalem, nor at any other time but in that 
mentioned in the prayer which he taught them, saying, 
"Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven." 



This should be the thought before our minds also: in 
waiting for the Kingdom we are waiting for the second coming 
of our Lord and his subsequent setting up of the Kingdom; 
that is, the resurrection change, the glorification of his 
faithful ones who must be with him and share his glory. 
No wonder the Apostle declared that he who hath this hope 
in him purifieth himself even as he is pure. (1 John 3:3.) 
He that hath this hope of the new wine in the Kingdom, the 
participation with his Master in those glories and honors and 
blessed opportunities for uplifting the world of mankind, 
will take lightly, yea, joyfully, suffering, trials, sacrifices of 
this present time— yea, he will be glad to suffer with the 
Master that they also may be glorified together. 

"FOR THE REMISSION OF SINS" 

So far as we are concerned, it is in vain that men teach 
that God forgives sins without exacting a penalty therefor 
from anybody. It is in vain that they claim that Christ was 
not the ransom price for the sinner, that it was not necessary 
that he should die, the Just for the unjust, in order that he 
might bring us back to harmony with God— in order that 
God might be just and yet justify the sinner. It is in vain, 
too, that they claim that it was sufficient that Jesus was a 
great teacher, by whose words the world should be saved. 
Our reply is in harmony with the Master's statement here 
and elsewhere and the testimony of all the apostles, that it 
was necessary that Christ should die for our sins; that our 
sins could never have been forgiven by divine justice except 
through the divine arrangement by which he paid our penalty. 
To us it is a most precious thought, therefore, that our 
Lord's blood was indeed shed for the remission of sins of the 
many. And it is also a precious thought to us that we are 
privileged to be so intimately associated with him as members 
of his body; that our little sacrifices covered by his 
merit are in God's sight esteemed as part of the great sin 
sacrifice for the world; that as joint-sufferers with Christ we 
are permitted to drink of his cup and be immersed in his 
baptism into death. 

It is equally vain for Evolutionists and Higher Critics 
to tell us that, so far from man falling from God's likeness 
into sin and death, he has been on the contrary evoluting 
upward step by step, from beastly conditions to where he 
now is. We believe them not. We hold fast the divinely inspired 
testimony that there was a fall, and that this made 
necessary the redemptive work; that Christ was the honorable 
servant of God, privileged and authorized to make atonement 
for the sins of the whole world; that he began this 
atonement work in the sacrifice of himself; that he has been 
carrying it on during this Gospel age by the sacrificing of 
the members of his body, and that he will soon complete it, 
when he, with all of his members glorified, shall during the 
Millennial age distribute to the world the blessings of that 
redemptive work, causing all to come to a knowledge of the 
Truth, of the love of God; that its height and depth and 
length and breadth are immeasurable, yea, all accomplished 



through him who loved us and bought us with his precious 
blood. 

"IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME" 

The Apostle Paul, referring to this Memorial Supper, 
quotes our Lord as saying, "This do in remembrance of me," 
and then adds, "As oft as ye eat this bread and drink this 
cup ye do show the Lord's death till he come." (1 Cor. 11:24-26.) 
The thought is that we are to thus celebrate this 
great transaction until the time come for the Kingdom celebration 
of it with the new wine, the joy, the glory, the honors, 
which we are to share with him who loved us and bought 
us. The Apostle evidently does not mean merely until the 
parousia, the presence of the Lord to gather his servants and 
reward them, but rather until all shall have been gathered 
and the Kingdom class shall all thus have been set up and 
glorified. 

The same Apostle in the same epistle (1 Cor. 10:16,17; 12:12) 
emphasizes the thought of the unity, the oneness of 
the Church, with each other and with the Lord. He declares, 
"The loaf which we break, is it not the communion 
[the fellowship] of the body of Christ?" Are we not all as 
parts of one loaf broken with the Lord? "For we being many 
are one loaf and one body: for we are all partakers of that 
one loaf"; and again he adds, "The cup of blessing which 
we bless, is it not the communion [participation, fellowship] 
of the blood of Christ?" Assuredly this is the thought then, 
that from God's standpoint there is the one great Messiah, 
the elect Head and the elect members of his body. These, 
as one loaf, constitute from God's standpoint the bread of 

R3881 : page 335 

everlasting life for the world, and in order to fill this picture 

each and all must be broken, each and all must partake of 

the cup of Christ's suffering and death before entering into 

his glory. And not until all these sufferings have been completed 

will the Lord's time come for the new dispensation, 

the new day, the day of blessing instead of cursing, the day 

of restitution instead of dying, the day of uplifting instead 

of falling, so far as the world is concerned. 



page 337 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVII NOVEMBER 1 No. 21 
A.D., 1906-A.M., 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 339 

Roman Catholicism in Trouble 339 

Hatred of the Jews 340 

Insanity on the Increase 341 

The Rose (Poem) 341 

Report of Recent Conventions 341 

Gathering or Scattering, Which? 342 

Harvest Helpers and Hinderers 343 

The Spirit of Division 344 

Berean Studies in "Tabernacle Shadows" 345 

"With Strong Cryings and Tears" 346 

He Was Heard in the Thing Feared 347 

"Despised and Rejected of Men" 349 

page 338 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKERSTR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3882 : page 338 

SWEDISH AND FRENCH TRUTH LITERATURE 



We have just published Vol. V. of MILLENNIAL DAWN in 
the Swedish language— style, binding and price uniform with 
English volume; see next column. We do not purpose publishing 
Vol. IV. in this language, the demand not being great 
enough. 

We have on hand cloth-bound copies of the Swedish TOWER 
for 1903 and 1904. They will be sent postpaid to any address 
for $1.00 each. 

The Swedish Hymnal, cloth-bound, containing a choice 
selection of 50 hymns, without music, is 10c, postpaid. 

"About Hell," in Swedish, is supplied in paper binding, 
at 10c each, 50c per doz.; in cardboard covers at 20c per copy, 
$1.00 per doz. 

In French we have "Bible versus Evolution" and "Our 
Lord's Return: His Parousia," etc., at 5c each. 

page 338 

"VOLUNTEER" TOWERS IN SWEDISH 



We have good quantities of Swedish literature for general 
circulation as Volunteer matter. We cannot send these by 
mail except in small lots, but where 2000 or more are ordered 
in one lot we can send by freight, charges prepaid. Order all 
you can use judiciously amongst the Swedish people of your 
neighborhood. 



R3881 : page 339 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
ROMAN CATHOLICISM IN TROUBLE 



WE have already noted the fact that the French government 
has cancelled its agreement or "Concordat" 
with the Church of Rome, and that religion in 
France is now on much the same plane as in these United 
States— that is, that religion shall no longer be supported 
by the government. There is this difference— the 
French have gone a step farther than America, and have 
decided that the great church edifices, etc., built with 
the money of the French public, are not the property of 



the Pope and Roman hierarchy, but to be supervised by 
the French government, which, being a Republic, is 
the people's government. 

French laws on the subject are even-handed toward 
all religions— Catholic, Protestant, Hebrew, et al. They 
will not recognize the power of the Pope and others in 
Italy to close the church buildings, nor to otherwise 
control them; but insists that the Catholic people of 
the diocese shall have the control. To understand this 
we must remember, as pointed out in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. II., that the Roman Catholic Church is 
not composed of the Roman Catholics of the congregation, 
but is a hierarchy composed of the Pope and higher 
clergy. The Catholic congregations are merely "the 
children of the Church, who call the Church" (the hierarchy) 
their fathers. This is the Episcopal idea even 
amongst Protestants: but the majority of Protestants 
recognize, in theory at least, that "All ye are brethren." 
However, even amongst these the division into "clergy" 
and "laity" is a too common fact— descended from "the 
dark ages" and fostered by Roman and Episcopal 
usages. 

The Pope (Pius X.) has issued (Aug 14) an Encyclical 
letter to the Roman Catholic Bishops of France 
in which he denounced the French government's action, 
and while apparently forbidding compliance with 
it, really instructs them how best to comply with it;— 
by organizing Societies amongst the laity who can and 
will co-operate with their Ecclesiastics. Note the point: 
Rome will not concede that her "children" are in or of 
the Church, but she will outwardly comply with French 
law to hold possession and control of Church property. 
The poor French "children" may never know that they 
have the control of the situation. Similar regulations 
in Great Britain and in these United States might be 
favorable to the greater liberty of the people of all denominations. 
For instance, then Presbyterians and 
Methodists and Catholics, et al., would control their 
own properties as the Disciples and some Baptists 
now do. 

ROMISH INFLUENCE IN SPAIN 

Ever since the Spanish-American war Spain has 
been awakening to a realization of her bondage to religious 
superstitions of the "dark ages." The action of 
France has been a lesson to Spain, which she is gradually 
learning, and it need not surprise us if it lead to 
separation between the State-and-Church union which 
has prevailed there for centuries. The entering wedge 
was the recent decision of the Minister of Justice, that 
a civil marriage is lawful and binding whether sanctioned 
by the Roman Catholic Church or not. The test 
case was on the refusal of burial privileges to the 
corpse of one married without the approval of the 
Roman clergy. The decision will thus be seen to be a 



breaking of the power of the Roman clergy over the 
people. 

A dispatch from Madrid states that the Church and 
State relationship is exciting heated discussions and 
that public disturbances have occurred. It is said that 
at the next session of the Spanish Parliament the 
King's representative will introduce a bill making the 
"religious orders" amenable to the law controlling industrial 
corporations, and another bill providing that 
the members of orders recently expelled from France 
shall either become naturalized citizens or leave Spain. 

We rejoice that "the dark places of the earth, the 
habitations of cruelty," are getting a glimmer of the 
light of the Millennial morning. We lift up our heads 
with rejoicing that the deliverance of the true and only 
Church ("whose names are written in heaven") is nigh 
at hand; and that then speedily the great Sun of 
Righteousness will shine forth to bless all the families 
of the earth, to give to all the knowledge of the glory 
of God as it shines in the face of Jesus Christ our Lord. 

Meantime the Lord has stirred the hearts of some 
familiar with the Spanish tongue, and they are preparing 

R3881 : page 340 

a translation of Vol. I., ("The Divine Plan of the 
Ages,") in that language, which we hope to have ready 
soon after the beginning of 1907. It will be in demand 
in Mexico first, but we learn will also be appreciated by 
considerable numbers in Spain. 

STRONG PROTESTS AGAINST THE POPE 

A cablegram says:— "Poor Pope Pius X's honeymoon 
is over, and the simple-minded child-like occupant 
of the chair of St. Peter is surrounded on all sides 
by dangers and intrigues. That his good intentions 
have at least partly failed and that the Augean stable of 
the Vatican is still waiting for a Hercules to clean it is 
no secret, and it is also a well-known fact that the Pope 
has fallen a victim to the forces of the reactionary parties 
surrounding him, and that this has caused great 
dissatisfaction amongst the Roman clergy. 

"This is plainly shown by the numerous libelous 
pamphlets which have appeared during the last few 
months. The latest of these, which has created widespread 
sensation, is entitled, Tldebrand monaco,' criticizes 
the Pope in a manner which in regard to forceful 
language surpasses anything ever printed in the Eternal 
City. 

'"It is no longer you, Holy Father, who rule, but 
reckless and unscrupulous prelates who have taken advantage 
of your kindness and modesty. A small clique 
of younger prelates, led by Cardinal Merry del Val, are 
bringing disgrace upon the Church, and while they are 
satisfying their every desire, the priests are struggling 



with poverty, many of them living on a lire and a half 
(30 cents) a day. 

'"We know that you, Holy Father, were inspired 
with the best intentions when you ascended to the 
throne of St. Peter, but though you do not realize it, 
you have become a weak, tyrannous Pope. You desired 
to reinstate the rule of love and charity, but you have 
been conquered by Satan, whose servants are surrounding 
you, disguised as young cardinals. 

'"Oh, Holy Father, remember that it is your holy 
duty to seek truth, and more so as many of us are beginning 
to doubt its existence. Remember that some 
day you will be called to account for your 
stewardship!'" 

HATRED OF THE JEWS 



Benjamin Disraeli, better known as Lord Beaconsfield, 
wrote a political biography which is attracting 
considerable attention. Goldwin Smith thus refers 
to it:~ 

"It is natural that in the course of this political 
biography Disraeli, who had witnessed the exclusion 
of Jews from the House of Commons and who had 
found and was still finding his own Israelite descent 
an almost insuperable bar to advancement, should diverge 
for a moment from the main current of his narration 
to consider the grounds of the disabilities to which 
the Hebrew race had been so long subjected in Christian 
Europe. He begins by reminding us that the 
Saxon, the Slav and the Celt have adopted most of the 
laws and many of the customs of the Jews, together 
with all the latter's literature and all their religion. 
The former are, therefore, indebted to the Israelites for 
much that regulates, much that charms and much that 
solaces existence. The toiling multitude rest every 
seventh day by virtue of a Jewish law; they are perpetually 
reading, that they may be taught by example, 
the records of Jewish history; they are continually 
singing the odes and elegies of Jewish poets; and they 
daily acknowledge on their knees with reverent gratitude 
that the only medium of communication between 
the Creator and themselves is the Jewish religion. 
Yet, at the hour when Disraeli wrote, the Saxon, the 
Slav and the Celt were accustomed to treat that race as 
the vilest of generations; and, instead of looking upon 
them logically as the channel of human happiness, they 
were accustomed to inflict upon them every term of obloquy 
and every form of persecution. Had it not been for 
the Jews of Palestine the good tidings of our Lord 
would have been unknown forever to the northern and 
western races. The first preachers of the Gospel were 
Jews, no others; the historians of the Gospel were 



R3882 : page 340 

Jews, no others. No human being has ever been permitted 
to write under the inspiration of the holy Spirit 
except a Jew. 'They nursed the sacred flame of which 
they were the consecrated and hereditary depositories. 
When the time was ripe to diffuse the truth among the 
Gentiles it was not a senator of Rome nor a philosopher 
of Athens who was personally appointed by our 
Lord for that office, but a Jew of Tarsus, who founded 
the seven churches of Asia. That greater Church, 
great even amid its terrible corruptions, that has 
avenged the victory of Titus by subjugating the capital 
of the Caesars and has changed every one of the 
Olympian temples into altars of the God of Sinai and 
of Calvary, was founded by another Jew, a Jew of Galilee.' 
From all which Disraeli concludes that the dispersion 
of the Jewish race, preceding as it did for ages 
the advent of our Lord, could not be for conduct which 
occurred subsequent to his nativity, and that they are 
also guiltless of that subsequent conduct which has 
been imputed to them as a crime, since for him and 
his blessed name they preached and wrote and shed 
their blood, 'as witnesses.' 

"Disraeli says: 'The creative genius of Israel, on 
the contrary, never shone so bright; and when the 
Russian, the Frenchman and the Anglo-Saxon, amid applauding 
theaters or the choral voices of solemn temples, 
yield themselves to the full spell of a Mozart or 
a Mendelssohn, it seems difficult to comprehend how 
these races can reconcile it to their hearts to persecute 
a Jew.' In the course of the same remarkable chapter 
Disraeli refers to the futility of persecution in the case 
of the Jew. 'Egyptian Pharaohs, Assyrian kings, Roman 
emperors, Scandinavian crusaders, Gothic princes 
and holy inquisitors have alike devoted their energies 
to the fulfilment of this common purpose. Expatriation, 
exile, captivity, confiscation, torture on the most 
ingenious and massacre on the most extensive scale, 
and a curious system of degrading customs and debasing 
laws which would have broken the heart of any 
other people have been tried, and in vain! The Jews, 
after all this havoc, are probably more numerous at 
this date than they were during the reign of Solomon 
the Wise, are found in all lands, and prospering in 
most. All which proves that it is in vain for man to 
attempt to baffle the inexorable law of nature, which 
has decreed that a superior race shall never be destroyed 
or absorbed by an inferior.' Disraeli adds that all 
the tendencies of the Jewish race are conservative. 
The bias of the Jews is toward religion, property and 
natural aristocracy. For which reason Disraeli pronounces 
it for the interest of statesmen that this bias 
of a great race should be encouraged, and their energies 
and creative powers enlisted in the cause of the 
existing social order."— Watchword. 



R3882: page 341 

INSANITY ON THE INCREASE 



Washington, D.C.,-At the end of the year 1904, 
the last for which figures have been returned, 199,773 
persons were under restraint in the 328 mad-houses of 
the country. No account was taken of the hopelessly 
insane people returned to the insane wards of the county 
poor-houses throughout the country by the hospitals 
for the insane maintained by the various States. 

During the thirteen years' period from 1890 to the 
end of 1903, the number of hospitals for the insane and 
the insane confined therein both doubled. In that same 
period 16,946 persons were confined in forty-two institutions 
for the feeble minded. 

These statistics were completed by the Census 
Bureau, and made public in a special bulletin to-day. 
The bureau does not regard them as conclusive answer 
to the question whether insanity is increasing. They 
do regard them as persuasive. They regard them as revealing 
a remarkable increase in the class to which they 
belong, namely, to the number of insane placed under 
restrictions. 

The number of insane in hospitals for each 100,000 
of population increased from 81.6 in 1880 to 118.2 in 
1890, and 186.2 in 1903. A remarkable fact is that 
among native whites there is more insanity among the 
males, while among foreign-born whites the females are 
more likely to lose their reason than the males. Although 
not made a part of the official record of speculations 
on the subject, there is an impression among 
those who assisted in the compilation of the figures that 
American males go insane as the reason of their strenuous 
efforts to get the money wherewith to support the 
female members of their families in comparative ease, 
while among the foreign-born insanity among the females 
results from the work their lords and masters 
compel them to perform.— Rochester Democrat. 



Science has been boasting of late that the average 
of human life has been increasing: that the 
average is now 35 years, whereas only twenty years ago 
it was as low as 32 years. This raise of the average has 
been accomplished chiefly through increased skill in dealing 
with children's ailments. Weakly children are now 
"pulled through" by the use of incubators, etc., etc. 
On these achievements of science some were disposed 
to predicate wonderful things— possibly eventually 
"eternal life." 

But those whose eyes of understanding are opening 



under the eyesalve of God's Word see matters differently: 
they see that man's hopes of everlasting life 
center in Christ and not in medical science. To us 
there is quite a connection between the above and other 
reports of the rapid increase of insanity and the preservation 
of the weaklings of our race. The lesson is that, 
if science held the race out of the grave a little longer 
the survival of the weak would mean in a few generations 
a weaker race and a still more rapid deterioration and 
shortening of longevity. Even now insanity experts 
are telling us that at the present rate the whole world 
would be insane in less than two centuries. Evidently 
the world as well as the Church has cause to pray 
earnestly, "Thy Kingdom Come." 



R3883 : page 341 

THE ROSE 

Within my hand I gently hold "the Garden's Queen," a rose,— 

The softly sighing summer wind about it faintly blows 

And wafts its wondrous fragrance out upon the evening air. 

And as I gaze upon the rose, so perfect and so fair, 

In memory's halls there wakes, the while, a legend, quaint and old, 

How once upon a time, one day, a sage picked up, we're told, 

A lump of common clay, so redolent with perfume rare, 

He marvelled, and the question wondering asked, "Whence dost 

thou bear 
Such fragrance, oh, thou lump of clay?" In tones of deep repose 
There came the sweet reply, "I have been dwelling with the rose." 

The while the legend stirs my soul, within my hand still lie 
The petals of the rose, and from my heart of hearts I cry, 
"Thou lovely "Rose of Sharon," may I ever dwell with Thee, 
So closely that the fragrance of Thy love shall cling to me! 
Oh, fill me with the spirit of Thy sweet humility, 
Then all shall see and know, dear Lord, that I have learned of Thee; 
And let my earthly pilgrimage, until its blessed close, 
Each day and hour bear witness, "I've been dwelling with the Rose.' 

G. W. S. 



R3882: page 341 

REPORT OF RECENT CONVENTIONS 

ALTOONA, PA., SEPT. 23 

WE had three splendid meetings at Altoona. The 
morning Testimony Rally showed warmth and 
zeal and love for the Lord, the Truth and the 
brethren. The afternoon meeting for the public was in 
the Opera House, which was well filled with an audience 



of about 1000. The evening session for the interested 
was attended by about 275. God's blessing was with 
our united efforts, we believe, and we already know of 
some good results. 

COLUMBUS, O. SEPT. 30 

Arriving at an early hour we had the privilege of 
visiting the Penitentiary, where a number of "brethren" 
are confined for misdeeds committed while they were 
still under the blinding instructions of "orthodoxy." 
We could not see all, on account of prison rules, but 
those whom we did meet gave good evidence of the 
truth of the Apostle's words, "He that hath this hope 
in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure." 

The Testimony Rally was at 10 a.m. and was a 
great success. A goodly number attended from nearby 
points and the general witness was to the mercy of God 
and special thankfulness for the Truth. The service 
for the public was in the new "Memorial Hall," the 
largest auditorium of the city, said to seat 3500. It was 
packed full, 200 on chairs on the platform, 300 standing, 
and several hundred were unable to obtain admittance 
when the public safety authorities closed and 
locked the doors. It was a grand audience which gave 
close attention for nearly two hours to our theme, "To 
Hell and Back." The evening address to the interested 
many of you already read in the Dispatch. The attendance 
was about 700, the majority of them being 
people who had heard in the afternoon for the first 
time. The friends had prayed much and labored hard 
for this meeting and had spent much money in wise 
advertising, that their fellow-citizens might have the 
privilege of coming in contact with the Truth, and they 

R3883 : page 342 

felt greatly blessed and encouraged by the results seen 
and hoped for. 

CONVENTIONS IN TEXAS 

Only one Texas Convention was announced— at 
Dallas, Oct. 13,14— but at a date too late for 
announcement in the WATCH TOWER the appeals 
from San Antonio and Houston prevailed. The 
determining arguments were that the Editor when at 
Dallas would be within 300 miles of the other points, 
that to visit them would consume little more time, and 
that the majority of the friends could not afford to visit 
Dallas. 

At Dallas we had a splendid gathering of the 
"brethren," representing every section of Texas, Indian 
Territory, Oklahoma, Arkansas and Louisiana. The 
only drawback was the rainy weather, which interfered 
with the attendance of the public, but in no sense 



dampened the spiritual ardor of our own people. 

The Convention opened Saturday morning, Oct. 
13, and closed the following Monday at noon. The 
largest attendance was about 400; 20 symbolized their 
consecration by immersion. 

The Editor left Dallas for San Antonio on Sunday 
night. At the latter place two public meetings were 
held— Monday afternoon and evening. The latter, in 
the Grand Opera House, was attended by about 1000 who 
gave excellent attention. 

Leaving on the night train, Houston was reached 
Tuesday morning and there two public services were 
held— afternoon and evening— about 350 being present 
at the closing session. Thence by train two days and 
three nights brought us in safety to the Bible House, 
Allegheny, on Friday morning, Oct. 20. 



R3883 : page 342 

GATHERING OR SCATTERING, WHICH? 

"He that is not for me is against me; and he 
that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad." 
-Matt. 12:30- 

OF THE JEWS in general at the first advent our 
Lord declared, "They knew not the time of 
their visitation." (Luke 19:44.) When we remember 
that the people addressed were the prototype 
of nominal Christendom today, it should not surprise 
us that the same words are applicable now. As Israel 
recognized not Jesus as the Messiah and that his work 
was a harvest work, a separating work, so likewise 
Christian people in general today are unaware that we 
are living in the second presence of the Messiah and 
that a similar harvesting work is now in progress- 
separating wheat from tares and gathering the wheat 
into the garner. Although there has always been a 
right and a wrong side to every question— the side of 
right and truth and the side of wrong and error, the 
side of God and the side of Mammon— yet the harvest 
in the end of the Jewish age brought a new issue and 
a fresh division along new lines. 

So it is in this harvest time: throughout the Gospel 
age there has been the side of right and justice and 
its opposing side of wrong and error, the side of God 
and the truth and the side of Mammon and confusion. 
But now in the harvest time the fresh separation takes 
place along new lines— a separation amongst those who 
are on the side of God, on the side of right, on the side 
of truth. Evidently these harvest testings, siftings, 
separations, represent more crucial tests to the Lord's 
people than have come to them at other times, and correspond 
with the harvest time at the first advent, and 



now have come increased blessings, privileges, favors, 
enlightenments. Where much advantage is given the 
more will reasonably be expected in return— where the 
trials are more severe, the more assistance and enlightenment 
are necessary and have been provided. 

THE PERIOD OF TRANSITION 

Surveying Christendom we find many in the nominal 
churches doing all in their power to oppose the 
harvest work; nevertheless it goes on prosperously, in 
harmony with our Lord's declaration, "So shall my 
word be that goeth out of my mouth; it shall not return 
unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which 
I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I 
sent it." (Isa. 55:11.) It was just so at the first advent: 
practically all of the leading theologians, Doctors 
of the Law, as well as the priests and the leading 
prominent Pharisees, took the side of opposition to the 
great Reaper and that harvest work. Similarly today 
in this harvest the most vigorous opponents of the 
Lord's work are the Doctors of Divinity and those 
prominent in religious matters. They can agree 
amongst themselves, and bury all their own serious 
oppositions of doctrine and usage in union meetings, 
etc., Episcopalians, Methodists, Presbyterians, Roman 
Catholics and Jews, as we sometimes see mentioned in 
the public press. But they all with one accord are 
violently opposed to Present Truth as represented in 
the WATCH TOWER publications, opposed to the harvest 
work. 

Just so the Sadducees, the Pharisees and Herodians 
made common cause in opposition to the Master 
and the harvest work in the end of the Jewish age. 
Nevertheless the Lord's work was really helped forward 
by their opposition, for he intended the gathering only 
of the elect class, the fully consecrated, and the opposition 
helped to separate from these all others; and 
just so we find it at the present time. We are not, 
therefore, complaining respecting these oppositions, 
knowing full well that the Chief Reaper has the entire 
situation in charge, and that by divine ability he is 
able to make all things work together for good to the 
right class, and for the accomplishment of his purpose 
in the separations intended at the present time. 

We feel justified according to the Scriptures in supposing 
that Satan, the great Adversary of the divine 
plan, has more or less to do with the oppositions of 

R3883 : page 343 

this present time, as the Scriptures assure us he had 
to do with the opposition to the harvest work of the 
Jewish age. He of course works through natural 
channels, uses human instrumentalities. As an angel 
of light he urges those who have been identified with 



religious institutions of human organization that their 
systems having been used by the Lord to some extent 
in helping faithful souls nearer the truth, it would be 
an error now to think of these institutions or systems 
as being rejected of the Lord and his people called out 
of them. He blinds them to the fact that in the past 
God has repeatedly used the wrath of men to praise 
him, and various institutions not approved by him 
have served as his instrumentalities in accomplishing 
his needed work, just as the Lord had undoubtedly 
blessed and used the priests and Levites, the Doctors 
of the Law and the Pharisees, in olden times, and 
continued to use them more or less up to the time of 
their final testing, when the Master declared publicly, 
"Your house is left unto you desolate."— Matt. 23:38. 

All true Israelites should have recognized the change 
of dispensations; or, as the Scriptures declare, they 
should have known "the time of their visitation." The 
difficulty evidently was that many of them were overcharged 
with the cares of this life, the deceitfulness of 
riches, the honors of men and their sectarian prosperity. 
And so it is here in this harvest time: the test comes 
along similar lines. Fidelity to the voice of him that 
speaketh from heaven through the Bible means, in the 
clearer light now granted us, an opposition to the errors 
and false doctrines long cherished as truths by ourselves 
and forbears and friends. Now as then this increase 
of light, this hearing of the voice of the Lord, brings a 
test— the separation of those who are the true sheep 
from others who do not belong to this flock. "My sheep 
hear my voice and they follow me." 

R3884 : page 343 

The true sheep have long recognized that the voice 
of their creeds from the "dark ages" was not purely and 
simply the voice of the Shepherd: they heard instead 
confused voices, some of them from the Lord and some 
of them from the Adversary; and this confusion is represented 
in the creeds. The word Babylon signifies 
confusion; hence nominal Christendom as a whole is 
today, according to the Scriptures, to be recognized as 
Babylon, confusion. Her voice is not wholly bad nor 
wholly good— it is the message of the Lord contradicted 
and confused by the message of the Adversary. 

But now in the harvest time the Chief Reaper is 
here, and all the wheat class should know it and should 
heed his message and be gathered into the garner. 
Under another figure the Chief Shepherd has come, 
and all the true sheep should now discern clearly between 
his voice and the voice of strangers, heard 
through their creeds and generally from their pulpits- 
voices which speak Evolution, Higher Critical Infidelity, 
and the rejection of the Word of God, which the Apostle 
declares is alone able to make us wise unto salvation 
—that is alone able to qualify the man of God that he 



may be thoroughly furnished unto every good work.— 
2 Tim. 3:17. 

HARVEST HELPERS AND HINDERERS 

One of the chief delusions practised by the Adversary 
at this time is to persuade the Lord's true people 
that any downfall of Babylon in any of its departments 
or denominations would be sacrilegious, would be an 
injury to the cause of Christ, whereas they should see 
clearly that the prosperity of the cause of Christ at the 
present time means the deliverance of his true saints 
from Babylon, and that this shall signify eventually 
the complete fall of Babylon as expressed in the Scriptures, 
the rejection of Babylon, which chronologically 
we located in the Scriptures by the words, "Babylon the 
Great is fallen, is fallen.... Come out of her, my people, 
that ye be not partakers of her sins and receive not 
of her plagues." (Rev. 18:2,4.) This fallen condition of 
Babylon signifies, not her destruction, but her complete 
rejection from God's favor, so that God will use her no 
more as a channel for the bestowment of his best blessings 
—"The voice of the Bridegroom and the Bride shall 
be heard no more at all in thee."— Rev. 18:23. 

We are now in the little season in which the Lord 
is waiting for the response of those whom he is calling 
out of Babylon. Those in her who have the highest 
stations of honor find it most difficult to forsake these 
and to become followers in the footsteps of Jesus to 
the extent of being disowned by the religious teachers 
and made of "no reputation." The Lord's call out of 
Babylon is not an audible one— he merely calls us by 
the principles of righteousness. He lifts the curtain 
before the eyes of understanding of his consecrated 
ones and thus lets them see some of the errors, some of 
the falsities in which they and others of Babylon are 
involved— dishonoring the holy name— blaspheming 
the holy name by misrepresentation of the divine character 
and plan. This is and should be call enough for 
those who are of the Lord's Spirit, for those who love 
the Lord and the honor of his name more than they 
love houses or lands or parents or children or any other 
creature or thing— yea, more than they love their own 
lives. Such are sure to respond and to come out of 
Babylon; others who remain, in spite of seeing the 
light, fail to be overcomers of the highest class— fail 
therefore to be in the elect Bride class, and must be 
counted in with the great company, which will come 
through great tribulation, and will get out of Babylon 
only when she has been cast as a great millstone into 
the midst of the sea— in the time of anarchous trouble 
with which this age will close. 

"WHO IS ON THE LORD'S SIDE?" 

What we all need to see clearly is that if we are on 



the side of the Lord we are helpers in this harvest 

work— helpers in the separation which is now due to 

be accomplished— an assisting of the Lord's true people 

out of Babylon and its confusion and darkness into 

the light of truth and more fully into the grace of God. 

We will all then see that to be in Babylon, upholding 

her systems, upholding her errors, whether by the influence 

of our names upon her rolls, counted in with 

her numbers, or by rendering any financial aid in any 

R3884 : page 344 

measure or degree, we are to that extent opposing the 

work which he is now doing in the world. If all could 

get this correct Scriptural thought in mind it would 

help them amazingly to know the step of duty and to 

take it. All who are the Lord's at heart must be loyal 

to him; and if they could but see the force of our 

Lord's words, that he who is not gathering with 

him in this harvest work, gathering out of Babylon, 

is in opposition to him and hinders his work, it 

would help many such, we believe, to come forward 

courageously and take their stand on the side of 

the Lord in opposition to Babylon and every false doctrine 

and false system. True, the Lord with great 

forbearance permitted the wheat and tares to grow together, 

permitted the truth and the falsehood to be 

mixed together. But now we have come to the turning 

point, now we are in the separating time: he no longer 

says, "Let both grow together," but he says positively 

to those who are his, "Come out of her, my people," 

and all who are his people of the "more than conqueror" 

class will heed the voice and come out before the 

fall of Babylon— come out in time to help rescue others 

by their word and example, and to bring others of the 

truth-hungry sheep out of the Babylon creed-pens into 

the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, that we 

may be taught of God. 

This message, "Come out of her, my people," is 
not to those who are still blind in Babylon; hence it is 
not the first message to be given out at the present time. 
The light, the truth, the divine plan of the ages, is to 
be let shine; the errors of Babylon on various points 
are to be shown, and how these are dishonoring to 
God: then it is that the voice of the truth, the voice of 
these facts, will cry aloud to all who are truly the 
Lord's sheep, to separate themselves from such misrepresentation 
of the divine character and plan, in 
heart, in person, in purse. There are some of the 
Lord's people today who much remind us of Nicodemus 
of old— they are inclined to visit the Lord by 
night, to hold the truth in secret while giving their 
time, their influence, principally in opposition to the 
divine plan. 

So long as any one is in this condition he cannot 
hope to make much progress in growth in grace, in 



knowledge and in the peace and joy and love and other 
fruits of the Spirit, now due to be developed and ripened 
in our hearts and lives. It is an element of the divine 
law that for every ray of light that we receive a certain 
amount of obedience and response must be expected: 
if therefore any would go on and grow in grace and 
grow in knowledge, he must practice the things which 
he has already learned, he must take the steps one by 
one as he comes to them. 

THE SPIRIT OF DIVISION 

Even if we have come out of Babylon and taken 
our stand on the Lord's side the great Adversary pursues 
us, seeking to entrap and ensnare and to hinder 
the work in general. Strange as it may seem, unreasonable 
as it may appear, there are some who have 
recognized Present Truth who have realized that we 
are in the harvest time, that the separation of wheat 
from tares is in progress, that the great Reaper is present 
conducting this work, that under his conduct of 
the work they themselves were gathered out and have 
received many blessings, yet now they begin to scatter 
abroad, they hinder the harvest work, they attempt to 
sow discord amongst the under-reapers by saying all 
manner of evil falsely against some of them, by traducing 
their characters, impugning their motives and by 
implication persuading those who have only gotten free 
from Babylon that the great Reaper himself has nothing 
to do in the matter, and that the proper thing is 
discord, dissension, slashing right and left to scatter 
abroad the wheat already separated from the tares. 

"We are not ignorant of his devices," writes the 
Apostle concerning our great Adversary. (2 Cor. 2:11.) 
We know who is to blame particularly for the present 
attitude of some in opposition to the harvest work. 
We remember how he practiced similarly in the early 
Church; how he got up dissensions amongst the 
Lord's chosen twelve, disputing as to which should be 
greatest— as to which had accomplished the greatest 
service and would have greatest honor. We remember 
how his spirit actuated Peter, so that he tried to interfere 
with the Lord's consecration to sacrifice, and how 
the Lord himself rebuked Peter, saying, "Get thee behind 
me, Adversary; thou savorest not the things that 
be of God but the things which be of man." We remember 
Jesus' own words to that same disciple, saying, 
"Satan hath desired to have thee that he might sift 
thee as wheat, but I have prayed for thee." Shall not 
these incidents from the typical harvest of the Jewish 
age have their weight with us in respect to the harvest 
of this Gospel age? Here, too, Satan is desirous to 
sift out some, and the great Chief Reaper is ready to 
aid all who desire his aid and succor. Here, too, we 
may expect to find some like Judas, of whom it is written, 
"Satan entered into him."— John 13:27. 



Satan's work in the heart of Judas was a gradual 
one: evidently the love of money was the beginning of 
his fall into the Adversary's hands. With some today 
the love of money and business prosperity may be the 
power, the influence, which will lead them to become 
Satan's accomplices. But so far as our observation 
goes temptation today is more likely to be along other 
lines of selfishness— honor of men and desire to be 
thought great and wise, to be leaders. As the spirit of 
selfishness undermined the loyalty of Judas to his Master, 
so a similar spirit of selfishness may today undermine 
loyalty to the Lord, his truth, his work, and thus 
lead on and on until Satan enters in, and the work of 
Satan is manifested more and more in the anger, malice, 
envy, hatred, strife and other works of the flesh 
and the devil, against members of the body of Christ, 
against under-reapers, and therefore against the great 
Chief Reaper, who declares that "he that rejecteth me 
and receiveth not my words hath one that judgeth him"; 
and, "Whoso offendeth one of these little ones that 

R3885 : page 345 

believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone 
were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned 
in the depth of the sea;" and again, "It must needs be 
that offences come; but woe unto that man by whom 
the offence cometh."-Matt. 18:6,7. 

The matter is an individual one, as stated in our 
text: therefore let each of us apply the matter to himself, 
and with the greatest of earnestness and solicitude 
inquire whether he is united fully at heart with 
the Lord, and whether his hands and heart and purse 
and every talent and possession are associated with 
the great Chief Reaper in the present harvest work— 
whether he is gathering into this barn, this garner, or 
whether he is doing a scattering work. The Lord indicates 
that his work is one, and that it is all under his 
supervision. Whoever, therefore, thinks otherwise— 
that he may do a separate harvest work, and that each 
of the Lord's people should do a separate harvest 
work, each according to the bent of his own mind, 
has evidently misunderstood the divine program. 

All of the propositions of Present Truth harmoniously 
agree that the Lord is here supervising and conducting 
the harvest work, calling his own servants and 
reckoning with them. If therefore we have been separated 
from the world and from Babylon, in part or in 
whole, let us look well to it that our stand is either for 
or against the Lord from the moment that we recognize 
the work he is doing. Hence every word and 
every act means to us responsibilities that it shall be for 
the Lord, for the truth, for the gathering of the saints, 
not in opposition to him and his, not to the scattering 
of his work. "He that is not for me is against me; he 
that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad." Very 



soon, we trust, we shall render our accounts to the one 
who gave us this message, and our joy or our shame 
shall be in proportion as we have heeded his words, 
allowing nothing of selfishness or personal ambition to 
have any place in our hearts or conduct. Let us more 
and more seek exclusively to glorify God in our bodies 
and spirits, which are his.— I Cor. 6:20. 



page 345 

BEREAN STUDIES IN "TABERNACLE SHADOWS" 

In the references below, Z. represents this journal 
and T. stands for Tabernacle Shadows. The references 
should be given to brethren and sisters for reading 
in the classes. Free comment should be permitted 
after each reading. 



NOVEMBER 4 

1 . What was the divine purpose in establishing the 
Tabernacle in the wilderness with its services 

and ceremonies? Heb. 10:1; Heb. 8:5; Col. 2:16,17; 
T. 11, par. 1;Z. '02-235 (1st col. par. 1; 2nd 
col. par. 1). 

2. What is a "type"? and how should types be used? Z. '92-100; 
see also WATCH TOWER BIBLE under 

"Types." 

3. What should be our object in studying the Tabernacle 
"shadows"? T.ll, par. 2 to 12, par. 2. 

4. Briefly stated, what was the Tabernacle, and where 
do we find the directions for its construction? 

T.12, par. 3; Ex. 25 to 27; 35 to 40. 

NOVEMBER 1 1 

5. What were the dimensions of the Tabernacle, the 
names and sizes of its two apartments? T.13, par. 1. 

6. How may we avoid the confusion arising from improper 
translations of the "Holy" and "Most 

Holy"? T.13, footnote. 

7. Describe the Court, with its dimensions. T.14, par. 1. 

8. What were the names of the three entrance passages 
into the "Court," the "Holy" and the "Most Holy," 
respectively? T.14, par. 2. 

9. What and where was the "Camp"? T.14, par. 2. 

10. What were the furnishments of the "Court" and 
how situated? T.15, par. 1 to 3. 

1 1 . What were the furnishments of the "Holy" and 
where were they placed? T.15, par. 4 to 17, par. 1. 

12. What furniture did the "Most Holy" contain? T.17, 
par. 2. 



13. What difference in the material of which the furniture 
in the Tabernacle and the "Court" was 

made, and what did this signify? T.17, par. 3. 

14. What did the "Camp" typify? T. 18, par. 1. 

NOVEMBER 18 

15. What did the "Court" represent, and who alone 
might enter into it? T.19, par. 1; Z/02-235 (2nd 
col. par. 2). 

16. Briefly, what did the two apartments of "the Tabernacle" 
proper represent? T.19, par. 2; Z. '02-236 

(1st col., top of page). 

17. Who only of the Israelites might enter the Tabernacle, 
and what is the antitype? T.20, par. 1. 

18. In the antitype, do all who enter the "Court" experience 
a change of nature? T.20, par. 2. 

19. What does entering the antitypical "Holy" imply, 
and how is Christ the "Gate" and the "Door"? 

T.20, par. 2. 

NOVEMBER 25 

20. What parts of the Tabernacle represented the two 
stages of our new life? T.20, par. 3. 

21. Who are those begotten of God through the Word 
of Truth (Jas. 1:18), and how represented in the 
"Holy"? T.20, par. 4; Z/00-227 (1st col., par. 2). 

22. Did the "Most Holy" represent the present or future 
condition of the "overcomers"? T.21, par. 1. 

23. What is the hope, which "as an anchor entereth into 
that within the [second] vail"? Heb. 6:19; 10:20; 

T.21, par. 2. 

24. How do consecrated believers follow in the footsteps 
of their Leader and High Priest, Jesus?" T.21, 

par. 3, to 22 par. 1; Z. '02-236 (1st col., par. 1). 

DECEMBER 2 

25. How do we pass the "vail of sin and unbelief," and 
why was it not necessary for Jesus to take 

this step? T.22, par. 1. 

26. How do we pass the first vail, and into what does 
it lead us? T.22, par. 2, 3. 

27. What does the passing of the second vail typify? 
T.22, par. 3. 

28. Why must we leave our human bodies behind when 
we pass the second vail? I Cor. 15:50; John 3:5,8,13; 
T.23 (top of page). 

29. By way of recapitulation, what did the "Camp," 
"Court" and "Tabernacle" typify? T.23, par. 1. 



R3885 : page 346 



"WITH STRONG CRYINGS AND TEARS" 

--MATTHEW 26:36-50.-NOVEMBER 11.- 

Golden Text:— "Not my will, but thine, be done."— Luke 22:42. 

THE Garden of Gethsemane was not a wild woods nor a 
public garden, but an olive orchard. The name 
seems to indicate that upon the premises was located 
an oil-press for the extraction of the oil from the olives. It 
is supposed to have been the home of the mother of Mark, 
reputed to have been a wealthy widow, a friend of Jesus' 
cause. The house and outbuildings were probably in one 
part of the orchard or "garden." At all events it seems 
evident that the property was under the control of Jesus' 
friends, and that he and his disciples were well acquainted 
with the spot to which, after eating the Memorial Supper, 
our Lord and his disciples adjourned. The site now pointed 
out as this Gethsemane Garden is about half a mile from 
the wall of Jerusalem, and contains some remarkably old 
olive trees, the Garden itself being under the care of some 
monks who reside near by. 

When our Lord and his eleven disciples had arrived at 
the entrance to the Garden or orchard, Jesus left eight of 
them there as a kind of outer guard, taking with him the 
favorite three, Peter, James and John, the three who on various 
occasions had been similarly favored— for instance, in 
connection with the visit to Jairus' daughter— and it was 
the same three who were privileged to see the "vision" on 
the Mount of Transfiguration. While Jesus loved all of his 
disciples, these three were especially dear to him, probably 
because of their special zeal and love for him. But on this 
occasion not even these, his specially dear disciples, could 
enter into or sympathize with the weight which was upon 
our Lord's heart; hence he stationed them and went still 
further along to engage in prayer to the Father. The language 
of all of the accounts of this incident taken together, 
especially in the light of the original Greek, shows that a 
sorrowful loneliness and anguish came upon our Lord with 
great force at this time. While with the disciples, doubtless 
in their interest, he had sought to be cheerful and to give 
them the needful lessons in preparing them for their trials; 
but now, having done all in his power for them, and having 
gone to the Father alone, his thoughts turned inward upon 
himself and his relationship to the Father, and outward 
upon the public shame of his trial and conviction as a blasphemer, 
a seditionist, and further on to the contemptuous 
mockery of the trial, and still further on to his public execution 
between two thieves. All this, now clearly before 
his mind, was enough for anguish, for pain, for deep, poignant 
sorrow. 

"THE MAN OF SORROWS-ACQUAINTED WITH GRIEF" 

In viewing the matter of our Lord's sufferings on this 
occasion it is well to remember that his perfect organization 



—untainted, unblemished by sin, undegraded, undulled by 
dying processes— was much more susceptible to the pains 
and sorrows of the hour upon him than the feelings of others 
of the fallen race could be. Under adverse conditions the 
finer the sentiments and characteristics the greater the pain. 
A hoodlum ringleader might even glory in a ride in the 
patrol wagon, while to a refined person the experience 
would be terrible. Take another illustration: A finely 
educated musician, with an ear for harmonies well developed, 
would know a disturbance and a pain from a discordant 
note that might not at all be appreciated by one of less 
acute musical talent. We could even imagine that one of the 
seditious robbers crucified at our Lord's side might have 
gloried in his death as a triumph had there been over his 
head those words which were over our Lord's head, "This is 
the King of the Jews." It is, of course, difficult for us to 
appreciate perfection, since neither ourselves nor any with 
whom we have relationship are perfect; but we repeat that 
it must be true that the perfect organization of our Lord 
would suffer far more than any of his followers could suffer 
under the same conditions. 

But there was another reason, and indeed it was the 
chief reason, we may be sure, why our Lord sorrowed on this 
occasion so that his agony, becoming very intense, produced 
a bloody sweat. That other reason was his realization of 
his own situation in relationship to God and the covenant 
under which he made his sacrifice. To fulfil the Father's 
will he had left the heavenly glories, stooped even below 
angels to take the human form and nature, so that he by 
God's favor might redeem Adam and, in redeeming him, redeem 
the race condemned in him. He had pleasure, yea, 
"delight," in this self-abasement, as it is written, "I delight 
to do thy will, O my God: thy law is written in my heart." 
(Psa. 40:8.) It was this spirit that led our Lord to a full 
consecration of himself to death as soon as he was thirty 
years of age, and could properly thus present himself as our 
sin offering. The same love and zeal kept him faithful 
during all the years of his ministry, and enabled him to 
count as light afflictions all the experiences of life and the 
various contradictions of sinners against himself— because 
he realized that he was doing the Father's will. 

Why was it, then, that at the very conclusion of his 
ministry, after he had told his disciples of his coming death, 
and having explained that he would be "set at naught by 
the chief priests and elders" and crucified— in the face of 
all this knowledge, confidence, loving obedience, faithfulness 
to his consecration vow unto death— why did our Lord 
experience so terrible an ordeal in the Gethsemane orchard? 

The words of the Apostle explain the situation: he 
says of Jesus, "He offered up strong cryings and tears unto 
him that was able to save him from [out of] death." (Heb. 5:7.) 
But others have died, others have faced death in as 
terrible or even more terrible form, and done it with calmness. 
Why did our Lord break down in such deep sorrow 
and such strong cryings as to bring on a bloody sweat? We 
answer that death to him was a very different proposition 



from what it is to us. We are already nine-tenths dead, or 
worse, through our imperfections, our share in the fall, 
which has benumbed all of our sensibilities, mental, moral 
and physical, and which renders us incapable of appreciating 
life in its highest, best and supremely fullest sense. Not 
so our Lord. "In him was Life"— perfection of life. True 
he had for three and a half years been laying down his life, 
using it in the preaching of the truth, and especially in the 
healing of multitudes of the sick, when virtue or vitality 
went out of him and healed them all. This indeed weakened 
his physical frame and strength, but undoubtedly he 

R3886 : page 347 

continued mentally very full of vigor, life, perfection. Besides, 

our experiences with death and our expectancy of 

death lead us to estimate it as a certainty sooner or later. 

On the contrary, our Lord's experiences were with life: for 

centuries to us untold he had been with the Father and the 

holy angels, enjoying the perfection of endless life; his experiences 

with dying men were but for a few short years, 

and hence to him death had a very different signification 

from what it has to the dying race. 

But there was more than this, much more: The heathen 
have a hope of future life built upon the traditions of their 
ancients, and God's people have hope of a resurrection built 
upon the divine promise and guaranteed to them through 
the merit of Christ's sacrifice— but what hope had Jesus? 
He could not share the heathen's hope that the dead were 
not dead, for he knew to the contrary; he could not share 
hope in a redemption and a raising up through the merit of 
another. His only hope, therefore, was that his entire career, 
from the moment of his consecration to the close, had been 
absolutely perfect, without flaw in the sight of justice, in the 
sight of the heavenly Father. It was here when alone that 
this awful fear overwhelmed him: Had he been perfect in 
every thought and word and deed? Had he pleased the 
Father absolutely? and would he be able on the morrow, 
with such a shrinking from the shame and ignominy as he 
would experience on account of his perfection— would he be 
able unflinchingly to perform his part? and would he, as a 
result, be accounted worthy by the Father to be raised from 
the dead on the third day? Or had he failed, or should he 
fail, even in some slightest particular, and thus be accounted 
unworthy of resurrection and thus become extinct? No wonder 
these weighty matters bore in upon our dear Redeemer's 
heart with unsurmountable sorrows, so that he offered up 
strong cryings and tears unto him who was able to save him 
from death [by a resurrection]. 

Matthew says he prayed, "If it be possible let this cup 
pass from me;" Mark says he prayed, "All things are possible;" 
Luke records it, "If thou be willing," and the substance 
of all is that our Lord was exceeding fearful of himself 
—fearful lest he should make a misstep and thus spoil 
the entire plan of God, which he had so obediently undertaken 
and thus far so loyally performed. Apparently death 



in any form would have been sufficient as a ransom for the 
first Adam's disobedience, meeting his death penalty; 
but it had pleased the Father to put his Son, the Redeemer, 
to the extremest of all tests, laying upon him 
the ignominy, the shame, of the cross. Our Lord's 
query was, Could he stand this? or would it be possible for 
the Father to deviate to that extent without interfering with 
the divine plan or the great work being accomplished? The 
necessary submission is indicated— "Not my will but thine 
be done." 

HE WAS HEARD RESPECTING THE THING FEARED 

The Apostle declares that our Lord was heard, that is, 
answered, in respect to the thing he feared— in respect to 
the cross and the recovery out of death. Prayers for help 
or deliverance from these troubles may be answered in two 
ways: The Father may remove the disturbing cause, or he 
may so strengthen us that we will be able to quite overcome 
the disturbance. And with us, as with the Master, the 
Father usually takes the latter course, and gives us the 
peace and strength through his assurance in his Word. 
Thus we read of our Master that an angel appeared unto 
him strengthening him. We know not what message that 
angel brought to our dear Redeemer in his hour of loneliness 
and violent grief, nor is it necessary that we should: it 
is sufficient for us to know that the Father answered the 
prayer, that it was heard respecting the thing feared, that 
the fear was all removed, that calm reigned in our dear Redeemer's 
bosom thereafter, so that in all the affairs and incidents 
of that night and the following day he was of all 
men the coolest and calmest. We can surmise that the 
Father's assurance through the angel was that he had the 
divine favor, that up to that moment he had been faithful, 
that he had the Father's smile, and that he would be fully 
able to meet, when the time would come, all the exigencies 
of the hour of trial before him. With the assurance of the 
Father's approval no wonder sorrow took its flight, no wonder 
hope, joy, love and peace streamed into the dear Redeemer's 
heart, and he returned to the disciples ready for 
the events that he knew were about to transpire. 

"LET US ALSO FEAR" 

It is well that the Lord's people strive to live a rejoicing 
life, giving thanks always to the Father in all things, 
and rejoicing to be counted worthy to suffer shame, etc., for 
the cause of Christ. But as the Apostle elsewhere declares, 
Let us rejoice with fear: let not our rejoicing be of that 
reckless, self-satisfying kind which might ensnare us and 
entrap us; let our rejoicing be in him who loved us and who 
bought us and who is ever present with us, our best Friend 
and truest Guide. Let us rejoice, not in feelings of our own 
strength and courage and wisdom, but in the fact that we 
have a Savior and a great one, who is able to deliver to the 
uttermost all that come unto the Father through him. Thus 



may the Lord be our strength, our confidence, our shield, our 
buckler. 

In our Lord's case we read that "He trod the winepress 
alone, of the people there was none with him." In his 
very saddest hour, when he most needed comfort and consolation, 
it was not possible for even the closest and dearest 
of his earthly friends to enter into his feelings or sympathize 
with him. How different with us! We are not so different 
from others that they cannot enter into our joys and sorrows, 
our hopes and fears, if they have been begotten of the 
same Spirit and instructed in the same school of Christ. 
With us human counsel and sympathy are both possible 
and proper. Indeed, this is the divine provision as set forth 
in the Scriptures, which assure us that the Lord desires that 
we should comfort one another and build one another up as 
members of the body of Christ. Nevertheless we should never 
neglect the throne of heavenly grace in personal interview 
with our Father and glorified Lord. Whatever of earthly 
companionship we may have, the Lord's companionship must 
never be underestimated or forgotten. The Lord sometimes 
sends his angels to us to comfort us, to give us the assurance 
of his love and to point out to us the sureness of our 
confidence, our hope. But it is not necessary any longer to 
send a heavenly messenger, for already the Lord has on 
the earth angels— messengers, members of the body of Christ 

R3886 : page 348 

—imbued with the Master's Spirit and love, and ready 
always and anxious to speak the kind word, to bind up the 
broken heart, to pour in the oil and wine of consolation and 
joy, and in every way to represent to us the Master himself. 
What joy often comes through such ministries, what blessing 
we have received in this manner, and what a privilege we 
have when occasion offers to be thus used of the Lord as his 
ministers of joy and peace and blessing to the fellow-members! 
Let us be on the alert that no such opportunity pass 
us by. 

The Apostle intimates that we have need of fearing the 
same thing that Jesus feared when he says, "Let us also fear 
lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of 
us should seem to come short of it." As New Creatures we 
have tasted of the new life, the heavenly life: our eyes of 
understanding have to some extent been opened to see the 
grandeurs and beauties of the heavenly things which God 
hath in reservation for them that love him. And we, too, realize 
that our attainment to the glory, honor, immortality and 
joint-heirship with the Lord depends upon our faithfulness 
to our covenant of sacrifice. If faithful, we know that he is 
faithful who has promised; if unfaithful, we know that we 
shall fail of that prize. What manner of persons ought we 
then to be under these conditions? Let us fear the loss of 
such a wonderful prospect of glory, honor and immortality, 
in the sense that we will seek constantly to fulfil our covenant 
and to abide in our Father's love and in our Redeemer's 
favor and smile. All who are thus walking carefully may 



have their moments in which they will experience something 
of the shadows of Gethsemane loneliness, for their testing, 
for their proving, and to develop in them the proper fear 
necessary to their full knowledge, to their appreciation of 
the situation and to faithfulness. 

"SLEEP ON NOW" 

During that hour of intense mental agony our Lord 
prayed and prayed again, and in the interim came to his 
disciples, doubtless craving such sympathy as they would be 
able to give; but he found them asleep, their eyes being 
heavy from sorrow, says the Evangelist. The hour was 
midnight; they were sharing his sorrows, but unable to appreciate 
them rightly. The Master chided, probably especially 
Peter, when he said, "What, could you not watch with 
me one hour? Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation." 
The noble Peter had but a short time before declared, 
"Lord, though all men forsake thee, yet will not I," and 
even now he had the sword which he subsequently used in 
seeking to defend the Lord, and yet he did not realize the 
importance of the hour; he knew not, as the Master did, how 
serious were the testings and how close; he knew not that it 
was a very short time until the Master's words would be fulfilled. 
"Before the cock crow twice thou shalt deny me 
thrice." Ah, had he realized as the Master did the trials 
that were near, how vigilant he doubtless would have been! 
And is it not so with us to-day? Are we not as the Lord's 
people in this harvest-time drawing close to the Gethsemane 
hour of the Church? Are we not already in the hour of 
temptation to a considerable extent? Will not the last members 

R3887 : page 348 

of the body soon follow the Head unto complete sacrifice? 
How ready are we for the ordeal? Are we asleep, or 
are we heeding the words of the Apostle, They that sleep 
sleep in the night, but we who are of the day should be 
awake, sober, putting on the whole armor of God that we 
may be able to stand in this evil day, in the time of trial 
already upon us, and in the still severer trials which no 
doubt will be ours in the near future? Are we prepared for 
the time when there will possibly be a general scattering, 
as these "all forsook him and fled"? How courageous we 
will be in our hour of trial will probably depend much 
upon our following the Master's example and securing first 
of all that positive conviction that we have the divine approval. 
Let us not then avoid the Gethsemane moment if it 
come to us in the Lord's providence, but let us also with 
strong cryings and tears look up to him who is able to save 
us out of death by the glorious First Resurrection, and let 
us remember that we have an Advocate, we have a helper. 
The Lord is our angel who speaks to us the Father's message, 
telling us that if we abide in his love all will be right 
in the end, and that he is able and willing to bring us off 
conquerors, yea, more than conquerors through his own 



merit. 

"THE SPIRIT IS WILLING, BUT THE FLESH IS WEAK" 

This was our dear Redeemer's comment upon his disciples. 
He appreciated the fact that at heart they were loyal 
to him— he was not unmindful of their forsaking all to be 
his followers, he is not a hard Master, but on the contrary 
ever willing to accept our heart intentions, even where the 
flesh fails to come up to the perfect standard; and doubtless, 
therefore, his words, "Sleep on now, and take your rest," 
were not meant as sarcasm, but in very truth he wished that 
they might get a little rest, refreshment, in view of the ordeals 
of the day approaching. But not long did they rest 
until the trial was upon them. Judas guided a multitude 
seeking for Jesus— not Roman soldiers, but a multitude, a 
rabble of the curious, with certain servants of the High 
Priest, who was also a Judge. These, then, were court officers, 
an impromptu sheriff's posse, that came upon Jesus in 
the garden and arrested him by night, fearing that an arrest 
in daylight would create a disturbance at a time when the 
city was full of visitors to the Passover, and when disturbances 
were rather to be expected, and by the officers of the 
law sought to be carefully avoided. 

Judas either knew the garden as a spot frequented by 
Jesus and the disciples, or had learned at the Supper where 
the company intended to go subsequently. When Satan 
entered into him and he resolved to earn the thirty pieces of 
silver by betraying the Lord, he left the gathered company 
at the Passover Feast and went to the chief priests and 
bargained with them, and now, as the result of that engagement, 
he came forward in advance of the multitude mentioned 
to meet Jesus and to indicate to the soldiers the one 
they wished to apprehend. As he approached he saluted, 
saying, "Hail, Rabbi," and kissed him. The Greek indicates 
that he kissed him repeatedly. Jesus received these expressions 
that belong to love, and knew that they were traitorous, 
yet made no evil retort. Instead he most kindly and 
respectfully said, "Friend, do that for which thou art come." 
The word "friend" does not signify loving friend— it is not 

R3887 : page 349 

from the Greek word philos, beloved, but from hetaire, which 
signifies comrade or partner. 

AVOID THE JUDAS SPIRIT 

Truly every disciple of Christ, realizing that the issue is 
with himself, will desire to follow such a course as will insure 
against his ever becoming a Judas to the Lord and his 
cause. God's foreknowledge that one of the twelve would 
prove a traitor, not only receiving the grace of God in vain, 
but using it in a most villainous manner, was not the cause 
of Judas' fall. The Apostle says, "The Lord knoweth them 
that are his. And, Let every one that nameth the name of 



Christ depart from iniquity." (2 Tim. 2:19.) It is for us to 
determine how the favors of God shall be received and used, 
and God's foreknowledge in no sense of the word influences 
us. 

We have every reason to suppose that Judas at the beginning 
of his career as a disciple was sincere. We may 
safely conclude that the gross deflection of his heart and 
character manifested at last came upon him gradually— that 
it began with the merest suggestion and ended with the 
most awful tragedy. The suggestion was probably along the 
line of selfishness; that he was not sufficiently honored 
amongst the twelve; that our Lord seemed to have a preference 
for Peter, James and John, and thus showed his lack 
of superior knowledge and ability— discernment. Doubtless 
Judas encouraged his own spirit of criticism. Self-complacent, 
he no doubt thought he saw places where Jesus and 
the others erred in judgment, failed to take advantage of 
opportunities, probably said the wrong word at the right 
time, etc., etc. Such a heady spirit, such a critical spirit, 
such a self-satisfied spirit, such a selfish spirit always go 
before a fall. The history of the Church as well as our individual 
experiences attest this. 

When Judas perceived that the cause of Christ was not 
prospering— that Jesus not only did not respond to the suggestions 
of the multitudes here and there that he become a 
king, but that on the contrary his mind turned in another 
direction, anticipating violence from the rulers of the Jews, the 
suggestion probably came to Judas that it was time to begin 
to "feather his own nest," so that when the disruption would 
come he would be one of the party who would gain and not 
lose by his experiences as a disciple. Thus selfishness was in 
control of his mind and led him to pilfering, as it is written, 
"He was a thief, and carried the bag." That is to say, he 
was the treasurer of the little company, and appropriated 
some of the funds to his own personal account. We can even 
suppose that in his perfidy he exonerated his theft with the 
thought that he had been giving his valuable time to the 
cause, and that what he took would not more than reimburse 
him the value thereof. Such is the spirit of selfishness, the 
very reverse of the Spirit of the Lord— the spirit of self-sacrifice 
and whole-souled service to the Truth. Whoever has 
this spirit in any measure has the Judas spirit to that extent, 
and the result will surely be evil whether it amounts to such 
an awful result as that of Judas or not. 

Our Lord declares that his faithful members in the 
world represent him, and that anything done against them is 
done against him. We may be sure, therefore, that the Judas 
spirit of selfishness even today might lead to betrayal of the 
Lord by the betrayal and injury of one of the least of his 
followers. Nor should it surprise us that these representatives 
of the Judas spirit follow his course even to the extent 
of betraying with a kiss, and ofttimes profess great love and 
respect for the members of the body of Christ, whom they 
secretly smite for their personal gain, or in an endeavor to 
gain place or influence or other selfish aggrandizement. Let 
each follower of the Lord apply to himself exactly Judas' 



words, saying, "Lord, is it I?" And let us each examine our 
own hearts to see to what extent anything of this Judas spirit 
might be lurking there, seeking a favorable moment to entrap 
us and destroy us as New Creatures. 



R3887 : page 349 

"DESPISED AND REJECTED OF MEN" 

--MATTHEW 26:57-68.- 

"HE is despised and rejected of men," wrote the Prophet 
Isaiah (53:3), as in the Golden Text of 
this lesson. How strange it all appears to those 
who have come to know the Lord and to appreciate man 
from the standpoint of the divine Word. Nevertheless, as 
we take up the narrative and follow the circumstances as 
though we were there present we perceive that it was difficult 
for the chief actors surrounding our Lord to realize the 
true situation. And turning from these to ourselves in the 
present time we may apply a lesson and realize that we, too, 
are in touch with great and important subjects in the present 
harvest-time; that we, too, probably are so close to great 
events as to be unable to appreciate their true import; that 
we, too, should go very carefully and should continually 
watch and pray lest we also fall into temptation. The 
thought of our own precarious condition will doubtless 
give us sympathy with those whose reprehensible conduct is 
noted in this lesson. 

Our last lesson left Jesus and the disciples at the garden 
gate. There Peter, who had one of the two swords 
previously mentioned, started to use it in defence of his 
Master, at the first blow smiting off the ear of Malchus, one of 
the servants of the High Priest's court. As Jesus said when instructing 
them to bring their swords, and being informed there 
were two swords already in the company, "It is enough," so 
this mere demonstration of the willingness of the disciples to 
defend him was quite sufficient, and the order at once came to 
"Put up thy sword." The opportunity was thus furnished 
for Jesus to heal the ear and so display his gracious magnanimity 
toward his enemies. The disciples apparently 
learned most thoroughly the lesson that he that taketh to 
the sword shall perish by the sword, and hence never afterward 
do we hear of their using force or violence in 
the service of the Lord. How well it would have been had 
all the followers of the Lord learned and applied to themselves 
this same lesson. The neglect of it has stained the 
pages of history to the dishonor of the Lord's teaching and 
been injurious to his real cause, while favorable to nominal 

R3888 : page 350 

Christianity— Churchianity, Christendom and its large crop 
of tares. All of the Lord's people should take to heart this 



message and remember the Lord's word, "Blessed are the 
peacemakers; they shall be called the children of God." 
(Matt. 5:9.) We are never to use the sword, earthly power, 
in seeking to promote the cause of the Master. He has 
power enough, and when the time comes for its exercise he 
will take to himself this great power, and the sword of justice 
will be unsheathed and cause a terrible time of trouble. 
But that will be the due time, and the Lord will then so take 
charge of the affairs of earth that the lessons from that experience 
will prove profitable and not injurious. The only sword 
which the Lord's people now may use is the sword of the 
Spirit, the Word of God, and it is to cleave its way by its 
own sharpness and penetrating power rather than force of 
language and invective, or any manifestation of anger on the 
part of those who use it. On the contrary, they are directed 
to speak the truth in love, that thus the truth may do its 
own work in its own way. 

"ALL FORSOOK HIM AND FLED" 

At first glance it would appear that the disciples were 
very cowardly when they all forsook the Master at the time 
of his arrest. But then we must remember that this was our 
Lord's own suggestion. He said to the officers, "If I am the 
one you seek, let these go their way." They discerned that 
they could be of no use to the Lord after he was in the 
hands of the high priests, who represented the civil court, 
the law of the land, and whom they knew to be prejudiced 
against Jesus. They may have even taken Jesus' words to 
imply a command that they should go their way. Furthermore 
they were perplexed: they had been expecting such 
different results from their adherence to Jesus. When they 
looked for his exaltation he talked about his crucifixion, 
was sad and distressed, and now was arrested. Everything 
was perplexing, disheartening, and they probably went to 
their homes thoroughly discouraged, except Peter and John, 
who followed him afar off. Arriving at the High Priest's 
palace and court-room, Jesus was first led before the aged 
priest Annas and cross-questioned a little, and then sent to 
the court of his son-in-law, the official priest, Caiaphas. 
His presentation before Annas was probably merely a matter 
of courtesy, as apparently it was Caiaphas who had caused 
his arrest and was waiting with certain elders of the Jews to 
examine him preparatory to his trial, with a view to ascertaining 
just what charges they would bring against him. 
(But in the morning it was evidently not thought worth while 
to have a formal trial according to the Law. Hence the unlawful 
night hearing was really the trial. The determination 
to get Pilate to try and execute Jesus was the thought, 
though to Pilate they subsequently implied that they had 
condemned Jesus lawfully.) 

SEEKING FALSE WITNESSES 

We have little reason to doubt that the High Priest and 
elders had considerable knowledge of Jesus, his teachings 



and his mighty works. We are informed that one of his 

last miracles in the vicinity of Jerusalem, the awakening of 

Lazarus from death, had so stirred the Scribes and Pharisees 

that they determined that Jesus must be put to death, because 

they feared that a few more such miracles would thoroughly 

arouse the people on his behalf and thus break their 

control over them. They now had their victim in their 

grasp, arrested without the knowledge of the people and 

without arousing any disturbance. And they still had the 

murderous intention respecting him. It was merely a question 

how they might execute it— not how they might serve the 

ends of justice, but how they might appear to conform to the 

requirements of justice and the Law, of which they were representatives, 

and yet accomplish the villainy, the murder, 

that was in their hearts. Hence we read that they sought 

false witnesses: they did not wish true witnesses, who 

would tell what they knew about the Master, but false witnesses, 

who would misrepresent him, his teachings, etc., 

either ignorantly through misunderstanding him or designedly 

with a view to gaining favor with the officers of the 

court. But they found none. It is certainly to the credit of 

those connected with the court, aside from its chief officers, 

that they neither seriously misunderstood our Lord's teachings 

nor were willing to misrepresent them. Finally, the best 

they could do was to find two witnesses who declared that 

they had heard Jesus say that if the Temple were destroyed 

he would be able to raise it up in three days. Nothing about 

this was false evidence— it was what the majority of those who 

heard probably understood our Lord to mean. It was subsequently, 

under the enlightenment of the holy Spirit, that the 

apostles understood that he "spoke of the temple of his 

body"; hence these two witnesses are not to be blamed as 

false witnesses, though doubtless in their ignorance they 

supposed that the testimony they bore was against Jesus and 

discreditable to him, as showing a spirit of boastfulness and 

a disregard for the greatness and grandeur of the Temple. 

The High Priest, however, realized that he had utterly failed 

of getting any testimony against the Lord. But he did not 

wish this to so appear to all the people present, and hence 

he affected to regard this testimony as very damaging, and 

indignantly questioned Jesus whether or not he heard that 

testimony, and if he had nothing whatever to say in rebuttal 

—was he unable to refute the witness, the testimony? Jesus 

answered nothing. Had the witnesses repeated his 

words exactly there was nothing in them upon which any 

law would condemn him. 

"ART THOU THE CHRIST?" 

Finally, unable to get Jesus to discuss the Temple 
question, and thus possibly say something that could be 
considered incriminating, the High Priest bethought him that 
a leading question put in a most solemn form might succeed 
in getting Jesus to make some admission that would be incriminating. 
The question was, "Tell us whether thou be 
the Christ [Messiah], the Son of God?" Caiaphas probably 



knew that Jesus had not boasted of his Messiahship, 
that rather he had gone quietly about his work, doing good 
and instructing the people, and allowing his works to testify 
that "never man spake like this man," and that he was 
working the works of him that sent him and was therefore 
the Messiah. It was a question, therefore, whether or not 
Jesus would incriminate himself by admitting his Messiahship. 
Had he denied it what recourse for a charge against 
him would have remained? But Jesus did not deny this 
question. To have remained silent even would have been 
to deny himself, denying the truth, denying the High Priest 

R3888 : page 351 

of the nation the knowledge and the corresponding responsibility 
of the hour. It was every way due to the head of the 
nation he should know that Jesus claimed to be the Messiah. 
Our Lord therefore answered, "Thou hast said," that is, I assent 
to what you have said, or, I am the Messiah, the Son of 
God, and I will volunteer further to assure you that by and by, 
hereafter, ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right 
hand of power and coming in the glories of heaven. 

In this statement, as in nearly all of our Lord's utterances, 
much was said in few words. It was not his intention 
nor would it have been proper to have explained 
the future of the divine plan at that time under those 
circumstances to those people. "The secret of the Lord 
is with them that reverence him, and he will show them his 
covenant." Hence our Lord did not say, as he might 
have said, "You are about to condemn me; I will be crucified 
this day between two thieves; I will rise again on the 
third day; I will ascend to the Father in forty days thereafter; 
I will then send my holy Spirit at Pentecost, and the 
work will be begun of a spiritual kingdom which will find 
the very elect throughout the whole earth. When these are 
found I will come again at my second advent in power and 
great glory, not to be tried by you, but to be your judge and 
to be the King and Ruler of the whole world, and to grant 
the blessings of the Millennial Kingdom to every creature, 
with full opportunity of coming to full knowledge and full 
blessing." We see that what our Lord stated implied that 
he knew all this, but it was not the proper time for its 
declaration. 

What lessons are there for us in connection with these 
facts? One is that when we seek information on any subject 
we should be thoroughly honest, thoroughly just, and not 
seek opportunity to misrepresent another, no matter what 
useful ends we might suppose would be served by such a 
course. To all who are the Lord's people in any sense of 
the word justice must stand out prominently. It is the very 
foundation of God's throne, we read, and surely must be the 
foundation of all character amongst those who are the Lord's 
and who hope ever to come off conquerors in this present 
time. Only the honest, only the just, seem to be influenced 
by the message of the Lord's Word at the present time, and 
those who lose their candor, their honesty, their sincerity, 



seem very certain to lose the Truth also. Let us all beware, 
therefore, of any slackness along this line of justice— toward 
God, toward ourselves, toward our friends, toward our enemies. 
We can not, we must not, be less than just to any, 
though we may be and should be more than just to all— yea, 
loving, generous. 

FEIGNING RIGHTEOUS INDIGNATION 

Hearing Jesus' admission that he was Messiah, the High 
Priest realized that this was the strongest, indeed the only 
complaint he could make against the Lord of anything that 

R3889 : page 351 

had the appearance of evil. Nor was there evil in this, for 
it was the truth; but feigning great piety, great respect for 
God, great reverence for the promise of God respecting Messiah 
—feigning to be thunderstruck with such a claim by 
Jesus, Caiaphas arose, his face full of pretended indignation 
and wrath against such a claim, which he affected to think 
so dishonored God as to be blasphemy, he rent or tore his 
robe as an expression of his pretended righteous indignation. 
He cried out to the people, "This is blasphemy— what further 
need have we of witnesses? Behold, now ye have heard his 
blasphemy. What think ye? What would be the proper 
punishment for such an awful crime as this? How shall we 
deter others from similarly coming forward and claiming to 
be Messiah, the Son of God, healing the sick, giving examples 
of his power in awakening the dead and casting out the devils 
from the people?" The elders, there assembled for the 
very purpose of murdering Jesus, answered, voted, "He is 
worthy of death." Jesus must wait, and they meanwhile 
reviled him— if not the elders and officers, yet with their 
knowledge and without their hindrance— and smote the Lord 
and spat upon him and derided him, and, calling him a 
Prophet, asked him to prove his ability as a Messiah and 
prophet by naming his tormentors. "But as a sheep before 
her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth" to defend 
himself, nor did he use the power invested in him, nor call 
for the twelve legions of angels who he previously declared 
would have been ready to respond for his release. On the 
contrary, he realized that he was but carrying out his covenant 
of sacrifice and submitted himself accordingly, desiring 
that this or whatever was the Father's will might be done in 
him. 

What is the lesson in this for us? We have covenanted 
to learn of him, to follow his example. How do we receive 
the buffetings, the trials, the "contradictions of sinners"? 
Are we similarly patient, long suffering? Do we endure these, 
realizing that nothing could happen to us except by our 
Father's knowledge— nothing that he is not both able and 
willing to overrule for our good? It will not do for us to 
say that if we deserved the evil treatment we could take it 
patiently, for we are to remember the truth of what one of 
the thieves confessed, "This man hath done nothing amiss." 



We cannot say that we have been perfect in all of our dealings 
with those who may despitefully use us and persecute 
us, even though our intentions have been the best, and even 
though we have in some degree rendered good for the evil 
we receive. Let us remember the Apostle's words on this 
line, "For what glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your 
faults, ye shall take it patiently? But if when ye do well, 
and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with 
God. For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also 
suffered for us, leaving us an example that ye might follow 
in his steps; who did no sin, neither was guile found in his 
mouth; who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; when 
he suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself to him 
who judgeth righteously."— 1 Pet. 2:20,23. 

Let us not only see to it that we are as nearly as possible 
faultless and undeserving of reproaches and buffetings, 
but when these experiences come to us let us remember to 
take them patiently, uncomplainingly, and thus to more and 
more develop and exhibit the character-likeness of our Lord. 
Those who thus do, have the Lord's guarantee that every 
such experience shall prove a blessing in the end. Those 
who, on the contrary, undertake to "battle for their rights," 
show that they either do not understand the nature of the 
covenant they have made to take up the cross, or else that 
they are unwilling to comply with the terms of that covenant. 



page 353 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVII NOVEMBER 15 No. 22 
A.D., 1906-A.M., 6035 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 355 

From Devilish to Saintly Surgery 355 

Another Operation at Toledo 356 

Secretary of the Navy on Anarchy 356 

Glasgow Convention Report 357 

One-Day Conventions 358 

Earthly Things Appreciated Most 358 

Do All as Unto the Lord 359 

"Ye Can Do Nothing Against the Truth" 362 

"As Deceivers and Yet True" 363 

An Apology for Pilate 364 

Barabbas Chosen— by Popular Vote 365 

Some Interesting Letters 366 

page 354 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 



-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKERSTR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



OUR SYMBOLIC PINS 



For some time the friends have been inquiring for symbolic 
pins, and now we are able to supply them. One represents 
the scene of Isa. 1 1:6. Sister Darlington drew the design for 
us and it is very fine. The other is a representation of the 
cross, crown and wreath which appears on the upper left corner 
of the TOWER cover. These are without metal rims, celluloid 
finish— beautiful. The latter design is in three sizes, 
5/8 in., 7/8 in. and 1-1/4 in.; the former is 1-1/4 in. in diameter. 

Getting these made in large quantities permits us to supply 
them at 25 cents per dozen— postpaid. We will assort 
them three of each unless you specifically mention a different 
preference. They are ready now. You may order at once. 
From their appearance you would expect them to cost each, 
the price we charge by the dozen. 

WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 



These are substantially made of stiff cloth boards, and can 
hold two years' issues of the WATCH TOWER. They prevent 
soiling and loss. Price, postpaid, 50c. 



R3894 : page 354 
Vol. III. in Norwegian and Vol. V. in Swedish, just issued. 



We again have "The Wonderful Story" in stock. 



R3889 : page 355 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
FROM DEVILISH TO SAINTLY SURGERY 



WE HAVE already noted in these columns an 
instance of how surgery, the trepanning of 
the skull and the removal of a tumor 
from the brain, changed a bad boy into a good one. 
We now note, in the American-Journal-Examiner, 
the account of another such case: a bandit, desperado, 
train robber and murderer of the Northwest, 
after being imprisoned was found to have some 
good traits and became a very useful man in the prison 
service, but nevertheless retained a vindictive, murderous 
spirit. Seizing his opportunity he was about to kill 
one of the keepers. The record says: "He fought like a 
madman, and it was only after a spirited struggle that 
the handcuffs were placed upon his wrists. When the 
man regained his feet he said, "I never expected to be 
taken alive. Give me my arms and I will defy the whole 
town." The man's name is Charles Holzhay, but he 
was generally known as Black Bart. 

The attention of the surgeons connected with the 
prison was drawn to the man, an operation was performed, 
a tumor removed from the brain, since which 
time Black Bart gives every evidence of being greatly 
changed in his general disposition, and, as the newspaper 
records— "Before they cut out the bad spot in the 
brain of Black Bart, the murderous bandit, he was the 
wildest, fiercest villain and freebooter of the Northwest; 
now he is tame and mild, a teacher in a Sunday 
School, a reader of tracts, a praying man full of noble 
impulses." 

No one for a moment supposes that all the meanness 
and weakness of the world are caused by brain 
tumors; but from our standpoint we can readily see 
that all the badness and meanness of the world is 
caused more or less directly by the fall, the imperfect 
twists and ruts of the human mind in consequence of 
depravity. Sin and death working in our race have 
wrought the general havoc of mind and morals and 



physique which makes of the human family what the 

Apostle describes as the "groaning creation." We can 

readily see that the will may have large influence in rectifying 

these defects, so that those who give their hearts 

to the Lord and turn from sin and meanness to copy 

the Lord's character to the best of their ability, may 

and do make considerable progress; but we all are witnesses 

that perfection is not attainable by any of us, 

however much we will to have it. As the Apostle said, 

"To will is present with me, but how to do [all that I 

will] that which is good, I find not."— Rom. 7:18. 

What the world needs, then, is the great Restorer, 
who, during the "times of restitution of all things 
spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the 
world began," shall lift up the poor, degenerate race 
from its fallen condition and bring it gradually back to 
all that was lost in Eden by the first man's transgression 
—back to the image and likeness of God. True, 
there will still be room for the human will to exercise 
itself, and any who knowingly, willingly, understandingly 
reject and oppose the divine restitution work will 
be utterly destroyed in the Second Death.— 
Acts 3:19-23. 

The whole world, then, is waiting for the good 
Physician, and the Scriptures tell us how long they 
must wait and what blessings will come to them as 
soon as the waiting time is ended. They must wait 
until the Church, the Body of Christ, has been selected 
from the world and proven itself worthy of its call by 
willing and glad participation with Jesus in his work 
of sacrifice, that they may also be participators in his 
coming work of glory and blessing and uplifting. Then 
all the blind eyes shall be opened, all the deaf ears 
shall be unstopped and the lame shall be healed— 
physical, mental and moral healing and enlightenment 
are herein proclaimed as the work of the great Restorer, 
soon to begin. The entire work will require one day's 
time— not a twenty-four-hour day, but the "Day of 
Christ," for, as the Apostle Peter declares, "we should 
not be ignorant of this one thing, that a day with the 
Lord is as a thousand years."— 2 Pet. 3:8. 

R3889 : page 356 

ANOTHER OPERATION AT TOLEDO 



The Toledo News-Bee says:— "Nearly a year has 
elapsed since Doctors J. & P. Donnelly operated on 
Harold Hurley, an incorrigible boy, at St. Vincent's hospital, 
and since that time four other operations of similar 
character have been performed. The Hurley boy 
was a burden to his family and a menace to the neighborhood: 
he is a changed youngster, obedient, kind, 
tractable, and the parents are ready witnesses to the 



efficacy of the operation which rescued their boy from 
degradation, vice and crime. 

"From all over the country, especially from large 
cities, come eager inquiries for the Toledo surgeons 
seeking information as to the nature of the operation 
and its results. Already in Philadelphia the city is 
bearing the expenses of the operations on incorrigibles 
and considers them a good investment, while New 
York is seriously considering the same problem. 

"The last operation of this kind was performed in 
St. Vincent's hospital Friday morning (Aug. 24) by Dr. 
J. Donnelly, on a 13-year-old boy, who was released 
from the workhouse and taken directly to the hospital 
for the operation. 

R3890 : page 356 

"Dr. Alfred Gordon reports that he has discovered a 
surprisingly large number of cases of feeble-mindedness 
among children supposed to be victims of cruelty, 
who are really in a condition bordering closely upon 
imbecility, and calling for constant and patient care, of 
a character their busy parents are unable to give them. 

"It is proposed that these children in many cases 
shall be sent to the Institution for Feeble-Minded, which 
is to be built at Spring City, where the evil can be corrected 
to a great extent and perhaps result in the total 
cure of the children, who would otherwise be turned 
out upon the world, misunderstood and regarded as 
common criminals, for it is believed that the criminal 
instinct in their brains, caused by the defect, would increase 
as they grow older. 

"The Philadelphia Inquirer tells of the organization 
of a Society there for surgical operations on juvenile 
incorrigibles apparently destined to a criminal career 
through some physical defect. It says: 

'"In all seven children were put under the knife by 
a number of the city's most prominent surgeons, who 
performed operations of varied natures from the most 
delicate to those of minor importance, calculated to improve 
the mental and moral conditions of the patients. 
The total number of children examined was 147, and 
about fifty per cent, of these were found to be suffering 
from refraction of the eyes. Glasses have been ordered 
for all of these, and wherever possible the parents have 
been required to meet the cost, but the Society furnishes 
them free to the others.'" 

SECRETARY OF THE NAVY ON ANARCHY 



Secretary of the Navy C. J. Bonaparte's recent 
address is thus reported by the secular press: 

After reviewing briefly the history of anarchism 
in this country, the efforts made in the past to check 



its growth and its probable peril to nations for years, 
Mr. Bonaparte said: 

"In the first place, the unlawful acts prompted 
by anarchism should be made crimes, in so far as they 
are not, strictly speaking, crimes already, and as crimes 
they should be visited with such penalties as are particularly 
distasteful to the criminals and therefore the 
most effective deterrents to crime. In dealing with a 
convicted anarchist two facts may well be remembered: 
the chances of his real reformation are so small that they 
may be safely neglected, and we can appeal for practical 
purposes to but one motive on his part to discourage a 
repetition of his offence, namely, the fear of physical 
pain and death. 

"On anarchists the death penalty should be unequivocally 
imposed by law and inflexibly executed 
whenever the prisoner has sought, directly or indirectly, 
to take life. For offences of less gravity, I advise a comparatively 
brief, but very rigorous imprisonment, 
characterized by complete seclusion, deprivation of all 
comfort, and denial of any form of distraction, which 
could be, to my mind, advantageously supplemented 
by a severe, but not a public whipping; the lash, of all 
punishments, most clearly shows the culprit that he 
suffers for what his fellowmen hold odious and disgraceful 
and not merely for reasons of public policy. 

"The final and most truly vital condition of success 
in ridding our country of anarchism in practice is that 
American public opinion should recognize the utter 
emptiness, the inheritent folly of its theory, and of all 
the kindred ready-made, furnished-while-you-wait 
schemes for the social regeneration of mankind. 
Civilized society, as it exists to-day, if it be nothing 
more, is the outcome of all the strivings for justice 
and happiness of the human race during thousands of 
years. What monstrous presumption, what preposterous 
conceit, for any man, were he the wisest, the most 
learned, the most justly famed of his own age or of all 
ages, to imagine that, with but the dim, flickering lights 
of his own dull, feeble mind, with but the few imperfect 
lessons of his own short, ill-spent life to guide his hand, 
he could cast down and build up again this incredibly 
vast, this infinitely complex fabric and improve on its 
structure!" 



Poor world! All are deranged in some measure 
as a result of the Adamic fall. Some go crazy on religion, 
others on politics, others are money-mad. Only a few 
have what the Apostle calls, "the spirit of a sound 
mind." (2 Tim. 1:7.) All deserve our sympathy as 
all have the Lord's sympathy and are soon to have his 
aid, through Christ's Millennial Kingdom. 

Anarchists are probably as sincere as others, but 
their brains have a different twist from those of the 



majority. They have lost all hope of the establishment 
of a reign of righteousness by human instrumentality; 
and in their selfishness and sympathy exaggerate the 
woes and wrongs suffered by themselves and others, 
and propose the extermination of the rich; because 
lacking the spirit of love, "the spirit of a sound mind," 
they see them as wholly evil. 

From the standpoint of God's Word we see that 
in the near future Socialists will become quite strong 
throughout the civilized world, as in opposition to 
anarchy, but that later on their failure to achieve their 
hopes will make anarchists of the majority of them 
and speedily convulse the world in the greatest time 
of trouble the world has ever known, which will completely 
overthrow present institutions. Thank God we 
see still further in his Word— that on that anarchistic 

R3890 : page 357 

wreck the Lord will establish the Kingdom of his dear 
Son, "under the whole heavens." 

No doubt Mr. Bonaparte's prescription of death 
for anarchists will soon become law, under the claim 
that society's life, as well as the lives of its individual 
members must be preserved, secured. And no doubt, 
also, at about that time the law of might will become 
so powerful as to throttle all liberty. And no doubt 
about then the enemies of Present Truth, as we expound 
it, will be numerous enough and powerful enough to 
throttle Zion's Watch Tower publications, if not to 
persecute its subscribers. Opposition to civil government 
being esteemed injurious and worthy of a death 
sentence, it may be that a further step will be to declare 
a State Church standard of religious doctrine, and to 
proscribe us and others who cannot assent to it as 
"religious anarchists" also worthy of death. Let us 
not forget that our Lord and his apostles thus suffered 
as religious anarchists, because not in accord with the 
so-called orthodoxy of their day. "When ye see these 
things begin to come to pass, then lift up your heads 
and rejoice; knowing that your redemption [deliverance] 
draweth nigh."— Luke 21:28. 



R3890 : page 357 

GLASGOW CONVENTION REPORT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is said that "Coming events cast their shadows 
before," and surely we felt that the Convention just 
past was affected by the knowledge that the great Convention 
of the Church is near at hand. But it was not 
a shadow we had— rather it was the light from the 
"glory to come" which gave us such a happy and blessed 



time together. While all the conventions are good 
there was a general consent to the feeling that this has 
been our best time. If we might judge we should say 
that while the addresses and talks were good and helpful 
it was not in these specially that the chief advantage 
was felt or the chief gain made; but that the fellowship 
and the encouragement gained from personal intercourse 
between the brethren— the communion of the 
holy Spirit— gave the real help and advantage. But all 
was good, and we praised the Lord for the foretaste of 
the "good to come." 

The British brethren were better represented than 
ever: the whole country from extreme North to furthest 
South sent messages of love, and a showing of 
interest. The Convention meetings were held in a 
pleasant hall, situated in one of the city parks; and 
besides the overflowing cup with which we were fed 
inside the hall the Lord favored us with the good 
things of nature. The weather smiled, and the brethren 
smiled, and the trees of the park, moved with the 
wind, clapped their hands for joy, and seemed delighted 
with the privilege of holding up the large advertisement 
telling that a "Bible Students' Convention" 
was being held. 

Many prayers had been offered for the Father's 
blessing and guidance, and the Convention at once 
struck a high note of expectation and spiritual desire, 
and this was maintained throughout the meetings. 
Brother Hemery gave a welcome on behalf of the absent 
President of the Society— Brother Russell— and 
Brother Edgar, on behalf of the Glasgow brethren, 
gave a welcome to the Society. Then we had a most 
inspiring talk from Brother Bilsbrough on "Our Good 
Fight." Other brethren who addressed the Convention 
were Brother Barton, Brother Edgar, Brother Johnston 
and Brother Hemery. On the second day thirty-three 
brothers and sisters were immersed, symbolizing their 
consecration to the Lord: our hearts went out to them 
and our prayers ascended for them that they might 
walk worthy of the grace given to them. The whole of 
the Sunday afternoon session was given for testimonies, 
and surely no people ever spent a happier time 
than we did. The testimonies were of the best character, 
and we laughed and wept and rejoiced with each 
other, and all to the glory of him we love and to the 
praise of his grace. Our minds recalled the earlier 

R3891 : page 357 

meetings when we met in small numbers, and we 
thought of the testimonies then given. Mostly, and 
naturally so, they were of thankfulness for the light 
which had come: now while there is the same gratitude 
for the light there is more praise for that which 
the light has worked in the heart. The Lord's people 
are learning to rejoice in him as well as in his Truth. 



Monday afternoon was spent partly on an exhibition 
lesson in the Berean Studies, and partly on a talk 
on the Harvest Work. The Study was chosen as an 
opportunity of showing the benefit of this special arrangement; 
how a very profitable time can be spent 
together, and how all can take part in the lessons. 
Already we have heard of several classes which are 
beginning these studies since the Convention. In the 
talk on the Harvest work Brother Edgar gave us a 
series of notes he had taken in the States, and the 
meeting was stirred as he told of the many brethren 
there who are spending their lives in the colporteur 
service. Brother Edgar and his wife, and his sister 
also, came back from the States enthused for the colporteur 
service, and as a consequence we had, on the 
Tuesday, a further meeting with this work specially 
to the front. As a result a general stimulus was seen: 
one dear brother gave up his work right away, and is 
doing well; others are to give a portion of their time, 
while quite a few others are thinking of entering the 
field. Bro. Hemery was unable to take part in the 
colporteur meeting, but on the previous day he said he 
thought the Lord's hand was in the recent visit to 
America of the three Glasgow friends, for their report 
was very timely. The work of putting the books into 
the hands of the people is not increasing in proportion 
with the increased numbers of those who show interest; 
and owing to sickness and other causes the number 
of colporteurs had not been quite so large, and 
therefore the sales were not increasing as could have 
been wished. (We are glad to say that there has been 
a quickening of the output, and that we feel a little 
lighter since our stock is getting less! We cable today 
for further shipments.) 

We had a very affecting time when Brother Barton 
was to leave us. The "sweet sorrow" of parting was 
almost too much for the dear brother. He had a good 
send-off as he left the railway station at night, for his 
visit has been a spiritual blessing to all the churches. 
How these brethren are appreciated! We shall look 

R3891 : page 358 

forward to the coming of a brother next year, but we 
should be glad if you would bring him— under your 
own hat. At the close of the Convention the meeting 
expressed its appreciation of the sending of the Pilgrim 
Brethren, and it rose to signify its love to Brother Russell, 
and to send him loving greetings and good wishes 
by this means. 

This report is delayed through the writer's sickness 
in Glasgow, where he was confined to bed for 
some days. Thanks to the Lord's favor and the kind 
care of a good nurse, he is back at work again. We 
thank the Lord for the mercies of the past days, and 
are going forward with stimulated zeal and desire to 



do his will, to spend and be spent for him. With the 
love of all the brethren, 
I am, dear Brother, your fellow-servant, 
J. HEMERY. 
LONDON, Eng., Oct. 13, 1906. 



R3891 : page 358 

ONE-DAY CONVENTIONS 

AT Scranton, Pa., Sunday, Oct. 21, we had a 

splendid season of refreshment. A Praise 

and Testimony meeting was started at 9 a.m., 

about 200 being present— interested friends from Scranton 

and surrounding points. It was closed shortly 

after the arrival of Brother Russell, in charge of a reception 

committee of six. Then followed the discourse 

to the interested, a report of which those desiring 

same already have in the public prints. It related to 

the manner of the Kingdom, and was intended to stimulate 

the faith and zeal of those present, to make their 

calling and election sure. 

The afternoon session for the public had been well 
advertised, and was in the finest and largest auditorium 
in the city. Of course under those conditions a 
large audience was secured. The dear Scranton 
friends had determined to bring the Truth to the attention 
of their friends and neighbors more thoroughly 
than ever before, and succeeded splendidly— we understand 
at an expense of about $300. They seemed 
greatly pleased that, notwithstanding dark, threatening 
weather the Lyceum was crowded, about 
300 being unable to obtain admittance, but were 
given with tracts on the topic. It is estimated that 
1600 were seated and that 600 stood during the service. 
We all prayed the Lord's blessing upon our united efforts 
to glorify his name. Only eternity will show the 
full results; but we know that no such efforts in his 
honor are despised by our gracious Lord, whether few 
or many of the large concourse were blest. Anyway 
all seemed to feel more than rewarded for the time, 
money and energy it cost. What a blessed privilege it 
is to be permitted to be co-laborers with the great Chief 
Reaper in this "harvest" work! Brother Russell left 
at 6 p.m., and Brother Samson gave a public discourse 
in the evening. 

At Brantford, Ont, Canada, Brother Russell arrived 
about 10 a.m. Sunday, October 28. At about the 
same time others arrived from Hamilton and Toronto. 
At the meeting place about 200 assembled, and as the 
Brantford class numbers not above 20 this signified a 
large attendance from outside places: from Hamilton 
14; from Toronto 30, and Chatham, London, Highland 
Grove, Gait, and many other places, as far away as 



New Liskeard, were represented. Some of these dear 
ones arrived Saturday, and their Praise and Testimony 
meeting began that evening and adjourned at 10 p.m., 
and was in full tide again on our arrival next morning, 
and continued until 1 1 o'clock, affording us an opportunity 
for hearing some of the praises to God for deliverance 
from darkness into his marvellous light. Something 
about the Canadian brethren and sisters reminds 
us of the friends in Great Britain; they are very whole-souled 
and warm-hearted. We always greatly enjoy 
meeting them. They seem to combine reverence for 
sacred things and fervency of spirit. 

Brother Russell's discourse to the interested began 
promptly at 1 1 o'clock and lasted for an hour and 
a half. It was on Matt. 25:31— the coming of our Lord 
in power and great glory. We need not comment, as 
those interested already have the newspaper report. 

At 3 p.m. the service for the public was held in the 
"Grand Opera House." The day was dark and threatening, 
but the house was packed (about 1000), many 
standing. Several hundred unable to gain admittance 
were supplied with tracts. Close attention was given 
and we trust some hearing ears were found. Anyway 
all in the Truth rejoiced in the hoped-for fruitage of 
our mutual endeavors. Homeward bound in the evening 
we had the company of many of the Toronto and 
Hamilton friends as far as the latter place, and parted 
singing "God be with you till we meet again," and 
hoping that it may not be long until "we meet to part 
no, never, on the resurrection shore." 



R3891 : page 358 

EARTHLY THINGS APPRECIATED MOST 

NOT infrequently we meet some dear brother or 
sister who says: "It seems to me that I am 
not of the spiritual class. Try as I will I 
cannot imagine spiritual things, heavenly things. On 
the contrary, I can well imagine and take great joy 
and pleasure in thinking of the blessings of the Millennial 
Kingdom, the restitution times, the earth in process 
of release from the curse and progressing to the 
Paradise condition, and mankind being greatly uplifted 
through the ministries of the Lord and the glorified 
Church out of sin-and-death conditions now prevailing 
up to the full perfection of all lost in Adam, 
with the added favor of increased knowledge on every 
subject. Does not this indicate that I am not begotten 
of the Spirit, and that I need not have any expectancy 
of attaining to the heavenly things of which we read 
so much in the WATCH TOWER publications?" 
We answer that those who take this position 



R3891 : page 359 

labor under a great mistake. These same things are 
true of every Christian. Everyone who has seen beautiful 
fields and lawns and gardens and who has a soul 
appreciative of the beauties of nature, can to some 
extent imagine what Paradise restored will be. Everyone 
who discerns the noble and true qualities of the 
human mind can approximately estimate what perfection 
of mind and heart would mean in the fully 
restored race of Adam, the result of restitution times 
at the end of the Millennial age. But not a soul on 
earth, not a saint that ever lived, has been able to 
imagine the heavenly things, the spiritual things, 
because he has never seen anything of the kind, has 
no powers whereby to contrast these with earthly 
things, and because they are not described in the 
Scriptures. As the Apostle declares, "It doth not yet 
appear what we shall be." (I John 3:2.) He gives 
the key to our faith and knowledge when he adds, 
"But we know that we shall be like him, for we shall 
see him as he is." 
Our knowledge is purely a faith knowledge, dependent 

R3892 : page 359 

upon our confidence in our Lord and his promises. 

We walk by faith, not by sight, whom not having seen 

we love, whose heavenly home not having been described 

to us we realize to be grander than all earthly 

things, because our heavenly Lord has assured us that 

"eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor entered into 

the heart of man the things which God hath in reservation 

for them that love him." These things he tells 

us God hath revealed unto us by his Spirit. (I Cor. 2:9.) 

Not that he has given us pictures of them either 

by visions or mental pictures or word pictures, but he 

has revealed them to us in the sense that he has revealed 

himself to us; and as we come to a knowledge 

of the Lord and to an appreciation of his great wisdom 

and love and justice and power— as we come to realize 

that he is the grand exemplification and illustration of 

all that is good and great and loving and wise and 

beautiful and true, so we know that his heavenly home 

and all the arrangements which God has prepared for 

his special elect ones must be in some very special 

sense far above the very glorious things which he has 

prepared for those of the world in general, who during 

the Millennial age will accept his favors and his blessed 

provisions. 

Suppose a woman who had found her ideal of a 
man, noble in every trait, mental, moral and physical, 
the one altogether lovely in person and character: 
suppose that she has accepted from this lover an invitation 
to become his bride and joint-heir in his estates: 
suppose that he showed her the most beautiful things 



of her knowledge in the vicinity of her home, and told 

her that these were not worthy to be compared with 

the grandeur of the home which he had prepared for 

her. Would not her confidence in her lover, that would 

lead her to forsake all to become his bride, lead her to 

have full confidence in his judgment and in his veracity 

respecting the many advantages of the home which 

he had specially prepared for her? Surely it would! 

She would need no more than his assurance, and would 

be glad to forsake her father's house and the best of everything 

that she had ever seen or could imagine and attain 

to the things of her betrothed. And is it not so with 

those who have accepted the Lord's invitation to become 

his Bride— to leave the world, to be changed from 

human nature to spirit nature, to inherit with him the 

glory, honor and immortality unspeakable and unknowable 

until the change shall come? Is this an unreasonable 

faith? Is this credulity? Does our Redeemer require 

of us an unreasonable faith? We think not. Yea, 

in proportion as we become followers in his steps our 

faith in the Leader grows, and our confidence not only 

in his words but also in his wisdom increases day by 

day as we onward go. We are confident, therefore, 

that he is able and willing to do for us exceedingly more 

abundantly than we could have asked or thought, 

according to the riches of his grace and his loving-kindness 

toward us in Christ Jesus.— Eph. 3:20. 

Let us, therefore, gird up the loins of our minds 
and be sober minded, and hope to the end for the grace 
that shall be brought unto us at the revelation of our 
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Let us look not at things 
that are seen, which at most are temporal, but let us 
look at the things that are unseen, at the eternal things. 
Let us look unto Jesus with the eye of faith, let us look 
unto the crown of life which he has promised, let us 
look unto the place that he is preparing for us in the 
many mansions of the Father's house; let us look, not 
with doubt and fear, but with full confidence that the 
grandest of our hopes will be much more than realized 
when he shall bid us come up higher and enter into the 
joys of our Lord. "Faith can firmly trust him, come 
what may." The more we exercise faith along these 
lines of his direction, the more are we pleasing in the 
sight of him who has called us out of darkness into his 
marvellous light; and the more of such faith we exercise 
the more we will have in us the power of God, which 
will work in us both to will and to do his good pleasure 
—which will enable us to more and more live separate 
from the world, to overcome the world, and to fight 
a good fight against sin and selfishness, the world, the 
Adversary and our own flesh. 



R3892 : page 359 



DO ALL AS UNTO THE LORD 

--ISAIAH 5: 11 -23. -NOVEMBER 25.- 

Golden Text:— "I keep under my body, and 
bring it into subjection."— 1 Cor. 9:27. 

THIS DATE has been set aside as the "World's Temperance 
Sunday," and the S.S. Lesson has been selected 
in accord with this. The consecrated of the 
Lord's people are not to be supposed to need special warnings 
or reproofs along this line. They have left the world 
behind, turned their backs upon sin and its various snares, 
and begun a life of consecration to the Lord— to them "old 
things have passed away, all things have become new." 
For such to turn again to the ways of sin and the gratification 
of the flesh, the Apostle says (2 Pet. 2:22), would be 
like the sow turning to wallowing in the mire after having 
been washed. Nevertheless the general weakness and 
frailty of our fallen human nature, and the fact that we are 
surrounded by temptations, make it necessary that the New 

R3892 : page 360 

Creature in Christ should continually watch as well as pray 

lest he enter into temptation. None achieve such strength 

of character nor attain to such heights of spiritual development 

as would permit them to glory in the flesh or insure 

them against ever yielding to its seductive influences. 

Hence it is, the Apostle assures us, that when we realize 

our weakness and our dependence upon the Lord for grace 

to help in every time of need, then we are really strong; 

whereas when we feel strong, sufficient of ourselves, self-confident, 

we are really in danger. 

THEREFORE GONE INTO CAPTIVITY 

Isaiah's prophecy was written after the ten-tribe kingdom 
of Israel had gone into captivity to the Assyrians, and 
in this lesson he seems to imply that in connection 
with the idolatries which were the direct cause of the 
nation's overthrow as elsewhere stated, intemperance 
was associated. But although he uses most direct language 
on the subject we are still not sure that the drunkenness 
referred to was not symbolical, figurative, representing intoxication 
with the spirit of the Adversary, the spirit of self-indulgence, 
the spirit of licentiousness, the spirit of wilfulness 
and alienation from God. We do know that in other 
parts of Isaiah's prophecy drunkenness is thus used figuratively, 
and we do know the same of other Scriptures, as, 
for instance, when we are told that Great Babylon made all the 
nations of the earth drunk with the wine of her fornication, 
and again it is declared that the world is drunk with the wine 
of the wrath of God just before the great climacteric trouble, 
which will be the consummation of the present age and the 
introduction of the new dispensation. 



Isaiah was not writing to the people who had been injured 
—to the people of the ten tribes, but to the Israelites 
of the two tribes. He was seeking to warn 
them by the experiences of their sister nation. In a 
parable he pictured a garden of the Lord kept with diligent 
care by the great Husbandman, which should have brought 
forth good grapes and good wine, but which instead brought 
forth evil grapes and a generally evil, poisonous influence. 
And it is upon this pedestal or basis that our lesson is set 
up, warning the Jews who were still under divine favor 
against making a similar mistake. However, whether we 
apply the Prophet's words to the figurative wine and strong 
drink or to the literal, we have lessons in both which are 
surely very profitable to all of the Lord's people. We need to 
fortify our minds, not only against strong drink of false doctrines 
and error, but against every intoxicating influence. In 
our poor fallen state none of us have any too much sense, and 
we need to conserve all that we have, and of the Lord's grace 
to receive more and more of his Spirit, which the Apostle 
describes as "the spirit of a sound mind." In this connection 
we quote the wise words of Professor George Adam 
Smith:- 

"No one who has had to do with persons slowly falling 
from moderate to immoderate drinking can mistake 
Isaiah's meaning when he says, 'They regard not the work 
of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands.' 
Nothing kills the conscience like steady drinking to a little 
excess; and religion, even while the conscience is still alive, 
acts on it only as an opiate.... With fatal persistence the 
luxury of every civilization has taken to drink; and of all 
the indictments brought by moralists against nations, that 
which they reserve for drunkenness is, as here, most heavily 
weighed. The crusade against drink is not the novel 
thing that many imagine who only observe its late revival 
amongst ourselves. In ancient times there was scarcely a 
State in which prohibitive legislation of the most stringent 
kind was not attempted, and generally carried out with a 
thoroughness more possible under despots than where, as 
with us, the slow consent of public opinion is necessary. A 
horror of strong drink has in every age possessed those who 
from their position as magistrates or prophets have been 
able to follow for any distance the drifts of social life. 
Isaiah exposes as powerfully as ever any of them did in 
what the peculiar fatality of drinking lies. Wine is a mocker 
by nothing more than by the moral incredulity which it produces, 

R3893 : page 360 

enabling men to hide from themselves the spiritual 
and material effects of over-indulgence in it." 

In our lesson the Prophet represents those who are 
enslaved to strong drink, saying, "Woe unto them that rise 
up early in the morning that they may follow strong drink; 
that continue until night, until wine inflame them." That 
which at first was a matter for the will to decide becomes 
very speedily a fixed habit, which controls the will and 



brings it into slavery, rendering it almost powerless. To 

the slaves of liquor or other intoxicants, such as tobacco, 

opium, morphine, etc., the voice of their tyrant master is 

heard when they awaken— their nerves cry out for the 

opiate; it is not with them as with those who are fully consecrated 

to the Lord and have him as their Master. To the 

latter the thought is and should be thankfulness to the 

Lord for blessings received, and petitions to him for wisdom 

and grace to render service in his cause for the day beginning. 

The Apostle declares that it is not so much whose 

servants we claim to be, but "his servants ye are to whom 

ye obey; whether of sin unto death or obedience unto 

righteousness." (Rom. 6:16.) If we are serving sin, serving 

the flesh, we are slaves to it; but if Christ has made us 

free in heart it is for the new mind to claim the divine 

promise, and to exalt itself in the ways of righteousness and 

to gain repeated victories over the weaknesses and besetments 

of the flesh. 

EVERY GOOD THING PERVERTED 

While under slavery to sin there is a disposition to 
turn all the good things of life into the service of the perverted 
appetites, and so our lesson sets forth that the harp, 
the flute, the tabret, good in themselves, become improperly 
associated with the wine of revelry. Then the result is 
stated, "They regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider 
the operation of his hands." How true this is: sin 
in its various forms blinding, influencing, the mind and 
heart are attracted away from the most worthy subjects of 
consideration. The Prophet David tells how he praised the 
Lord early in the morning, and in the night-watches called 
to mind his goodness, but contrariwise declared of those 
given up to self-indulgence and enslaved to sin, "God is 
not in all their thoughts." (Psa. 10:4.) Their minds are 
distracted, turned to unworthy and ignoble subjects, that 
have more and more a degrading influence upon them. In 
a word, the general tendency of sin, which abounds in the 

R3893 : page 361 

world through the fall, is downward, but God has set before 
us in his Word higher and nobler and better standards. 
Wise are those who, hearing the voice divine, seek to follow 
it; foolish are those who, knowing the downward tendency 
of sin, pursue it. 

CAPTIVES IN HELL 

"Therefore my people are gone into captivity for lack 
of knowledge: and their honorable men are famished, and 
their multitudes are parched with thirst. Therefore hell 
hath enlarged herself and opened her mouth without measure, 
and their glory and their multitude and their pomp 
and he that rejoiceth shall descend into it; and the mean 
man shall be brought down, and the mighty man shall be 



humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled." 

We cannot hope that even the most abstemious living 
on the part of the most godly of mankind would deliver any 
from the divine sentence, "Dying thou shalt die," which, 
the Apostle declares, "passed upon all men through one 
man's disobedience." As a result of that sentence Adam 
himself went down to sheol, into the tomb, into the state of 
death (the "hell" of the above quotation). We can, however, 
fearlessly assert that the ignoring of the divine Law, the disposition 
to gratification of the fallen flesh, has greatly enlarged 
hell, sheol, the tomb. That is to say, that many more die 
prematurely than otherwise would. Because of this slavery to 
sin and appetite our race is greatly weakened mentally, 
morally and physically— hence the death of so many of the 
weaklings of our race in infancy and the general captivity 
of all, for, as the Apostle declares, "Sin and Death reign," and 
the world are their subjects, their slaves. Thank God the 
Apostle points out a coming day when the groaning creation, 
slaves to sin, will be delivered from this bondage of 
corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. The 
opportunity for deliverance will be within their reach, yea, 
thrust upon them by the blessed conditions of the Millennial 
age, so that only by a wilful, persistent resistance of 
God's gracious purposes will any of them be remanded to 
the Second Death as incorrigible. 

Our lesson points out that this enslaving and degrading 
influence takes hold upon all the mighty and the great 
as well as the mean and the little, but eventually out of all 
this miserable failure on man's part the Lord shall get glory 
and honor. In due time his gracious plan will so outwork 
as to bring in righteousness, and cause it to predominate and 
rule the world, even as Sin and Death are now ruling. 
Thank God that the great Redeemer who has purchased the 
world with his own precious blood is shortly to be the King 
of earth, Immanuel, God with men, and that one of his first 
works in connection with the establishment of his Kingdom 
will be the binding of Satan, the restraining of the power of 
Sin and Death and the setting free of all their captives, as 
it is written, the prison-doors shall be opened and the captives 
shall be liberated.— Isa. 61:1. 

The people of Israel had been favored of God greatly 
in a covenant made with them through Moses, and in the 
consequent blessings which had attended them through the 
Lord's general supervision of their affairs; and since they 
rebelled against all these, and degraded themselves after 
the manner of the heathen, they merited special judgments 
and received them. Their captivity was a part of these, 
and, as our lesson declares, their favored land was permitted 
to fall into the hands of strangers. Yea, the goodly 
portion, even the spiritual favors, were many of them bestowed 
upon us who were by nature Gentiles, aliens, strangers 
and foreigners from the commonwealth of Israel.— 
Eph. 2:12. 

SLAVES OF VANITY AND SIN 



When we read, "Woe unto them that draw iniquity 
with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart rope," 
we should not understand the word "woe" as a threat of 
future tribulation: rather we may consider it as an expression 
of sympathy. Woeful is the lot of those who are enslaved 
to a wrong course through vanity. Pride is really 
controlling a large proportion of the human family, conscience 
is violated because of pride, iniquities of various 
kinds are often unwillingly dragged along on this account. 
The poor groaning creation is as a slave bound to sin by a 
"cart rope"; it is so strong that he cannot break it even if 
he did realize its galling nature. On the contrary, blind to 
the real source of his troubles, the sinner often rejoices and 
seeks pleasure in his slavery, and knows not that the only 
one from whom it is possible for liberty to be secured is 
the Almighty God, who has appointed the Redeemer to set 
us free, and whose word is, "If the Son shall make you free 
you shall be free indeed."— John 8:36. 

This class of deluded ones, tied with cords of vanity 
and enslaved to sin with a cart-rope, are inclined to doubt 
the holy one of Israel— to say within themselves, "If there 
be a God, and if he have the power, would he not long ago 
have exerted it? May we not, therefore, go onward in the 
way of sin with impunity?" As the Prophet expresses it, 
they say, "Let him [God] make speed and hasten his work 
that we may see it, and let the counsel of the holy one of 
Israel draw nigh and come that we may know it." Today 
we are living in just such a time. The fact that the Lord 
has been lifting the vail of ignorance from the world, and 
permitting mankind greater blessings and greater enlightenment 
than ever before, is influencing many of those who are 
drinking the wine of Babylon to deny the Word of God and 
the plan of God therein set forth— to deny that man was 
created in the divine image, that he fell, that he needed to 
be redeemed, that it is God's intention to restore him, and 
that for the purpose of this restoration God has promised 
the Millennial Kingdom, and that the divine purpose in this 
Gospel age has been the selection of the Church, to be joint-heirs 
with Christ in that work of human uplift. As the 
Apostle has expressed it, they are inclined to say, "Where is 
the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep 
all things continue as they were from the beginning of the 
creation." (2 Pet. 3:4.) They have turned their minds in 
the direction of evolution, and conclude that man did not 
fall from the divine image, but that he has been progressing 
for now six thousand years from the image of a monkey, 
gradually attaining to perfection. They incline to say the 
world is just what we make it; they incline to ignore the 
Scriptural promise that there is a coming time of rectification 
or judgment as respects all the affairs of the world, 
and that in that thousand-year day of judgment all the 

R3894 : page 362 

iniquities of the present time shall be rectified, every good 
endeavor rewarded, every wilful misdeed receive its just 



punishment, and all mankind have a glorious opportunity 
of rising up under the stripes and disciplines and rewards 
of that glorious time to the recovery, if they will, of all that 
was lost in Adam. 

THEY THAT CALL EVIL GOOD 

These same people are disposed to consider the evils of 
our time as nothing, as really good in comparison with the 
past, and the good of the past they are disposed to reckon 
as evil, imperfect. The Doctors of Divinity and professors 
of our day are esteemed to be the highest standards of 
knowledge and authority that the world has ever seen, 
while correspondingly the Lord, the apostles and the prophets 
of the past are esteemed to have been unwise, foolish, 
ignorant, unable to discern each other's falsities as the 
Higher Critics of our day discern them. Do not these, as 
the Apostle declares, call evil good and good evil? do they 
not put darkness for light and light for darkness, bitter for 
sweet and sweet for bitter? Are they not "wise in their 
own eyes, prudent in their own sight"? Are they not 
"mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong 
drink"— strong doctrine— wonderful philosophies? 

GUIDED BY POLICY, NOT BY TRUTH 

The final arraignment of the lesson is that the class 
under criticism "justify the wicked for a reward and take 
away the righteousness of the righteous from him." That 
is to say, the spirit of "graft" is here recognized— it is a matter 
of policy. Many today can be found ready to compromise 
as respects their condemnation of iniquities if there is 
some reward and advantage or gift for themselves in connection 
with the matter, or if they believe that some general 
purposes favorable to themselves would be served thereby. 
Likewise is there not a growing spirit of disregard for the 
reputation of the righteous, so that many are not only indifferent 
on this subject, but would be willing to misrepresent 
or vilify those in the right if it would be profitable to them 
so to do? We cannot avoid the thought that this self-seeking 
disposition is growingly manifest everywhere— perhaps 
nowhere more so than amongst the clergy of Christendom. 
Many of them, we have every reason to believe, clearly recognize 
the weakness of the erroneous positions with which 
they are associated, and recognize to a considerable degree 
the strength of the Truth. Nevertheless the majority of 
them seem to be ready to justify, to defend, the wicked, the 
erroneous, the God-dishonoring creeds for a reward— for 
their standing in their denominations, for the honor of men, 
for the dignity and financial emoluments connected therewith. 
And for the same considerations many are willing to 
denounce and misrepresent as in error those whom they 
know to be the defenders of the truth, of righteousness. 
What says the Prophet of these? He says:— "Woe unto 
them!" And the "woe" time is very near at hand. It will 
be that great time of trouble such as was not since there 



was a nation, which shall engulf the great, the wise, the 
mighty, the learned, the chief captains, financial, social and 
religious, in the great catastrophe of anarchy. Thank God 
for the glorious prospect which we see in his Word— that 
just behind the clouds of trouble which surround our lonely 
way the Sun of Righteousness is arising with healing in his 
beams for the blessing of all the families of the earth, according 
to the Abrahamic Covenant. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

The lesson for us all as the Lord's followers is well expressed 
in our Golden Text, which holds before us the 
Apostle's example, that we should be followers of him as he 
was a follower of the Lord and of his instructions. Let us, 
therefore, each and all, strive earnestly that we may be able 
to faithfully apply to ourselves the words of the Apostle, 
"I keep my body under and bring it into subjection, lest having 
preached to others I myself should be a castaway"— a 
castaway from the high calling with which we have been 
favored— losers of the great blessing and privilege of joint-heirship 
in the Kingdom with our Lord. Could we but keep 
ever before our minds the thought that we are on trial now, 
being tested, that we are being given opportunity to prove 
the sincerity and depth of our consecration to the Lord and 
to righteousness, the effect would surely be to spur us and 
energize us in the ways of the Lord. Let us remember, 
then, that this keeping under of the body appertains to our 
food as well as to our drink, to our thoughts as well as to our 
speech. Indeed all the difficulties with which we are obliged 
to contend begin in our thoughts, and by these, therefore, 
is the New Creature properly and justly measured by the 
Lord, who judges us not according to the imperfections of the 
flesh, which we have inherited, but according to our new 
spirits, our new minds, our new intentions, our new wills, 
our new hearts, and the energy and activity which these 
put forth in the keeping of the mortal body in subjection to 
the spirit, and so far as possible to the letter of the divine 
requirement. 

"WE CAN DO NOTHING AGAINST THE TRUTH" 

Whoever intelligently, wilfully, heartily does anything 
against the truth, against that which is right, is in serious 
danger of losing his relationship to the Lord— in serious 
danger of extinguishing the spark of the new nature with 
which he had been begotten of the holy Spirit. The Spirit 
of Christ is the spirit of obedience to the Father and to all 
righteousness, and whoever loses this Spirit so that he will 
intentionally oppose the Lord and righteousness, seemingly 
comes under the head of those mentioned by the Apostle 
when he says, "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ he 
is none of his."— Rom. 8:9. 

This principle may be widely applied, but for the moment 
we narrow it down to the special topic of our lesson, 
intemperance, and suggest that from our standpoint the 



Lord's people should all be found on the side of temperance 
and in opposition to intemperance. Even when apparently 
there will be no hope of enforcing a prohibition law, we do 
not see how the Lord's faithful could conscientiously endorse 
the licensing a recognized evil. "We can do nothing 
against the truth." We must not be of those who say, Let 
us do evil that good may follow. We do not need to judge 
those who differ from us as to their conceptions of duty, 
but we suggest that each one who is the Lord's has a personal 
responsibility and should view it from this standpoint. 
We have no hope of the world's reformation along the lines 
of prohibition, but this does not hinder us from expressing 

R3894 : page 363 

our sympathy for the right, which we are sure will prevail 
as soon as our Lord's prayer is fulfilled that God's Kingdom 
shall come and his will be done on earth as in heaven. It 
is our duty to help lift up the standard for the people, even 
though that be a standard which they will not accept nor be 
greatly profited by until the Kingdom enforce it. In line with 
this we suggest that if the Lord's people at any time in any 
place be confronted with the question of license or no license 
they would do well to exercise their liberties and 
privileges in voting against the license— even though they 
may doubt the value of their vote and even though they 
might be sure that it would bring upon them more or less of 
odium and ill will on the part of those who are ready to 
rob the righteous of their righteousness for a reward and 
consideration. 

We quote the following from the public prints without 
being able to verify its truthfulness. The lesson is true, 
whether the incident is so or not. The item follows:— 

THE DECIDING TESTIMONY 

"I have read of a town meeting in Pennsylvania where 
this question of license was to be decided. As the question 
was about to be put there arose from one corner of the room 
a miserable female, wrinkled and gaunt, and stretching out 
her arms, in a shrill voice she cried: Look upon me. You 
all know me, or once did. You all know that I was once 
mistress of the best farm in town. You all know, too, I had 
one of the best— the most devoted of husbands. You all 
know I had five noble-hearted, industrious boys. Where 
are they now? Doctor, where are they now? You all 
know. You all know they lie in a row, side by side, in yonder 
churchyard; all— every one of them filling a drunkard's 
grave ! 

'"They were all taught to believe that temperate 
drinking was safe— excess alone ought to be avoided; and 
they never acknowledged excess. They quoted you, and 
you, and you [pointing with her shred of a forefinger to 
him who said that alcohol was a good creature of God, to 
him that sold the poison, to him that gave it as a medicine, 
for a little was good]. They thought themselves safe under 



such teachers. But I saw the gradual change coming over 
my family and prospects with dismay and horror: I felt 
that we were all to be overwhelmed in one common ruin. 
I tried to ward off the blow, I tried to break the spell— the 
delusive spell— in which the idea of the benefits of temperate 
drinking had involved my husband and sons. 

'"I begged, I prayed; but the odds were against me. 
My poor husband and my dear boys fell into the snare, and 
they could not escape; and one after another were conveyed 
to the sorrowful grave of the drunkard. Now look at me 
again. You probably see me for the last time— my sand 
has almost run. I have dragged my exhausted frame from 
my present home— your poorhouse— to warn you all— to 
warn you who taught, you who sold, you who gave;' and 
with her arms high flung, and her tall form stretched to 
the utmost, and her voice raised to an unearthly pitch— she 
exclaimed: 'I shall soon stand before the judgment seat of 
God. I shall meet you there, you false guides, and be a 
witness against you all.' 

"She spoke and vanished. But when the chairman 
put the question, 'Shall any license be granted for the sale 
of spirituous liquors?' the response was the unanimous, 
'No!'" 



R3895 : page 363 

"AS DECEIVERS AND YET TRUE." 

-LUKE 23: 13-25. -DECEMBER 2.- 

Golden Text:— "Then said Pilate, I find 
no fault in this man."— Luke 23:14. 

OUR Lord's words, "The darkness hateth the light," 
were verified not only in his own case but also 
amongst those who have been his footstep followers 
throughout this Gospel age. In the lesson before us we 
see an illustration of this in the incidents connected with 
our Lord's examination before Pilate and Herod, in his being 
"set at naught" and variously maltreated, and we can apply 
the same general principles to his true followers. Another 
of our Lord's sayings was illustrated in his experiences at 
this time, namely, "If the light that is in thee become darkness, 
how great is that darkness." The Jewish people had 
a certain amount of light, as the Apostle declares, "Much 
advantage everyway." (Rom. 3:2.) Yet the most rabid of 
our Lord's foes were the chief priests and rulers, and the 
Jewish mob whom they incited and authorized, and in a 
sense legalized by their learning, pretended piety and official 
position as those who "sat in Moses' seat." How great was 
their darkness, how perverted their sense of justice, how 
absent all sense of love!— how fully they demonstrated the 
wisdom of the divine decision that they were not fit to represent 
God and his Kingdom amongst men, and should, 



therefore, be cast off, that a spiritual Israel might be selected 
as Messiah's associates, his Bride. And is it not the same 
to-day? Has it not been a similar class all the way down 
through the age and now that is found opposing God and 
his Anointed, represented in his members in the flesh? It 
is even so: while the whole world under the blinding influence 
of the Adversary is opposed to the light, to the Truth, 
to the children of the light and to the promulgation of the 
Truth, nevertheless it is nominal Christendom and her Doctors 
of Divinity whose opposition is chiefly aroused, whose 
tongues are the loudest in crying, "Crucify! crucify!" against 
all the true members of the body of Christ, those who walk 
in his footsteps. We are glad of the Apostle Peter's assurance, 
as respects all such, that in general they have not had 
a sufficiency of light to make their course of conduct a 
guilty one to the last degree. The apostles said of the traducers 
of Jesus, his real crucifiers, "I wot that in ignorance 
ye did it, as did also your rulers." (Acts 3:17.) We may be 
sure that much of the opposition to the body of Christ all 
down through the age the Lord will be able to similarly pass 
by as done in blindness, in ignorance. We must be in the 
condition of heart to love our enemies, to do good to those 
who despitefully use us, and to pray for such; and we have 

R3895 : page 364 

good hope that when the blessed Kingdom of the Lord shall 
be established, and clear knowledge of the Lord fill the 
whole earth, many of these now blinded and bitter enemies 
will have the eyes of their understanding opened and be 
amongst those who will bow the knee and with the tongue 
confess to the glory of God. 

JESUS BEFORE PILATE 

Our Lord was brought before Pilate early in the morning 
of the day of his crucifixion, about eight o'clock. The 
Jewish Sanhedrin had met still earlier, and had approved 
of the findings of the High Priest in the examination during 
the night watches— that Jesus was guilty of blasphemy, of 
treason against God and his country. This was held to be 
proven by his admission before the High Priest that he was 
the Son of God, the Messiah. They were ashamed of him, 
and desired no such King, no such Savior, no such Messiah. 
They went to Pilate's judgment hall early, before the news 
of our Lord's arrest would reach the people of the city in 
general, and thus too great a commotion be made and perhaps 
some of his friends be aroused to his defense. 

It required but a few moments for Pilate to make an 
examination of the prisoner at the bar. The charge against 
our Lord before Pilate was a totally different one from that 
on which he had been condemned by the Jewish Sanhedrin. 
It was of three counts: (1) Sedition, raising a tumult, stirring 
up the people to a rebellion; (2) that he taught the people 
that they should not give tribute to Caesar; (3) that he 
himself claimed to be the king who should receive the tributes. 



The charges were so evidently untrue that Pilate 

speedily discerned the animus of the Jewish rulers who formulated 

them. He saw that it was the religious power of the 

rulers that was in danger, and not the civil power of the 

Roman government. The multitude standing outside the 

gates shouted the accusations riotously, incited so to do by 

their religious teachers. Jesus made no reply, so that even 

Pilate marveled at his quietness, self-possession, non-resistance 

and lack of vindictiveness and refusal to defend himself, 

even though he was manifestly a person quite able to 

plead his own cause. Pilate even asked him if he were not 

aware of the fact that he had power either to set him at 

liberty or to inflict the punishment desired by the people. 

Our Lord's answer was serene, that Pilate could have no 

power at all except as it was permitted him by the heavenly 

Father. Ah, this was the secret of our Lord's composure! 

He had given his life, his all; he had surrendered to the 

Father his every interest; he had confidence in the Father's 

love and wisdom, and was willing, therefore, to drink of the 

cup which the Father had poured, rejoicing to do the will of 

him that sent him and to finish that work. So with the 

Lord's followers throughout this age— in proportion as they, 

like him, have been enabled to realize the fulness of their 

consecration and at heart have been filled with his spirit and 

loving submission to the Father's will— in that same proportion 

they have been able to be calm under most severe and 

trying ordeals, so that the world even has marveled at their 

composure and self-control, the peace of God passing all 

understanding ruling in their hearts. 

Concluding his brief interview with Jesus, Pilate approached 
the wide-open doorway of his court-room, outside 
which the people were crowding, and publicly and openly 
declared, "I find no fault in this man." The rulers, disappointed, 
fearing that by some mischance they would after all 
lose their prey, were angry, and aroused the populace to expressions 
of dissatisfaction with the verdict. Pilate, however, 
had given the sentence and was not disposed to change it- 
yet he hesitated about setting Jesus at liberty in the face of 
such an angry demonstration on the part of the general public 
as well as of the influential rulers. Incidentally hearing 
something said about Galilee, he inquired if Jesus were a 
Galilean, and this being confirmed he said, "Since he is a 
Galilean I will send him to Herod, who at present is in the 
city." Then our Lord, publicly accompanied by a squad of 
Roman soldiers, was sent to Herod, who had a curiosity to 
see him; he had heard many things about him, and he had 
wondered whether or not he might be John the Baptist, 
whom he had beheaded, raised from the dead. But when 
Herod began to question Jesus he answered him never a 
word. There is a time to speak and a time to hold silence, 
and our Lord was the master of the situation. Undoubtedly 
his silence was more forceful than anything he could have 
said. Herod was evidently provoked by this silence, but dare 
not belittle himself by showing this. He therefore contented 
himself by allowing some of his men of war to array Jesus 
in a gorgeous robe, and to do him mock reverence. He regarded 



Jesus as a pretender, and no doubt thought it a 
stroke of wit to parody his claims of royalty. His verdict 
was, Not guilty— innocent. As Pilate had turned the prisoner 
over to Herod, declaring that he himself found no cause 
of death in him, Herod returned the compliment by remitting 
the prisoner again to Pilate. When, therefore, Pilate found 
the matter again in his hands he called together the chief 
priests and the rulers of the people, as stated in the opening 
verse of our lesson, and said, "Ye have brought this man 
unto me as one that perverteth the people: And behold I 
have examined him before you and have found no fault in 
this man as touching those things whereof ye accuse him. 
No, nor Herod, for I sent you to him; and lo, nothing worthy 
of death is found in him. I will therefore chastise him and 
release him." 

AN APOLOGY FOR PILATE 

Many are disposed to censure Pilate's severity: they call 
him a wicked man, unwilling to stand by his own convictions, 
and suggest that even the proposition to chastise Jesus was a 
manifestation of this weakness— that if there was no fault in 
Jesus, justice would not only have forbidden his execution 
but would also have forbidden his scourging with whips. 

We believe that an injustice is done the man. He was 
a heathen, had no faith in the Jewish expectancy of a Messiah, 

R3895 : page 365 

no respect for the Jews themselves, but thought of them 

as a rebellious people whom he was placed there to keep in 

order— in subjection to the Roman empire. His training in 

life had been to consider that there might be many gods invisible, 

but that Caesar, the Roman Emperor, was the tangible 

representative of the gods, whose honor, authority and 

respect should be maintained at any hazard. He knew that 

he was placed as the representative of Rome at Jerusalem 

not to do justice but to keep order— not to favor and forward 

the divine plans, but to represent and maintain the authority 

of the Roman empire. What mattered it to Rome if a 

thousand innocent victims suffered every year so long as 

Roman prestige was maintained and Roman tribute was collected? 

If injustice amongst the Jews had been likely to stir 

them up to disloyalty to Rome, then the injustice would have 

been righted, so that the authority of Rome might remain 

upon a good basis; but if both the rulers and the people 

united against anybody or anything, and made it a test of 

R3896 : page 365 

their loyalty to Rome, the Emperor and senate would surely 
expect that Pilate, as their representative, would favor the 
voice of the people and maintain order and quiet. Apparently 
therefore it was either a respect which Pilate felt for 
our Lord's personality or the influence of his wife's dream 
of the preceding night that led him to strive with the Jewish 



rulers for the release of Jesus. Many another man in his 
position would have used the opportunity to curry favor with 
those under his control, and would have executed Jesus 
simply to please them— just as we see that Herod did on 
another occasion, respecting which we read, "And he killed 
James, the brother of John, with a sword. And because he 
saw that it pleased the Jews, he proceeded further to take 
Peter also. "-Acts 12:2,3. 

The scourging incident should be viewed from this 
standpoint: Pilate wished to placate the mob spirit which he 
perceived at his court gate: if Jesus were scourged, and thus 
demeaned, the people would probably be better satisfied and 
more likely to let the incident drop than if the Lord were 
turned free without chastisement. We esteem then that it 
was with a good motive rather than a bad one that Pilate 
condemned Jesus to be lashed on the back. 

BARABBAS CHOSEN-BY POPULAR VOTE 

At this season of the year it was the custom for the 
Roman Governor to release a prisoner as an act of magnanimity 
and an adjunct to the general joy of the occasion. 
Pilate reminded them of this, and suggested that after 
scourging Jesus he would be the prisoner whom he would 
release, but the multitude cried out against this with united 
voice, "Away with this man, and release unto us Barabbas." 
We cannot doubt that the priests and rulers had more or 
less to do with this— that they were still inciting the people 
against Jesus. And when we think of the Jews we are 
appalled at the condition of heart which it reveals. Barabbas 
was a seditionist in fact and had been imprisoned for murder 
—and this was the choice of the people as against Jesus! 
Truly they showed the murderous condition of their hearts: 
although outwardly a moral people, respecting the Law, inwardly 
they were filled with the spirit of the Adversary— 
they hated the Light and the great Light-Bearer. Similarly, 
all down through the age, those who have been chosen to 
office— while they have not always been seditionists and 
murderers— have rarely, if ever, been saints. And so today, 
although nearly nineteen centuries have passed, and the 
most civilized parts of the world are called Christendom, we 
may be sure that if our Lord were to offer himself as King 
to these he would be rejected, and, if not a murderer elected 
instead, the choice would certainly fall upon one who had 
considerable of the murderous spirit— the spirit of the world, 
the spirit of the Adversary, which frequently manifests itself, 
as the Apostle declares, in malice, hatred, envy, strife- 
works of the flesh and of the devil. The disciple is not above 
his Lord; but in proportion as he has a heart-likeness to his 
Lord, in that same proportion he will be tolerably sure not 
to be pushed into any place of very great honor and dignity 
in the present time. We by no means inveigh against those 
who occupy official and honorable positions. We believe 
that good, noble characters have filled such positions by popular 
choice, popular vote, but we consider such occurrences 
so rare as to prove the rule to the contrary. Let it be remembered, 



however, that we make a wide distinction between 
a good citizen, a good ruler, a noble man and a saint, a follower 
in the footsteps of Jesus. Let us determine that by the 
grace of God our stand will be with the Master; let us expect 
that it will be unpopular, cost us shame and contempt 
and disadvantage, and that this will be our share in his 
cross— and let us remember that only those who bear the 
cross will wear the crown. 

"Once to every man and nation comes the moment to decide, 
In the strife of truth with falsehood, for the good or evil side; 
Some great cause, God's new Messiah offering each the bloom 

or blight, 
Parts the goats upon the left hand, and the sheep upon the right; 
And the choice goes by forever 'twixt that darkness and that 

light." 

PILATE'S WIFE'S DREAM 

Edersheim remarks that it was "While the people were 
deciding to choose Barabbas instead of Jesus, and Pilate was 
sitting on his judgment seat, a messenger came to him from 
his wife, warning him not to yield and deliver up Jesus to be 
crucified, for she had suffered many things in a dream because 
of him. We can understand it all, if, on the previous 
evening, after the Roman guard had been granted, Pilate had 
spoken of it to his wife. Tradition has given her the name 
Procula. What if Procula had not only been a proselyte, 
like the wife of a previous Roman governor (Saturninus), 
but had known about Jesus and spoken of him to Pilate on 
that evening? This would best explain his reluctance to 
condemn Jesus, as well as her dream of him." 

"WHY, WHAT EVIL HATH HE DONE?" 

Pilate a second time essayed to influence the people, 
but again they began shouting, "Crucify him, Crucify him," 
and the third time he appealed to them saying, "Why, 
what evil hath he done? I have found no cause of death 
in him. I will therefore chastise him and let him go," but 

R3896 : page 366 

the mob was "instant with loud voices requiring that he 
might be crucified, and the voices of them and the chief 
priests prevailed." 

Stalker comments upon this incident: "This scene has 
often been alleged as the self-condemnation of democracy. 
Vox populi, vox Dei, its flatterers have said— but look yonder! 
When the multitude has to choose between Jesus and 
Barabbas, it chooses Barabbas! If this be so, the scene is 
equally decisive against aristocracy. Did the priests, scribes, 
and nobles behave better than the mob? It was by their 
advice that the mob chose." 

Elsewhere their arguments are set forth: they clearly 
intimated to Pilate that the incident would be reported at 



Rome, and would have a peculiar light that would reflect 
against his vigilance as the representative of Roman authority 
—that a pretender to the dominion of Israel had appeared, 
and that they themselves, loyal to Rome, had arrested 
him and brought him to the Governor, who was so slack of 
his duty that instead of crucifying him he had set him free. 
Poor Pilate was in a very hard place for one of his character, 
position and education. He gave way finally under pressure, 
whereas many a man in his place would not have 
thought of resisting the popular will in such a matter. He 
finally gave sentence that the will of the people should be 
done. And is not this as high a level as is ever attained 
by earthly law and justice? What human law can stand 
against the will of the people? Is it not the same 
with us today? The people make the laws and the people 
execute them, and Pilate merely hearkened to the voice of 
Jesus' own countrymen. Here, too, the Scriptures lay the 
blame, saying, "He came unto his own, and his own received 
him not." Here the Apostle also lays the blame, not upon 
Pilate, but upon the Jews and their rulers. 

PILATE WASHED HIS HANDS 

As an indication of his dissent, and as clearing himself 
in the sight of all from the responsibility, Pilate called for 
water to be brought, and in the sight of the multitude 
poured it over his hands. Thus washing his hands he said, 
both in symbol and in words, "I am innocent of the blood 
of this righteous man, see ye to it." (Deut. 21:6-9.) How 
blinded were the Jews that they could not even appreciate 
justice to the same extent as this heathen ruler, who had 
nothing at stake personally nor religiously— whose every 
interest might be said to have been better served by a concurrence 
in the popular vote. This hardness of heart is 
represented by the willingness with which the priests and 
rulers and multitude accepted the responsibility, saying, "His 
blood be upon us and upon our children." The full responsibility 
of what followed was left with the Jews. 

"HIM WHOM THEY PIERCED" 

Carrying out the thought that the responsibility lay 
with the Jews, God through the Prophet had already declared 
that the time would come when the poor blinded eyes 
would be opened and the Jews would look upon him whom 
they had pierced and mourn for him. (Zech. 12:10.) Thank 
God that such a time is coming, and that the Lord promises 
that he will pour upon them the spirit of prayer and supplication, 
and will take away their sin. As a people they 
have had severe experiences for now many centuries, and all 
who have the Spirit of Christ rejoice to know of their coming 
reprieve; and not only so, but to know, further, that the 
blessing which will thus begin with the "Jew first" shall 
extend through him under the divine guidance of spiritual 
Israel in glory, the Christ, to the blessing of all the families 
of the earth during Christ's Millennial reign. 



"AS DECEIVERS AND YET TRUE" 

These words of the Apostle merely confirm the thought 
emphasized by the Master himself, that all true followers of 
Jesus will have more or less of his experiences. He was the 
true one— the Truth, as well as the Way and the Life— and 
yet he was crucified as a deceiver, he was misunderstood by 
the sin-blinded world, yea, by the most enlightened people 
of that time. The disciple is not to expect to be above his 
Lord, but rather to expect to glory in the privilege of being 
his companion. Let us learn, therefore, to rejoice even in 

R3897 : page 366 

the midst of misrepresentation, falsification, buffetings, 
scourgings, legal and illegal, farcical— let us count it all 
joy to be permitted thus to have companionship with our 
beloved Savior; let us learn the lesson of patient endurance 
in well doing, that in due time, not having fainted, we may 
reap the glorious reward of joint-heirship with him in his 
Kingdom. 



R3897 : page 366 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER:- 

I am thinking of that blessed season of soul refreshing 
which the good Lord permitted so many of us 
to enjoy to so full an extent at St. Paul. I wish I could 
have each countenance clearly impressed upon the tablet 
of my memory as I saw them there. I wish I could 
remember all their names, and recall all the kind words 
they uttered. But I can't, and therefore I realize that, 
good as it was, it was not quite the thing we are expecting 
and when I think what a good thing it was, 
then I wonder just what we are expecting anyhow, and 
I confess that my lips cannot describe that upon which 
my heart is fastening its hope. But I know that I 
shall see my Lord face to face and be with him and 
like him. 

Among the many things that impressed me was 
the thought that our dear Master was there, and all the 
glorified saints with him. The thought that very soon, 
if faithful, we, too, would be on the other side of the 
vail; and then that "if" impressed me, and I said deep 
down in my heart,— 

"Teach our thoughts to ever rise 
Upward toward the heavenly prize; 
Help our doubting hearts to clasp 
Hope within a firmer grasp." 



We thought of the thousand or more of the Lord's 
little ones there, and we tried to comprehend the sum 
of their trials, and we tried to multiply it by 144, and 
we failed; and then we tried to add it to the trials and 
suffering of our dear Master, and failed again. Then 
we tried to subtract it from the sum of all our joys 
when we shall be glorified together with our Lord, and 
the remainder was beyond our comprehension; and 
then we thought, Oh, how glad we will be when we 

R3897 : page 367 

know as we are known, when the dear Master will divide 
the spoils with the strong. 

We thought of the progress these dear friends had 
made, as we looked into their beaming faces and saw 
the beautiful lines traced there by the divine artist; 
lines and coloring that told of the beauty of thoughts, 
desires and hopes stored away in each bosom, and we 
seemed to hear the heart-throbs utter, 

"None of self, and all of thee." 

"But are there no scars and wrinkles to mar this 
beauty?" our ungenerous flesh asked, and the Spirit 
gently replied, "Doubtless there are scars and wrinkles, 
but not to mar this beauty— oh no, no! for there 
were no eyes there to behold the scars and wrinkles, 
only the beautiful." "Love hideth a multitude of sins." 
It was literally love before you, love to the right of you, 
love to the left of you, love above you and love within 
you. 

Then we thought of it as a rally— a rally around 
our invisible Standard-Bearer and his unseen army. 
And then we noticed lines and features that indicated 
discipline, hardness as good soldiers, firmness, decision, 
patience, etc. And we were impressed, and at 
once tightened our armor a little more and grasped the 
weapons of our warfare a little more firmly, and faced 
about a little squarer and stood a little straighter, and 
our hearts responded, "Yea, Lord, we are ready to follow 
even unto death." 

We remembered that we were an army in camp, 
feasting on food such as loyal soldiers needed, and 
that we were doing so in the face of the enemy, and 
that soon the orders would be to break camp and 
march. Yes, "To the front, to the front!" would soon 
be the call to the battle. And may we all "Fight the 
good fight of faith," and be able to say with the Apostle, 
"I have fought a good fight." 

Your brother in Christ and in fellowship of suffering 
and hope, J. P. MARTIN,-Ohio. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 



As Bro. is very busy he wishes me to write 

you in reference to the enclosed draft. 

Some matters have taken a different turn since he 
spoke to you of loaning the Society a sum of money 
this fall. We have again decided to make the enclosed 
amount ($1,000.00) a donation instead of a loan. We 
find, somewhat to our surprise, that in the Lord's 
providence we are about as able to give the amount as 
we were to give the same amount a year ago, so feel 
that it would be pleasing to the Lord to do so. Kindly 
place the amount to our credit on the "Good Hopes" 
fund for 1907. We thought it as well to pay "cash in 
advance" on the Lord's account and reserve the 
"hopes" for our own! 

Personally, Brother Russell, I feel that I would 
like to tell you that I find much peace and comfort 
from the clearer understanding of the Lord's will in 
reference to woman's place in the Church and home. 
I began to seek light on the subject before we came 
"into the Truth" and I presume I received as much 
light as I was able to walk in at the time. I can see 
how it must have cost you some "crucifixion of the 
flesh" to declare the whole counsel of God on the subject 
—even as it is in some cases contrary to the natural 
heart to receive it. But when we see the Lord's will in 
reference to any matter and submit our wills to his 
what rest of heart it brings! 

Brother and I found the double TOWER of 

last July a blessing, although we had never been disturbed 

in mind over your private affairs. We realize it 

must have caused you sorrow, pain, to be required in 

the Lord's providence to so lay bare your heart's secrets, 

but we trust it has not been without a measure 

of compensating blessing to yourself as it has without 

doubt been a blessing to others. 

May the dear Lord who has so graciously blessed 
you and made of you a blessing continue with you to 
the end. Your sister in hope, MRS. . 



MR. CHARLES T. RUSSELL: 

DEAR SIR,— It has never been my good fortune until 
the past few months to read any of your works on 
Bible common sense, but am pleased to inform you 
that within the past three weeks I have had the use of 
your work, and so far my reading is quite satisfactory. 
You are certainly led by the Spirit of God to write the 
simplicity of his expressed will in plain words. 

I had read some of your writings previous to reading 
these volumes, and was impressed with your reasoning 
and conclusions. I am a seeker after Gospel 
information, and have some crude ideas, but a firm 
believer, and get my opinions from my Bible reading, 
but never go to the Bible with an opinion of my own. 
I never believed in "torment" or "torture," but in a just 



punishment— the law of cause and effect, as it were. 

I have some pulpit work to do— not a "preacher," 
however— just talks, as Superintendent of this Home 
for paroled and discharged prisoners who would start 
new and honest in life. I practised law for twenty 
years, but retired, and am now giving my time and 
talents to this work. 

I thank God for such intellects as yours, and for 
such industry, such mind-consecration. God bless you. 

Sincerely yours, V. P. K.,— L.I. 



R.M.S. Lucania, Oct. 1, '06. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We are now on board, all three of us, off to the 
"Old Country." About a dozen of the New York 
friends were at the pier to see us off. We have had a 
very pleasant and helpful sojourn in this country and 
have met with so much kindness everywhere that we 
don't know how to thank you all sufficiently. We know 
that you will say to this that we are to thank the Lord, 
and we do, dear Brother, for without the Lord we 
should not have known you all. We are glad that we 
and so many others have received such marvellous 
light. All we have met have shown the same spirit, the 
Spirit of our dear Master. 

We shall always look back with thankfulness to 
our visit to America, and we hope the many lessons we 
have learned— for we have been keeping our eyes and 
ears open— will help us to be conformed to the image 
of God's dear Son. We shall try with God's help to 
impart to others the blessings we have received. 

We desire to thank you, especially, dear Brother, 
for the kindness we have received from you. We know 
that a great deal of the hospitality we have received 
has been due to you. We trust that you will be sustained 
throughout the rest of your life's journey on 
this side of the vail. We shall continue to pray for 
you. Convey our love in the Lord to all the Bible 
House friends. We love you all because we see in you 
so much of the Spirit of Christ. 

I am, with love to you from my wife, sister and 
self, JOHN EDGAR. 



page 369 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVII DECEMBER 1 No. 23 
A.D., 1906-A.M., 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 371 

Socialism Menacing Great Britain 371 

Strong Words in the House of Lords 371 

Heathen New England 372 

Restatement of Methodist Faith 372 

Business Methods in Church Work 373 

Brooklyn and Worcester Conventions 373 

Berean Studies in "Tabernacle Shadows" 374 

He Thresheth His Wheat (Poem) 375 

In the Cross of Christ I Glory 375 

Bearing the Cross After Him 376 

"He is Risen, as He Said" 380 

Two Views of the Resurrection 381 

page 370 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



1907--MOTTO CARDS--1907 



We announce these a little in advance because some of 
the friends may be ordering other 
mottoes before the first of the year, 
and may desire to include some of 
these. We hope that they will be 
found in every home, if not in every 
room of WATCH TOWER subscribers. 
Put up singly and postpaid, 10 cents. 
In packs of 10 to one address, postpaid, 
60 cents. In quantities by 
freight or express collect, 5 cents 
each. 

The "In Due Time" mottoes we 
now have in good supply at same 
prices as the above. 

General information with regard 
to other mottoes will be found on 
page 4 of the Catalogue in this issue. 
British friends order of London office. 

HYMNS OF DAWN and ZION'S GLAD SONGS are the only hymn 
books we expect to handle. Between them we have a large 
and choice selection of nearly 400 hymns and tunes. We trust 
that all will familiarize themselves with these, that we may 
sing the same hymns of praise as well as "mind the same things" 
doctrinaily. Quality the choicest, prices one-third the usual. 



R3898 : page 371 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
SOCIALISM MENACING GREAT BRITAIN 



THE Liberal Party in the present House of Commons 
stands committed to a considerable degree 
to the laboring class— indeed quite a few of its 
members were chosen on the Labor ticket. British 
statesmen have been wondering to what extent this 
new element in their politics will affect future legislation, 
wondering how conservative or otherwise the new 
members from the lower strata of society would prove 
to be. Heretofore the members have generally been 
chosen either from the aristocratic or wealthy class, or 
from the middle class of merchants, lawyers, etc., who 
have a great respect for traditions. It is causing 
quite an awakening amongst the British to find that 
the new members representing the working classes are 



by no means disposed to be conservative, but rather 
are laying their plans for the ultimate capture of the 
majority in Parliament— planning also something of a 
socialistic turn to legislation. Thus, in their due time, 
matters are shaping around for the termination of Gentile 
rule in anarchy by the appointed time— by October, 
1914, when their lease or permit will expire. We quote 
the following from the pen of an English writer who 
evidently is well posted on his subject. He says:— 

"The enormous majority secured by the Liberal 
party in the last British parliamentary elections had 
its embarrassments as well as its pleasant features. 
...A section of the Labor party in parliament, composing 
about one-half the labor vote, is socialistic in 
its program and principles, and has been striving vigorously 
to whip into line with itself the other half by 
seeking to get control of the trades unions to which 
the conservative half owes and confesses allegiance. 
This movement has become so successful that the 
leaders of the Liberal party, especially the Scotch, became 
alarmed at the growth of Socialism in the labor 
end of the party, and have recently taken steps to warn 
the Government that any further encouragement of the 
socialistic element would result in serious trouble. 
Alexander Murray, the Liberal Scottish whip in the 
House of Commons, in a recent speech made a fierce 
attack upon Socialism and its representatives in Parliament. 
The Scottish Parliamentary Association, 
under Mr. Murray's influence, passed a resolution that 
'it is the primary duty of the Liberal party to present 
strenuous opposition to all candidates who are not prepared 
to dissociate themselves from the Socialist 
party, the avowed object of which is the complete destruction 
of those principles of individual liberty for 
which Liberalism has always contended.' 

"In the meantime, the Labor representation committee, 
whose chairman is Keir Hardie, and which is 
the controlling body of the Socialistic element in politics, 
is working with might and main among the unions 
to bring them over body and soul to Socialism, with 
which they are all more or less deeply leavened, and 
seems to be in the way of fully succeeding. This presages 
a cleavage between the whole Labor vote and the 
Government." 

STRONG WORDS IN THE HOUSE OF LORDS 



"It is strange that the strong, impressive words 
spoken by Lord Avebury in the House of Lords last 
week should have failed, as they have, to excite international 
discussion. Lord Avebury said: 

"The unrest of Europe, the spread of Socialism 
and the ominous rise of anarchism are warnings to the 
governments and the ruling classes that the condition 



of the working classes in Europe is becoming intolerable, 

and that if a revolution is to be avoided some 

steps must be taken to increase wages, reduce the 

hours of labor and lower the prices of the necessaries 

of life. Europe is a great military camp. We have no 

peace, only an armistice, with unlimited expenditures. 

The result is that instead of accumulating capital for 

our children we are piling up for them debt and overwhelming 

responsibilities.' 

"These words were spoken, not by a labor agitator 
or a Socialist, but by an aristocrat and a member of 
the most conservative body in all Europe. That gives 
them all the more significance. They contain more 
valuable political economy than is to be found in most 
of the books. They sound a note of warning. Take 

R3898 : page 372 

heed, gentlemen of the war and navy departments!"— 
Wall Street Journal. 



The matter that confuses many is that really the 
working people of the civilized world are better off in 
many respects today than they ever were before: the 
unrest is the result of knowledge, the increase of the 
spirit of liberty. When the people supposed that God 
had created the royal families to rule and had specially 
blessed them financially, they looked to them as they 
properly looked to the Almighty, as their benefactors, 
and were thankful for whatever they received, thankful 
to be permitted to live at all, thankful to have enough 
of food and raiment and shelter to make them reasonably 
comfortable. But with the opening of the eyes of 
their understanding, with the information from the 
pages of history that their kings and nobles in times 
past had seized the property and power which they 
now possessed— seized it by force and without divine 
authorization— this knowledge has rendered the masses 
dissatisfied. They now reason that those who have 
seized the earth and its honors, authorities and powers 
in the past and who hold them by force may be reasonably 
required to surrender to the public enough of 
their surplus to make the entire people reasonably 
comfortable. Nor need we be surprised that frequently 
unreasonable demands are made by those whose 
minds have not been developed along the lines of 
finance, politics and religion, but who are coming to 
these subjects with crude, half-formed impressions, 
surmises, expectations. Is not this exactly what the 
Scriptures tell us respecting our day, the "time of the 
end"— in which we have already been for one hundred 
and seven years? Do they not tell us that in this 
period would come the running to and fro of travel, 
which we now see about us everywhere, by which the 



various nations and peoples and classes are intermingled 
and waked up to the true situation of matters? 
Do we not see about us as another evidence of this 
time the fulfilment of the prediction, "Knowledge shall 
be increased"? And is it not as a result of the increase 
of knowledge from this intermingling that the further 
prediction is to be fulfilled, "There shall be a time of 
trouble such as was not since there was a nation"?— 
Daniel 12:1. 

HEATHEN NEW ENGLAND 



Rev. Dr. Hoar, of the Newton Theological Seminary, 
has been making a study of conditions in New 
England, and finally raises his voice in protest that 
instead of civilization elevating the people a marked 
degeneracy is in progress. This may be disappointing 
to those who have the wrong expectation for the 
future— to those who are hoping that the Millennium 
will be introduced by the conversion, sanctification, of 
the whole world of mankind to the extent that God's 
will shall be done on earth as it is done in heaven. 
But for those who take the Scriptural view, Reverend 
Hoar's findings are a further corroboration of the 
truth of the Bible. Our Lord's words are confirmed, 
for he said, "When the Son of man cometh shall he 
find the faith on earth?"— implying that the true faith 
would be very scarce at that time. It confirms the Apostle 
Paul's statement that "evil men and seducers shall 
wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived"; 
and again, that "In the last days [in the close of the 
present age, before the dawning of the new dispensation] 
perilous times shall come. For men shall be 
lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, 
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, 
without natural affection, truce breakers, false 
accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that 
are good, traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasure 
more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, 
but denying the power thereof."— 2 Tim. 3:1-5. 

Reverend Hoar says:— "There has come to some 
communities a disintegration and degeneration of public 
morals which has brought them down in moral tone 
below the mining camps of the west. Degenerates in 
mining camps are willing to acknowledge that they 
are bad, but not so with degenerates in New England. 
They commit the sins of the mining camps while they 
lay claim to respectability, and refuse to admit their 
guilt. There must be a mixture of wickedness in order 
to free them from a charge of being Puritanical. In 
90 per cent, of the New England towns the large majority 
of the people have no intelligent faith about anything, 
and do not wish to have any. Serious religion, 
which interferes with personal aims and pleasures, is 



shunned and its advocates ridiculed. The condition 
seems utterly hopeless." 

RESTATEMENT OF METHODIST FAITH 



Considerable agitation has been caused amongst our 
Methodist friends looking toward a revised statement 
of their creed; but, says the Michigan Christian Advocate, 
commenting on the question, "Present indications 
are that no revision of the Methodist creed will be undertaken 
in this generation." 

The Methodist Times (London) admits that honesty 
seems to call for a revision, but claims that expediency 
frowns upon it. It says:— 

"Theoretically a great deal might be said in favor 
of the American proposal, especially on the score of 

R3899 : page 372 

honesty. But, practically, we are convinced that any 
attempt at definition just now would be inexpedient. 
The fact is, every Methodist Church now allows a certain 
latitude to its ministers and people on points of 
doctrine, so long as the 'substance of doctrine' is accepted 
and honorably adhered to. We all know in 
practice what that substance is, for it has been clearly 
laid down in the admirable Free-Church catechism. 
Anything further in the way of an attempt to bring the 
whole body of Methodist belief into the strait-waistcoat 
of a doctrinal standard would probably have an effect 
of a far-reaching and disastrous character. 

"For the plain truth is, that the world of religious 
thought is still in a state of flux. True, Christian 
thought has assimilated and been enriched by the 
theory of evolution as the result of the researches into 
natural science. But even on the subject of evolution 
we have not heard the last word. Meanwhile, a new 
realm of thought is being opened up by the investigations 

R3899 : page 373 

of the psychologist. The secrets of man's higher 
self are being laid bare with the scientific exactness 
which has been already brought to bear on his physical 
frame, and the thoughtful Christian is being led into 
new realms of thought, which must still further widen 
the theological horizon. In these circumstances no 
finality is practicable, and any effort to force it prematurely 
might conceivably end in a fissure which would 
rend our Church asunder from pole to pole. Students 
of theological history know well that these periods of 
flux in thought occur in cycles; and it will be quite 
time enough to examine our own doctrinal position 
when the present movement has reached a standstill— 



of which no signs are yet discernible. If the invitation 
comes to the British conference, we hope that it will be 
courteously declined— and declined not on the grounds 
proffered by Bishop Wilson and others, of any slavish 
dread of breaking with traditional views, but because 
the time is not opportune." 

BUSINESS METHODS IN CHURCH WORK 



Reverend E. D. Decker, pastor of Ebenezer M.E. 
Church, Manayunk, Philadelphia, finding that even 
short sermons and elaborate choir service failed to 
attract the people to his Church, has introduced a new 
plan to draw "worshipers," as follows:— 

"He has formed the young, attractive and unengaged 
girls of his congregation into an ushers' association, 
the chief duties of membership being to conduct 
worshipers, and especially strangers, to their seats and 
to collect the offertory. The girls take turns, twelve 
of them officiating each week. They wear a simple, 
neat and very effective uniform of white, with a becoming 
lace cap, and stand ready in a double row at the 
Church door to welcome arriving worshipers. 

"The first trial of the innovation yesterday was an 
enormous success, crowds of young men who have 
been stubbornly 'unregenerate,' coming from far and 
near. The pastor is delighted with the success of the 
experiment, which, he said, he was sure would prove 
the long-sought solution of the difficult problem of how 
to bring light to many young men whom the distractions 
of business and pleasure have hitherto 
monopolized. 

"The Church's principal supporters are prominent 
business men, and they are equally delighted. They 
say that the opposition churches in the neighborhood 
must follow suit or 'go out of business.' The treasurer 
said the fact was sufficient that the offertory showed a 
150 per cent, increase over the corresponding Sunday 
of last year." 



The difficulty with Christian people in general is 
their misunderstanding of the divine plan, with the 
thought which is so general amongst them, that an 
outward moral gloss and membership in some of the 
sectarian churches is what the Lord is seeking and 
approves. The enterprising Church members, with a 
measure of good intention, resort to Trilby shows, 
raffles, chances, and various methods that are somewhat 
shady for the raising of money, or, as in the above 
case, for the increase of their attendance. What they 
all should see is that the Lord "seeks such to worship 
him as worship him in spirit and in truth." (John 4:23.) 



And the call is not to an outward gloss of morality, 
nor to an earthly Church membership, but a call 
to saintship, to full consecration of heart and life to 
the Lord, and these, as the Lord himself forewarned 
us, will be but a little flock, amongst them not 
many wise, great, learned or noble according to the 
course of this world. 

But the friends of the various denominations ask, 
How then would the world be converted and the Millennium 
be ushered in? We answer that the conversion 
of the world and the bringing in of the Millennium 
are matters beyond human power. With all the stooping 
to worldly methods and ignoble practices, there 
are twice as many heathen today, after a hundred years 
of the most noted missionary effort the world has ever 
known, as there were a century ago. The natural 
increase of the human family operates effectively to 
stop any thought of a conversion of all the heathen— 
we are getting farther from such a possibility every 
day. But even if the heathen were all converted to the 
condition of the Church members of Christendom we are 
all witnesses that the work of conversion would need 
to be repeated, because surely amongst Church members 
God's will is not done on earth as it is in heaven. 
The vast majority of them have no wish for God's will 
to be done in them, but rather are walking after the 
flesh and not after the Spirit. The real hope is in the 
divine plan: the selection now of the little flock to be 
the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, and the work for the world 
to begin after the marriage of the Lamb has taken 
place at the second coming. Then the Spirit and the 
glorified Bride will say, "Come," and whosoever will 
may come and take of the water of life freely. Then 
Satan will be bound and all the families of the earth 
be blessed with the uplifting influences that will then 
be world-wide and ocean-deep— the knowledge of the 
Lord. 



R3899 : page 373 

BROOKLYN AND WORCESTER CONVENTIONS 

ON November 1 1th Brooklyn, N.Y., had a splendid 

one-day Convention. About 200 gathered with 

the local friends— mainly from New York City, 

but various cities of New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, 

Connecticut and Maryland were represented. 

The forenoon rally was heart-cheering. One dear Colporteur 

present, on hearing a testimony given by one 

newly come into the light through his efforts, declared 

that it was worth more to him than a thousand-dollar 

gift. Testimonies from the newly-interested often 

astonish us, showing how rapidly some can grow in 

grace and knowledge. 



The afternoon session for the public was splendidly 
attended, considering that it rained all day;— about 
1000 very attentive hearers were present. The friends 
must have been very industrious and liberal in their 

R3900 : page 374 

advertising, else no such assemblage could have been 
gathered on such a day. We were pleased, too, that when 
they noted the unfavorable weather they did not murmur 
nor complain, but said,— "The Lord knows best: 
He could have ordered it otherwise had he so desired." 

The evening discourse on "Two Purgatories"— one 
for the Church and one for the world— those who desire 
already possess, through the newspapers; so we 
do not elaborate its features here. We parted with 
joyful greetings at 9 p.m., all of us wishing for the 
General Convention with our Lord— hoping that it 
will be soon. 

Worcester, Mass., had its first One-Day Convention 
on Nov. 18. It was surely a joyous occasion for the 
dear friends there as well as for us who visited them; 
over 200 from all parts of New England, but particularly 
from Boston and vicinity. The local Church is 
small in numbers and financially weak, but had been 
saving up in preparation for the Convention expenses 
for fully two years. They seemed greatly rejoiced 
with the results of their efforts. 

The morning session led off as a Testimony Rally, 
then came Brother Russell's discourse to the interested 
on the "Times of Restitution"— slightly different and 
more elaborated than the reports of it in the daily 
newspapers. Next came the noon-day repast, and in 
the afternoon the public service— the event of the occasion. 
The friends had secured "Mechanics' Hall," the 
largest and finest auditorium in Worcester, seating 
over 2,000. A grand audience was present, and the 
close attention given to so lengthy a discourse told of 
an interest which with some will, we trust, grow and 
deepen into love, devotion, zeal. About 1100 were 
present. Brother Russell's train left just at the close 
of this service, but the friends had, we understand, 
further spiritual feasting in the evening. 



page 374 

BEREAN STUDIES IN "TABERNACLE SHADOWS" 

In the references below, Z. represents this journal 
and T. stands for Tabernacle Shadows. The references 
should be given to brethren and sisters for reading 
in the classes. Free comment should be permitted 
after each reading. 



ISRAELITES, LEVITES AND THE PRIESTHOOD 



DECEMBER 9 

1. What did the nation of Israel frequently typify? 
T.25,par. 2, 3. 

2. What did Israel typify in its relation to the Tabernacle? 
T.25, par. 3, to 26, par. 1. 

3. What did the Levites typify? T.26, par. 2. 

4. What did the Aaronic priesthood typify? T.26, 
par. 2 to 4. 

5. Who is the head of the antitypical priesthood? 
Heb. 3:1;T.27, par. 1. 

6. What is the significance in the tribe of Levi having 
existed before the priesthood was instituted? 

T.27, par. 2. 

7. What is the significance of the fact that in the ordination 
of the priesthood the Chief Priest was 

always first? T.28, par. 1, 2. 

8. What did the ceremony of the anointing signify 
and typify? T.28, par. 3. 

DECEMBER 16 

9. What was the significance of Aaron's being washed 
before putting on the garments of "glory and 
beauty"? T. 29, par. 1. 

10. What were the High Priest's garments of "glory 
and beauty"? and what did they typify in general? 
Ex. 28:4; T.29, par. 2, 3. 

11. What did the white linen "coat" represent? T.29, 
par. 4. 

12. What was the "mitre"? and what did it typify? 
T.29, par. 5. 

13. Describe the golden plate or "crown." What did it 
typify? and why was it fastened with a blue lacer 

to the "mitre"? T.30, par. 1; T.29, par. 5. 

14. What was the significance of the "linen girdle"? T.30, 
par. 2. 

15. Describe the "upper robe." What did its color 
(blue) and its golden bells and pomegranates 
signify? T.30, par. 3. 

16. How was the "ephod" made? and what was the 
significance of its two parts with their golden 
clasps? T.30, par. 4. 

17. What did the "curious girdle" signify? T.33, par. 1. 

DECEMBER 23 

18. Respecting the statement on page 33, par. 2, "Sealed 
with the sacrifice of himself once for all," are 

the members of his body all counted in with the 



Head in this work of sealing the New Covenant? 
and has the great High Priest yet finished this 
work of sealing and confirming the New Covenant? 
and has it gone into effect? or will this 
all be accomplished with the passing beyond the 
vail of the last member of the body, the sprinkling 
of the blood of the sin-offering, and the coming 
forth in glory robes for the blessing of the 
people? Z/05-378 (1st col. par. 1.) 

19. Why is that part of the "ephod" representing the 
Abrahamic Covenant still incomplete? T.33, par. 3. 

20. What is meant by "the Seed of Abraham"? Gal. 3:16,29; 
T.33, par. 3. 

DECEMBER 30 

21. How do we know that the natural seed of Abraham 
will not be members of the great antitypical High 
Priest? T.33, par. 4. 

22. What part will natural Israel have in fulfilling the 
Abrahamic Covenant? and upon what conditions? 
T.34, par. 1. 

23. What did the colors of the "ephod" signify? T.34, 
par. 2. 

24. How was the "breastplate of judgment" worn, and 
what did it represent? T.34, par. 3. 

25. How did natural Israel regard the Covenant (represented 
by the ephod), and the Law (represented 

by the breastplate), and why? T.34, par. 3. 

JANUARY 6 

26. Describe the Law emblem (the breastplate). Why 
was it bound upon the High Priest's heart? 

T.35, par. 1. 

27. What were the dimensions of the breastplate? and 
what the significance of its being a span long and 

a span wide when doubled? T.35, par. 2. 

28. What was the significance of its being doubled, and 
what did each half represent? T.35, par. 3. 

page 375 

29. What is the precious significance of the breastplate 
being suspended by a gold chain from the 

gold clasps of the "ephod"? T.36, par. 1. 

30. What did Aaron represent when clothed in these 
beautiful robes and anointed with the holy oil? 
T.36, par. 2. 

31. How were the under priests, "the body," clothed, 
and what was the significance of their garments? 
T.36, par. 3, 4. 

32. What beautiful and appropriate antitypical application 
does the Apostle Paul make to the Gospel 

Church in this connection? T.36, par. 3; F.271, 
par. 1-3. 



33. How was the anointing oil applied, and what did 
this ceremony typify primarily? T.37, par. 1. 

34. Why was the anointing oil poured only upon Aaron's 
head, and not upon the under priests? T.37, par. 2. 

35. What is the antitype of this anointing in its secondary 
significance? T.37, par. 2, 3; E.304 to 305, 

par. 1; F.132, par. 1. 

36. From what standpoint should we view Aaron thus 
robed and anointed? T.38, par. 1. 



R3899 : page 375 

HE THRESHETH HIS WHEAT 

When the Wheat is carried home 
And the threshing time is come, 

Close the door. 
When the flail is lifted high, 
Like the chaff I would not fly; 
At His feet oh let me lie 

On the floor. 

All the cares that o'er me steal, 
All the sorrows that I feel 

Like a dart, 
When my enemies prevail, 
When my strength begins to fail— 
'Tis the beating of the flail 
On my heart. 

It becomes me to be still, 
Tho' I cannot all His will 

Understand; 
I would be the purest wheat, 
Lying humbly at His feet, 
Kissing oft the rod that beat, 

In His hand. 

By and by I shall be stored 
In the garner of the Lord 

Like a prize; 
Thanking Him for every blow 
That in sorrow laid me low, 
But in beating made me grow 

For the skies. 

—Unknown. 



R3900 : page 375 

IN THE CROSS OF CHRIST I GLORY. 
-LUKE 23:33-46. -DECEMBER 9- 



Golden Text:— "Father, forgive them; 
for they know not what they do." 

THE Gospel of salvation by the blood of the cross 
is becoming more and more unpopular. That 
divine justice required a "life for a life," and 
accepted the life of Jesus as the ransom price for the 
life of Adam and that of the race which lost life through 
him, seems to be repugnant to the natural mind, and, 
alas! the number of those begotten of the Spirit and 
able to appreciate spiritual things from the spiritual 
standpoint seems to be remarkably small. Worldly wisdom 
rejects the entire story of redemption when it rejects 
the Bible record of the fall and substitutes the 
theory of evolution, which assumes that man is gradually 
raising himself from bestial to more and more 
rational conditions. Of course, it must be logically 
true that if there was no fall from perfection there was 
no original sin and condemnation, and if Adam and his 
race were not cursed, condemned, sentenced to death, 
redemption from such a sentence would be impossible. 
From this standpoint of worldly wisdom (which is 
taught in all the colleges, seminaries and high schools) 
the entire Bible story of redemption through the blood 
of the cross is foolishness. 

"Christian Science," falsely so-called, is aiding also 
in the undermining of faith in the Bible testimony respecting 
redemption through the blood. Its theory is 
that there is no sin, never was any sin nor evil of any 
kind, but all such matters are purely mental hallucinations 
and deceptions;— that there was therefore no 
divine sentence against Adam and his race as sinners, 
and that there is no such thing as death. They thus 
contradict the Apostle who declares, "By one man's 
disobedience sin entered into the world and death as 
the result of sin; and so death passed upon all men for 
all are sinners." (Rom. 5:12.) This delusion, which 
seems so weak and nonsensical to those who have 
learned to rightly divide the Word of Truth, is, as the 
Scriptures declare, a "strong delusion" upon many who 
have only a superficial knowledge of the divine Word. 
These, after learning to deny the facts in their own experiences, 
after practising the denial of all pain, gradually 
so pervert their minds that they cannot reason 
properly and truthfully on any subject. These, being 
mentally blindfolded, the Scriptures are twisted for 
them into such shapes as to bind them hand and foot 
and render them thoroughly impervious to the Truth. 

ERRORS BEGET ERRORS 

The third view of the cross is the offspring of the 
two delusions foregoing: it seeks to hold to the Scriptures 
and to the cross of Christ, and to some kind of a 
work there accomplished for mankind, but is confused 



and blinded, and sees not clearly just what was accomplished. 

In its blindness it grasps the statement that 

Christ set an example to us his followers, but that his 

sufferings were in no sense of the word redemptive, but 

merely educational, instructive to his followers. They 

claim that Jesus suffered to show us how to suffer, that 

he died to show us how to die, to show us his resignation 

to the Father's will. They totally overlook and 

ignore the true view of our Lord's death set forth in 

many Scriptural, positive statements, some of them in 

this lesson: that Christ died for our sins, that he gave 

himself a ransom for all, that he bought us with his 

precious blood, that we are redeemed by the blood of 

Christ. 

R3900 : page 376 

The true view of the cross recognizes that while 
Jesus is indeed the Teacher of the Church, the Head of 
the Church, the Bridegroom for the Bride, the Church, 
it is the Lord who obtained not only the rightful authority 
to be our Teacher and by and by to be King of 
the world, but also by the same sacrifice, by the same 
ransom price, he bought the Church and the world, 
securing for all mankind release from the original 
sentence of death, release from the "curse," thus making 
it possible for God to be just and at the same time 
the justifier of him that believeth on Jesus. It is when 
the death of Christ is recognized as the ransom price 
for Adam, and incidentally for all of his family who 
lost through his disobedience, that we see its real signification, 
and how it was impossible under the divine 
arrangement for the baptism into death to be omitted 
by our Lord. At the same time we see how all who will 
be members of his glorious Bride class must also share 
with him in this baptism into death, and that without 
the shedding of his blood there could be no remission 
of sins, no reconciliation to the Father, no resurrection 
out of death, no reattainment of everlasting life. With 
the true view before us we have not only feelings of 
sympathy for our dear Redeemer's sufferings at Calvary, 
portrayed in this lesson, but we have joy also in 
his faithfulness, which means our redemption and ultimately 
through him, in the resurrection, our deliverance 
from the power of sin and death. 

EN ROUTE TO CALVARY 

Our last lesson showed us Pilate signing the death-warrant 
of Jesus under protest, washing his hands as 
indicating that he considered the matter an outrage of 
justice, but was helpless as respects further protestation 
against the will of the people who cried out, 
"Crucify him!" The scourged Jesus, who knew in advance 
the result, was the most calm and collected one 
of the company, fully prepared to drink to its dregs the 



cup which the Father had allowed to be prepared for 
him— conscious that the Father's love and care would 
do nothing amiss and would cause ultimately all things 
to work together for his good. Soon all was in readiness, 
and the little procession was formed and wended 
its way from Pilate's castle along the narrow streets of 
Jerusalem to the Damascus gate. First went a soldier 
with a white wooden board, on which was written the 
nature of the crime of the convict; next followed four 
soldiers under the command of a centurion, with hammer 
and nails, guarding Jesus, who bore his own cross; 
then followed the two robbers, each bearing his own 
cross and guarded by four soldiers. A multitude 
thronged the way, the curious throng, the exultant enemies, 
and some of the Lord's friends, "Mary with other 
women weeping" (vs. 27). The entire distance from 
castle Antonio to the hill-top called Calvary is about 
three-fourths of a mile. Calvary is the Latin name, 
signifying the skull; Golgotha, the word used by Matthew, 
also signifies a skull, being the Aramaic, the 
original language of the Jews in Palestine. The name 
was probably applied because, looked upon at a little 
distance, it much resembled a skull. A recent writer 
thus describes it:— 

"Two hundred yards outside the Damascus gate of 
Jerusalem there is an isolated white limestone knoll, in 
contour like the crown of the head and about 60 feet high. 
It contains in its perpendicular face the most remarkable 
likeness to a skull. The two eyeless sockets, the 
overhanging forehead, the lines of the nose, the mouth 
and chin will be plainly seen. It is also concave, and 
the same color as a skull. On the summit of Golgotha 
there is a great pit heaped over with stones. . . . This 
pit is filled with the skeletons and bones of criminals, 
who, from time immemorial, have been crucified and 
stoned. The bodies of criminals are still hurled into 
that same pit. A mighty earthquake upheaved this 
solid earth and split this very rock asunder. To the 
right of the skull the face of the cliff is oddly riven. . . 
At the bottom of the western cliff there is a large garden 
with a very ancient well. Where it touches the foot 
of the cliff, six feet below the surface, the rock-hewn 
sepulcher of our Lord has been discovered. There is 
now a general concensus of agreement that this is the 
true Calvary." 

R3901 : page 376 

En route, and probably near the Damascus gate, a 
women's society for the mitigation of the sufferings of 
those executed met the procession and tendered refreshments 
in the form of a narcotic drink of wine and 
myrrh, intended to relieve the pains of the crucified by 
benumbing their sensibilities. Their sympathy was 
also expressed by their tears. The account gives us to 
understand that Jesus courteously tasted of the beverage 



to show his appreciation of the kindness, but declined 

to drink the potion. He was willing to endure 

to the end all that the Father might be pleased to permit 

to come upon him. "More than conqueror" we behold 

him— we glory in the principles which actuated 

the Captain of our Salvation in his every act, and we 

are inspired by his example to press with vigor on, assured 

by him that "Greater is he that is for us than all 

that be against us," and that he will not permit any experience 

to happen to us that he is not able to overrule 

for our best interests. 

BEARING THE CROSS AFTER HIM 

Another incident occurred about this time: Simon, 
a countryman, a Cyrenian, met the procession at a time 
when, according to tradition, Jesus— weakened through 
the experiences of the night and through his previous 
experiences, in which virtue went out of him when he 
healed the multitudes— was about to faint under the 
weight of the cross. Simon was compelled to bear the 
cross after Jesus, but whether this means that Jesus 
walked before and that Simon carried the cross behind 
him, or whether it means that Simon walked back of 
Jesus carrying the end which otherwise was dragging 
on the ground, we cannot surely know. If, however, it 
was the latter, the figure becomes all the more striking 
as an illustration of how the Lord's true followers today 
are to walk in his footsteps and to join with him in 
the carrying of the cross— not the literal, but the 
symbolical. 

R3901 : page 377 

If we are inclined to wonder where were Peter, 
John and James and the others of the apostles that they 
proffered the Master no helping hand, we are to remember 
that they were "common people" and rather despised 
as Galileans, and that they had reason to fear 
that the wrath of the chief priests and rulers against 
Jesus might also attach more or less to them, and no 
doubt these considerations had something to do with 
their backwardness. Besides, they were in a great 
maze of perplexity at the experiences through which 
their Master was passing— they understood not until 
after our Lord's resurrection and his explanation of the 
Scriptures bearing upon the subject. We are not, 
therefore, to plume ourselves upon superior courage 
when thinking how we would delight ourselves in such 
an opportunity. We are to remember that we have the 
light and the knowledge and the holy Spirit, which 
they did not then have, and that thus we have much 
advantage over them every way. 

When we think, however, how nobly Peter, James 
and John and the others carried on the work of the 
Lord— how they took up the cross of Christ in the 



highest sense as his apostles and servants— we have 
every reason to rejoice and to do them honor. And now 
the cross is with us. The truths represented in our 
Lord, in his teachings, in his sacrifice, are still despised 
and rejected of men— not only by the world, but 
also by the chief priests, scribes and Pharisees of nominal 
Christendom. The members of the body of Christ, 
their hope of glory, honor and immortality, and the 
blessing of all the families of the earth, are still 
laughed to scorn, and there is still room for bearing 
the cross and experiencing crucifixion of the flesh as 
the representatives of him who loved us and bought us 
with his precious blood. How faithful have we been 
in the past? how faithful will we be in the future? 
Here is our opportunity also for coming off conquerors 
through faithfulness in walking in his steps. 

"FATHER, FORGIVE THEM" 

Arrived at Calvary, Golgotha, the wooden crosses 
were laid upon the ground, the victims stretched 
thereon, and nailed by hands and feet; then the 
soldiers lifted the crosses and set them into already 
prepared holes or sockets. The torture of these experiences 
can better be imagined than described. It was 
a most cruel death, though perhaps not more cruel than 
some other forms by which the Lord's followers and 
others have died. It was not the pain, not the suffering 
that was our ransom price— it was the death. The 
penalty upon father Adam was not the amount of pain 
he should suffer, but the fact that he must lose life. 
And so some of Adam's children have lost their lives 
with great pain, others with little suffering, but over 
all the sentence reigns, "Dying thou shalt die." It was 
sufficient in some respects that the Lord should have 
died, no matter how, but in other respects this was not 
sufficient. Under the Mosaic law it was decreed, 
"Cursed is everyone that hangeth on a tree." (Gal. 3:13.) 
That vilest sentence or curse against sinners under the 
Law Jesus bore, that he might not only be the Redeemer 
of the world in general but also the Redeemer 
of the Jew, as it is written, "He was made a curse for 
us"— experienced the sentence of the accursed ones 
under the Law. 

It was supposed that it was just about the time 
that the cross was dropped into the sockets, which 
would be one of the most agonizing moments of the 
entire experience, that our Lord in the midst of his 
agony prayed for his enemies, "Father, forgive them, 
for they know not what they do." It certainly would be 
just like our dear Master to utter such a prayer, and 
we feel very sure that it was the sentiment of his heart, 
as it was also that of the first martyr, Stephen, who 
cried in dying, "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge." 
It is but truthful, however, for us to note the fact that 
these words credited to our Lord are omitted from the 



Vatican MS., which is one of the very oldest; and 

although they appeared in the Sinaitic, they were subsequently 

stricken out of the latter as though their 

authenticity were doubted. We cannot, however, have 

any doubt that the words represented our Master's 

sentiments toward his enemies, for they are in full accord 

with his instructions to his followers, Love your 

enemies, do good to them that persecute you, and pray 

for them. 

"THEY PARTED HIS RAIMENT" 

The four soldiers who had Jesus in charge, after 
they had set the cross in place, began to look after his 
personal effects, his clothing, which became their portion 
according to usage. Little did they think as they 
divided his garments, and then cast lots for his seamless 
tunic, which was the most valuable article, that 
they were thus fulfilling prophecy. (Psa. 22:18.) Just 
so it is with the whole world; matters are moving on 
from day to day, prophecies are being fulfilled, many 
of us have part in them, but few can see and understand, 
because only a few have the guidance of the holy 
Spirit. As an illustration of prophecy being fulfilled 
in our day, note the statement in Daniel about many 
running to and fro and knowledge being increased, and 
the approach of a time of trouble such as was not since 
there was a nation— all declared to be indications of 
the time of the end of this age. (Dan. 12:1-4.) Yet 
how few of those who see and acknowledge that we are 
living in peculiar and wonderful times realize that 
these are fulfilments of prophecy. 

DECEPTIVE OUTWARD EVIDENCES 

The crowd stood around gaping, and the rulers 
joined with them in deriding the one who so recently 
had ridden upon the ass as the King of the Jews. They 
made light also of his miracles of healing, of awaking 
the dead, saying, "He saved others, let him save himself." 
Let him save himself if he be the Messiah of 
God, his elect one. How deceived they were, and what 
a lesson it should teach us of the fallibility of human 
judgment and the necessity for looking deeply, especially 
in matters pertaining to God and his Word. If the 
rulers had any compunctions of conscience respecting 
their course previously, they did not now manifest it, 
since they were fully convinced that our Lord was a 

R3901 : page 378 

deceiver, a fraud. This was implied in their willingness 
to say, "His blood be upon us and upon our 
children." If they had any qualms of conscience these 
apparently were satisfied as they beheld Jesus on the 
cross, helpless and dying. Here was certainly a test, they 



said. If he were the Messiah undoubtedly he would 
not thus suffer ignominiously, but would come down 
from the cross; hence they said, We have proof that 
our course has been a wise and proper one in ridding 
our nation of a disturber of its peace, whose teaching 
would ultimately have overthrown our priestly authority 
and control of the people. 

Similarly in the harvest of this age, with antitypical 
nominal spiritual Israel, the Truth is stranger than 
any fiction, and the masses, in a wrong condition of 
heart, not guided by the Spirit of the Lord, are blind 
to it, and also the rulers, the Doctors of Divinity. 
Doubtless the hour will come when measures of force 
will be used against all who stand faithful to the Lord 
and his Truth; and they, too, will suffer under the 
claim that their death will be for the good of the cause, 
that it is expedient that injustice in some measure be 
done to a few rather than that their influence should 
prevail to any further extent against the systems in 
power. 

Spurred on by the influence of the Jewish rulers, 
the Roman soldiers also derided the one just crucified 
as the King of the Jews; and the whole multitude, as 
they read over his head in Greek, the language of literature 
—in Latin, the language of the Romans, their 
rulers— in Hebrew, the language of their own nation, 
the words, "This is the King of the Jews," were struck 
with the absurdity of the situation— its impossibility, 
so to speak,— that a king of the nation should be thus 
completely denounced and rejected by the people of his 
realm! Alas, how little they understood his power! He 
could indeed have come down from the cross, could 

R3902 : page 378 

have refused to die, could have resisted their insults, 
could have had "more than twelve legion of angels" for 
his defence. But this would not have been in accord 
with his consecration, nor in accord with the Father's 
will, and would have left us as the race of Adam under 
the sentence of death, without hope of a future life- 
dead as brute beasts. 

How we may rejoice that the dear Redeemer did 
not when he was reviled revile again, when he was maltreated 
resent it and do injury to his executioners. How 
we may rejoice in his faithfulness and love, which 
enabled him to present the acceptable sacrifice on our 
behalf. How we can exult also in the great glory, honor, 
dominion and power everlasting which have come to 
him as a reward and as a token of the Father's approval, 
and what a hope it gives us that we also by his 
grace and assistance may attain to joint-heirship with 
him in his Kingdom. 

"WITH ME IN PARADISE" 



As the multitude of onlookers were divided, some 
sympathizing and some deriding, it is not surprising 
that similar emotions were awakened in the minds of 
the two robbers crucified with Jesus. In his company, 
following him, they had been witnesses of his meekness, 
gentleness, patience and evident faith in God, 
yet but one of them had the eyes of understanding to 
appreciate this in any measure. The other, blind as 
the rulers and the populace, joined with them in reviling 
the Lord as an impostor, a hypocrite. The first- 
manifesting a faith which, under all the circumstances, 
was a remarkable one— reproved his fellow saying, 
"Dost not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same 
condemnation? And we indeed justly, for we receive 
the due reward of our deeds, but this man hath done 
nothing amiss." Our Lord's light indeed shined in 
darkness and the children of darkness comprehended 
it not, but his disciples at least sympathized. And so 
also this poor thief perceived that our Lord was suffering 
injustice, being buffeted, yet taking it patiently. 

Doubtless the thief had heard of Jesus, that he was 
reputed by some to be the Messiah, and, notwithstanding 
the incongruous condition of things, the thief realized 
that with our Redeemer there was a kingly demeanor, 
and the thought had doubtless been growing 
in his mind, What if this is some great one from the 
spirit world, who, as he claims, will by and by in 
another age establish his Kingdom! What if these 
rulers are moved by envy and selfishness, and are blind 
to his teachings! The raillery of his companion only 
opened his mouth in defense of the Savior. Confessing 
his own unworthiness, he nevertheless pled for justice, 
suggesting that both he and his companion thief had 
reason to be fearful in their dying hour as respects 
what might be their future in the hands of the 
Almighty; but here was one traduced, buffeted, crucified, 
of whom they were witnesses that "This man hath 
done nothing amiss." 

"LORD, REMEMBER ME" 

Having administered the rebuke he appealed to 
our Lord, saying, "Lord, remember me when thou comest 
into thy kingdom"— when you receive your kingdom, 
wherever it may be and under whatever conditions, 
if it is in your power remember me. I look to you 
as vastly my superior and the superior of all of us. It 
seems to me not at all improbable that you are indeed 
a mighty king, misunderstood by some of your subjects. 
I venture this appeal to you, even though in the 
eyes of others it may seem foolish. "Remember me" 
when you become a king, for I verily believe somehow, 
sometime, somewhere, you shall have a kingdom, 
for you certainly would be worthy of it. 

Our Lord's recorded answer has caused much debate 
amongst Christian people. As it appears in the 



English it seems to give the thought that the Lord 
himself expected to be in Paradise that same day, and 
that the thief would be there and receive blessing and 
favor at his hand. If by Paradise heaven be understood, 
we know that there must be some mistake, because 
our Lord certainly did not go to heaven that 
day. The Apostle quotes the Prophet David's words, 
which imply that he was in sheol (Greek hades) until 
his resurrection on the third day. (Acts 2:31; Psa. 16:10.) 
Our Lord himself on the morning of his resurrection 

R3902 : page 379 

told Mary to tell the disciples that he had not 
yet ascended to his Father and their Father, to his God 
and their God. Paul's declaration is that he was dead 
during the interim— that "he rose from the dead on the 
third day. "-I Cor. 15:4. 

PARADISE LOST TO BE RESTORED 

The word Paradise, elsewhere mentioned in the 
Scriptures, refers to the Garden of Eden, from which 
Adam and Eve were cast out, and to the Paradise restored 
—the entire earth turned into a Paradise at the 
second coming of our Lord and the establishment of 
his Kingdom. The Garden of Eden had long been destroyed 
at the time of this conversation; the Paradise 
of the Kingdom is therefore the only one to which the 
Lord could have referred. The whole question hinges 
upon the word today, which is not generally used now 
as in this text, where it is used to express emphasis, 
and is better appreciated when we transpose the 
comma and place it after today instead of before it. 
Then the passage would read, "Verily I say unto thee 
today [when everything seems unfavorable, when I appear 
as an impostor, subject to the insults and taunts 
of my enemies— notwithstanding all this, I tell you] 
thou shalt be with me in Paradise." But the Lord 
and the thief went to hades, the tomb, the state of 
death, that very day. The Lord arose on the third 
day, but the thief remained a prisoner in the great 
prison-house of death, with the remainder of the world, 
unconscious. 

When the Lord at his second coming, in due time, 
shall call forth the thief from the tomb he will come 
forth to Paradise, for the whole earth at that time shall 
be filled with the glory of the Lord, the Sun of Righteousness 
shall fill the earth with the light of 
divine truth. Then that thief of remarkable faith will 
be remembered and receive blessing proportionate to 
his faith and to the blessing which he ministered to 
his dying Redeemer. Furthermore, the thief's request 
was to be remembered when Messiah would come in 
his Kingdom, and we still pray, "Thy Kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven." There 



can be no Paradise until his Kingdom shall come. Our 
Lord's answer, as expressed in the words "Verily, verily," 
signifies, "Amen, so be it,"— Be it as you have 
suggested, thou shalt be with me in Paradise, I declare 
this today amidst all this contradiction of sinners 
and exhibition of the powers of darkness. 

MANY OR FEW STRIPES IN PARADISE 

But will not all mankind, except those who have 
now seen and tasted and wilfully rejected the grace of 
God— will not all others have some blessed opportunity 
in Paradise, too, under the ministration of the 
Millennial Kingdom? We answer, Yes. The blinded 
thief will be there, and all those blind spectators who 
railed upon the Lord and those who cried, "Crucify 
him," and pierced him, and who said, "His blood be 
upon us and upon our children"— they will all be there, 
as it is written, "All that are in their graves shall hear 
the voice of the Son of man and shall come forth." (Jno. 5:28,29.) 
What advantage then will the friends of the 
Lord have over the others? We answer they have 
much advantage every way: first they have the blessing 
and peace which come in believing even in the present 
life. All the Lord's disciples know this, and the 
believing thief assuredly realized a blessing from it, 
too, and died the happier. As for the future life we 
may readily see that the blinded ones, while not to be 
held entirely responsible for their blindness, which 
the Scriptures declare comes from the god of this world, 
who blinds the minds of them that believe not, are 
nevertheless to some extent responsible, and will be 
handicapped in the future in proportion to their degree 
of present wilfulness in sin. 

The believing thief was certainly not prepared for 
heaven. He was not begotten of the Spirit, and hence 
could not be born of the Spirit in the resurrection. He 
had not cultivated the fruits and graces of the Spirit 
and therefore would not be acceptable as an overcomer 
and joint-heir with the saints. But we may be sure 
that the faith developed and acted upon to the extent 
of defending the Lord in such an emergency implies a 
considerable degree of principle and love of righteousness 
at heart, and that under the Millennial Kingdom 
conditions the believing thief would undoubtedly have 
made rapid progress under the blessing of the Lord up 
to full perfection of all that was lost in Adam and redeemed 
by the precious blood. 

Dr. Alford has well said, "What is really astonishing 
is the power and strength of that faith which, 
amid shame and pain and mockery, could lift itself to 
the apprehension of the Crucified as his King. The 
thief would fill a conspicuous place in the list of triumphs 
of faith supplementary to Hebrews 11." 

"DARKNESS OVER THE LAND" 



It was about noon that Jesus, seeing his mother 
and John standing near, said, "Woman, behold they 
son," and to John, "Behold thy mother." We thus see 
that, in the extremity of his pain even, our Lord was 
thinking less of himself than of his disciples and of his 
dear ones. It was about this time that darkness began 
to settle, beclouding the scene for about three hours. 
Undoubtedly the shade was more comfortable for the 
crucified ones than the sunlight of that bright land. 
And surely it was appropriate that nature should be 
draped, the shadowy vail drawn over such a scene. Well 
did it picture the temporary triumph of the power of darkness 
over him who is the Light of the world. Thanks 
be to God and to our Lord that through his blessed 
sacrifice for sins very soon all the shadows will be past, 
for the Sun of Righteousness will rise with healing in 
his beams for the blessing of all the families of the 
earth. 

"GAVE UP THE GHOST" 

The last verse of our lesson tells of our Lord's last 
agonizing cry with a loud voice— consuming the remainder 
of his strength. His words elsewhere recorded 
were, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken 
me?" We have already noticed the serene calmness of 
our dear Master from the time in Gethsemane 
when the angel strengthened him with the assurance 

R3903 : page 380 

that his course had thus far been pleasing 

and acceptable in the Father's sight. But it was 

necessary that he should have the sinner's bitter 

experience, even to the extent of being entirely cut off 

from fellowship with the Father. In God's providence, 

however, this was not prolonged, but merely "for a moment." 

The Father hid his face from his beloved Son 

in the sense of withdrawing all spiritual fellowship 

and communion: for a moment, therefore, our Redeemer 

was left in a depth of darkness, and his agonizing 

cry pictures the loneliness of his heart. It was not 

enough that of the people there were none with him— 

it must come to this, that the Father should temporarily 

withdraw sustaining strength and assistance. 

Yet our Lord triumphed, and his final words as he 
breathed his last were, "Father, into thy hands I commit 
my spirit," and having said this "he gave up the 
ghost." The word ghost was at one time used as a 
synonym for spirit, and the meaning of this statement 
is that our Lord gave up his spirit, his breath of life. 
In other words, he breathed out his last breath, he let 
go his hold upon life. 

But what was meant by the words, "Into thy hands 
I commit my spirit"— my breath, my life? We answer 



that when God created Adam he first formed him and 
then gave him the gift of life. The right to this gift 
Adam forfeited by disobedience. He was able to transmit 
to his posterity a spark of vitality, but not perfection 
of life, because he had lost all right to that. 
Hence Adam and each member of his race in dying 
surrenders his life to God under the divine edict that 
they were unworthy of life, that they could not have it 
nor claim it either soon or ever. But with our Lord 
Jesus it was different: he had a life that was not derived 
from Adam, but, transferred from a heavenly 
condition, he had a right to life, and it was this life to 
which he had a right that he was now laying down on 
behalf of, and as a redemption price for, Adam and his 
race. In letting go his hold on life he surrendered it 
to the Father, who had already promised that his life 
being thus surrendered should entitle him to a higher 
life under still greater favor, and this he received when 
he arose from the dead on the "third day," for, as the 
Apostle declared, "He was put to death in the flesh, 
but quickened [made alive] in the Spirit"— a spirit being. 
-I Pet. 3:18. 



R3903 : page 380 

"HE IS RISEN, EVEN AS HE SAID" 

-MATTHEW 28:1-15.-DECEMBER 16.- 

THE PROOFS of our Lord's resurrection from the dead 
are quite necessary to be kept in mind by those who 
have been begotten of the holy Spirit; and as they 
were indispensable to our attainment of justifying faith in 
Jesus, so they are also necessary for others. Indeed none 
could reach the higher developments of faith and Christian 
experience without this foundation well established. As it 
was necessary for us to know that Christ died for our sins 
before we could believe in him as the Redeemer, as the one 
who had secured the right to be the Life-giver to Adam and 
his race, so it was necessary for us to believe more than 
this, namely, that he who died for our sins rose again, so 
that he might be our justifier, our Lord, our guide, our 
helper, our advocate with the Father, and by and by the 
Mediator between God and the world. From this standpoint, 
therefore, our lesson is important as providing us 
with the necessary reasonable proofs to lay before those 
who are approaching the subject— our friends, the members 
of our families, etc., who have not yet accepted Christ. 

SUMMING UP THE PROOFS 

we find that they are numerous and well substantiated, as 
follows:— 
(1) Our Lord's death could not have been a case of 



suspended animation: the spear-thrust in his side made this 

evident, not only because it was a mortal wound, but because 

it furnished evidence that our Lord was already dead 

in that there issued from his side water as well as coagulated 

blood. 

(2) The centurion charged with the execution was 
convinced of his death, and so reported to Pilate, the 
Governor. 

(3) The request of the chief priests, that the stone 
against the door of the sepulcher be sealed and the Roman 
guard placed around the tomb, so that no one could remove 
the body and then pretend that Jesus had risen, was a further 
evidence that he was regarded as dead. 

(4) His friends believed that he was dead and wrapped 
him in spices for burial: indeed in their grief they seem 

to have forgotten his promise of a resurrection— so much so 
that even after he had risen it was with difficulty that they 
were convinced. 

(5) The record that the guards dissembled and declared 
that the disciples stole his body while they slept, being 
bribed by the Jewish rulers, served at last to prove that 
the guard had been set and that everybody recognized that 
Jesus was dead. 

(6) The tomb in which Jesus was buried was a new 
one, in which no one had previously been buried, so there 
could be no doubt as to the identity of the one who arose. 
We are glad that there is such satisfactory evidence that 
Christ died, and that thus we have further foundation for 
the Scriptural assurance that he died as the Redeemer of 
the world. Even Strauss, the agnostic, is constrained to 
say on this subject, "The whole countryside knew he was 
dead." 

THE WITNESSES MOST RELIABLE 

The resurrection of Christ is vouched for by many most 
honorable witnesses, of whom it cannot be said that they 
were shrewd and learned and took advantage of opportunity 
to hoax the public. On the contrary, they had nothing 
to gain by their course— everything to jeopardize. The witnesses 
were not only poor but unlearned, and write themselves 
down as "ignorant." It would have been to their 
advantage to have dropped Jesus and the malodorous reputation 
associated with his name. They testified to his resurrection, 
and preached in his name and through his power 

R3903 : page 381 

as the risen one the forgiveness of sins— and did this at 
their own expense, with sufferings, stripes, imprisonment 
and cruel death as the reward. Their testimony fully concurs 
with the Master's own words before he died— words 
which his own intimate followers could not appreciate, 
could not comprehend— that on the third day he would rise 
from the dead. 
The doctrine of the resurrection itself is peculiar to the 



Jewish and Christian religions. Other religions the world 
over ignore the necessity for a resurrection, and claim that 
those who die are more alive than they were before 
their death. The Apostles, on the contrary, admitted that 
all their hope rested in the fact that Christ did rise from the 
dead. Mark the Apostle Paul's words, "If Christ be not 
risen, then is our preaching vain, your faith is also vain; 
yea, and we are found false witnesses of God; because we 
have testified that God raised up Christ: whom he raised 
not up if the dead rise not; for if the dead rise not then is 
not Christ risen: and if Christ be not raised, your faith is 
vain; ye are yet in your sins. Then they also that are 
fallen asleep in Christ are perished."— 1 Cor. 15:14-18. 

It is not reasonable to suppose that honest men would 
misrepresent such a matter as the resurrection of our Lord, 
and it would be foolish for them to lay such stress upon a 
matter of which they were not morally convinced themselves. 
Why dwell so earnestly upon the resurrection of the dead 
if they had the least doubt on the subject? Why declare 
that all faith and all hope in Christ, all hope of forgiveness 
of sins, all hope of a future life by a resurrection was at an 
end if Christ had not risen, unless they were satisfied beyond 
peradventure? Especially so when the learned of that time 
were teaching Plato's philosophy, that the dead are not dead 
but more alive, and hence need no resurrection. 

Our Lord announced in advance that he would rise 
from the dead on the third day. In any view of the matter 
our Lord could not have been exactly three days and three 
nights in the tomb according to the record— it would have 
been either more or less, because he died in the afternoon 
and rose from the dead in the morning, hence no exact 
statement of even days and nights would fit the case. 
We recognize the custom of the times of reckoning a portion 
of a day or a year as though it were a complete one. For 
instance, throughout all the records of the chronicles of the 
kings we find that a portion of a year is counted for a year; 
that if a king reigned three years and three months it would 
be counted a reign of four years, or if he reigned two years 
and three months it would be counted three years, since he 
did reign for a portion of the third year. So in the statement 
of our Lord's period in the tomb, it is properly enough 
spoken of as three days and three nights, and shown thus: 

JEWISH RECKONING 

4 to 6 P.M. Friday==2 hours. 

6 P.M. Friday to 6 P.M. Saturday==24 hours. 

6 P.M. Saturday to 4 or 5 A.M. Sunday==10 or 11 hours. 

R3904: page 381 

BY MODERN RECKONING 

4 P.M. to 12 midnight, Friday==8 hours. 

From midnight Friday to midnight Saturday==24 hours. 

From midnight Saturday to 5 A.M. Sunday==5 hours. 



Or another possible view of the matter would indicate 
Thursday as our Lord's death-day as follows:— 

Laid in tomb— 6 P.M. Thursday. 

6 P.M. Thursday to 6 A.M. Friday— First night. 

6 A.M. Friday to 6 P.M. Friday-First day. 

6 P.M. Friday to 6 A.M. Saturday-Second night. 

6 A.M. Saturday to 6 P.M. Saturday-Second day. 

6 P.M. Saturday to 6 A.M. Sunday-Third night. 

6 A.M. Sunday— Beginning third day. 

Either view thus reckoned fulfils Peter's words, "He 
rose again the third day." 

TWO VIEWS OF THE RESURRECTION 

The view of the majority of Christian people is that our 
Lord arose from the dead to the same conditions exactly that 
he had during his life on earth— a man subject to the same 
limitations that he had before he died. The other view is 
ours, namely, that our Lord arose from the dead a spirit being, 
but since human beings cannot see a spirit being 
without injury, our Lord— really a spirit being— clothed 
himself as it were with flesh and clothing in order to appear 
to his followers— in order to give them a demonstration 
that he was no longer dead; and secondarily by appearing 
to them in various forms, as a gardener, as a stranger, 
as a man on the shores of Galilee and as the one who was 
pierced— that by all these changes he might demonstrate to 
his followers that, although risen from the dead, he was no 
longer the same being as before nor subject to the same limitations 
as before; but now as a New Creature, a spirit being, 
even as he explained to Nicodemus, he had power to 
come and go as the wind, and none could tell from whence 
he came or whither he went— so is everyone born of the 
Spirit, everyone who experiences a resurrection to the spirit 
nature.— John 3:6-8. 

Our Lord had indeed appeared subsequently to Saul 
of Tarsus, and manifested to him a certain measure of the 
glory of his resurrection condition, but the effect upon Saul 
was to blind him so that it required a miracle for his relief. 
To have so appeared to the eleven apostles and the others 
of the five hundred brethren who believed on him would not 
have been a satisfactory proof of our Lord's resurrection. 
They would merely have known that they had seen a great 
light, experienced a shock, and that they had heard certain 
wonderful words, but where would have been the proof to 
them or others of mankind that the one who was buried in 
Joseph's tomb had arisen from the dead and was now a 
spirit being? Our Lord, therefore, evidently chose by all 
means the better plan for making known the great fact of 
his resurrection. He appeared as a man, but under varying 
conditions, showing that he was not bound by the limitations 
of the human nature, but that he appeared and disappeared 
in bodily forms as the angels had in previous times, 



as for instance the three who appeared as men to Abraham 
for the purpose of communion with him, who ate dinner with 
him and whom he afterwards came to know as the Lord 
and two angels. For a similar purpose the Lord had appeared 
to his disciples after his resurrection: he vailed his 
glory and they saw it not when he appeared in various 
forms. 

ERROR ALWAYS CONFUSING 

The majority of Christian people are greatly confused 
over the matter of the resurrection anyway. Having received 
from heathen philosophies in the "dark ages" the same 
doctrines that were communicated by the Adversary to all 
the heathen, namely, that the dead are more alive than they 
ever were before, Christian people in general wonder why 
the Scriptures lay such stress upon the resurrection— why 

R3904 : page 382 

there is any necessity at all for a resurrection. They properly 
enough reason that if they were told at the time of the 
funeral that their dead friend was now "free," no longer 
trammeled with the earthly body, etc., why would he need 
to be trammeled with it in the future any more than in the 
present? and if some had gotten along without bodies for 
eighteen centuries or more, why would they need bodies 
thereafter any more than before? All this confusion of 
thought is directly traceable to Satan's falsehood, "Ye 
shall not surely die," and the rejection of God's statement, 
"Ye shall surely die." When we accept the teachings of 
the Word of God that the dead are really dead, then we 
perceive that there is no hope for them ever to have any 
knowledge or consciousness except by resurrection of the 
dead— we learn that there is neither knowledge nor device 
nor wisdom in the grave, sheol, the state of death, whither 
all go. (Eccl. 9:10.) As an illustration of how confused 
some of the ablest clergymen of the country are on this 
matter, we quote a few words from Doctor Peloubet. He 
says:— 

"The resurrection of Jesus shows us the meaning of the 
New Testament teaching concerning the resurrection of the 
body. So in the Apostles' Creed we declare our belief in 
the 'resurrection of the body.' But these things do not express 
what the New Testament teaches concerning the resurrection, 
especially in 1 Corinthians 15. Jesus himself did 
not have his resurrection body till he ascended. The disciples 
saw the same body they had seen before the crucifixion. 
Our present bodies with flesh and bones cannot inherit 
the Kingdom of God, but out from them in some way 
will grow spiritual bodies." 

What confusion we find here! The cause is not far 
to seek: it is first the error of supposing that the dead are 
not dead, and secondly the failure to see that our Lord was 
"put to death in the flesh but quickened in the spirit," as 
the Apostle most explicitly tells us. (1 Pet. 3:18.) Thank 



God that with the morning light shining upon the divine 
Word these shadows so confusing to heart and mind are 
gradually fleeing away, disclosing to us new beauties in our 
heavenly Father's Word— consistencies, harmonies. Here 
we see the Apostle's statement that we are sown in weakness, 
raised in power, sown in dishonor, raised in glory, sown 
a natural body, raised a spiritual body (1 Cor. 15:42-44)— 
not sown a natural body and raised a natural body out of 
which will grow a spiritual body. The Scriptures are consistent, 
harmonious, beautiful, when allowed to interpret 
themselves. 

REVEREND DOCTORS CONFUSED 

We suggested foregoing that the doctrine of the resurrection 
is a confusion to the majority of Christians, and we 
give another sample of this from Doctor Peloubet:— 

"What is the need of a resurrection body? The body 
is the instrument of the soul: it is probable that the soul 
must have some medium of communication with other souls 
and with nature." 

Now consider: Our dear friends hold that the souls 
never die, although the Scriptures tell us that a death sentence 
is upon every soul of man, and that Christ poured 
out his soul unto death as our ransom price.) For our views 
on this subject, "What is the soul?" we refer the reader to 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. VI., page 346.) Doctor Peloubet probably 
holds in common with others that the undying souls go 
either to heaven or hell immediately at death, that the resurrection 
will not take place until the second coming of 
Christ, which he in common with others probably places a 
long way off; and yet he tells us here that the souls in 
heaven and in hell would have no instrument of communication 
with each other and with nature without a body. 
Hence we might reason, if they could not in any manner 
communicate with nature, they could not even enjoy pleasures 
or suffer pain. How much more reasonable is the 
Scriptural proposition that man himself is a soul, a being, 
that in dying his being is dissolved, that the resurrection is 
a resurrection of being by a reorganization of conditions 
necessary to restore him— the producing of a body with talents 
and powers to correspond and vitalized by the great 
Life-Giver who declares, "I am the resurrection and the 
Life." 

OUR LORD'S RESURRECTION 

With the foregoing suggestions respecting the fact that 
our Lord's resurrection is well vouched for by good authority, 
and that he was raised a spirit being, let us proceed to 
an examination of the lesson. The narrative is simple, unvarnished, 
natural. The different gospels tell of the matter 
in different language, narrating sometimes the same item in 
different form and sometimes different items connected with 
the manifestations of the forty days of our Lord's presence 
after he arose from the dead and before he ascended on 



high. Although these accounts differ they in nowise contradict 
each other; each told what he himself saw and knew, 
whereas had the account been a spurious one, gotten up to 
deceive, undoubtedly great care would have been exercised 
to have every witness tell the same thing. Here, then, is a 
sure proof of the truthfulness of the records. 

To draw an illustration from more modern history: We 
notice the fact that several generals present at the battle of 
Waterloo gave very different accounts of the same— especially 
respecting the time of the beginning of the battle. 
Two armies of men witnessed the matter, yet an authoritative 
account of just when it opened cannot today be known. 
The Duke of Wellington declared that it began at ten 
o'clock in the morning, and General Alba, who rode beside 
him, says the hour was eleven-thirty; Napoleon and one of 
his assistants, Douret, claimed that it began at twelve 
o'clock, and General Ney asserted that it began at one 
o'clock. Evidently these different persons had different 
conceptions of the matter: one may have counted from the 

R3905 : page 382 

time the first gun was fired, another from a period of the 
general engagement, or what not. No one thinks of questioning 
the fact that there was a battle of Waterloo because 
of these divergent statements respecting the time it began. 
So with the matter of our Lord's resurrection, the fact that 
the different records of it are not in the same language militates 
nothing against the fact as a fact. All agree that the 
resurrection took place on the first day of the week (Sunday) 
following the Passover, early in the morning. Mary 
Magdalene and the other Mary, the mother of James the 
Less and of Joses, were there (Matt. 27:56), and Mark 
and Luke tell us that shortly afterward came Salome the 
mother of John, Joanna the wife of Chuza, and other women, 
who brought spices for a more thorough embalming of the 
Lord's body than was possible on the night of our Lord's 

R3905 : page 383 

burial, on account of the lateness of the hour and the approach 
of the Passover. 

The earthquake had already rolled away the stone, the 
sentries had fled in terror from the manifestation of the 
angel's presence— they fled to the high priest, who probably 
had engaged to be their paymaster— having them detailed 
for a special police duty by Pilate. But the angel, so terrible 
to those out of harmony with the Lord, spoke graciously 
to those who were his friends, assuring them that Jesus was 
risen, and directing them to go quickly and tell his disciples, 
also assuring them that Jesus would go into Galilee, and intimating 
a general meeting of his friends there, which later 
took place. En route they met Jesus, who sent the same 
message to his disciples. Seemingly the Lord recognized 
that woman can exercise faith more readily than can man, 
and here he used them as his servants and mouthpieces to 



bear his message— to prepare his disciples, to assist them 

more readily to accept the truth of his resurrection. Meantime 

the affrighted guard fled and told the circumstances 

to the prominent elders who had set them their task and 

who were probably special enemies of our Lord. They 

were assured that their work would be considered satisfactory 

if they would keep the facts to themselves or report 

that Jesus' disciples had stolen the corpse. They gave them 

a handsome present for their cooperation in this matter and 

assured them of protection should their conduct ever be called 

in question. 

ELEVEN APPEARANCES AT MOST 

For forty days our Lord was with his disciples before 
his ascension, yet he revealed himself to them, according to 
the records, not more than eleven times in all— and some of 
these instances are probably duplications. His interviews 
with the disciples lasted but for a few moments each, and were 
surrounded by circumstances and conditions which said to 
them in thunder tones that a great change had occurred to 
him— that he was no longer the same being, although he 
evidently had the same loving interest in them as before. 
He was still their Lord and Master, this same Jesus, although 
no longer Jesus in the flesh. He was "the Lord, that spirit," 
a "quickening spirit." To bring the matter more clearly 
before our minds let us note the records covering these manifestations 
or appearances, as follows: 

ON THE DAY OF THE RESURRECTION 

(1) Sunday morning early— to Mary Magdalene— near 
the sepulchre at Jerusalem.— Mark 16:9; John 20:11-18. 

(2) Sunday morning— to the women returning from 
the sepulchre— near Jerusalem.— Matt. 28:9,10. 

(3) Sunday— to Simon Peter alone— near Jerusalem. 
-Luke 24:34. 

(4) Sunday afternoon— to the two disciples going to 
Emmaus— between Jerusalem and Emmaus.— Luke 24:13-21. 

(5) Sunday evening— to the apostles excepting Thomas 
—at Jerusalem.— John 20:19-25. 

All five of these were on the first day, the resurrection 
day, the remaining six appearances being scattered through 
the remaining thirty-nine days of our Lord's presence, as 
follows: 

THE NEXT SUNDAY-THE EIGHTH DAY 

(6) Sunday evening, a week after the resurrection— 
to the apostles, Thomas being present— at Jerusalem.— 
John 20:26-29. 

Following this was a long interval apparently in which 
there was no appearance whatever, and the disciples, discouraged, 
perplexed, resolved to go back to their homes in 
Galilee and there to reengage in the fishing business, considering 
that the Lord and his mission had been a failure. 



Our Lord evidently expected just such a process of reasoning 
on their part, and his delay was undoubtedly to help 
them over the difficulty and to start them afresh as servants 
of the Kingdom of God on a higher and still grander plane 
than their previous ministries had been— under the ministration 
of the holy Spirit. 

APPEARANCES IN GALILEE 

Quite probably three weeks intervened without the 
slightest communication. Meantime the apostles had reengaged 
in the fishing business, when our Lord appeared to 
them on the shores of Galilee. 

(7) As a stranger on the shore Jesus called to seven of 
his disciples who were fishing— John 21:1-13. 

(8) Shortly after the manifestation on the shores of 
Galilee Jesus appeared to the eleven disciples on a mountain 
in Galilee.-Matt. 28:16-20. 

(9) Very shortly after this he again appeared to a general 
company of his followers gathered together by previous 
appointment, "above 500 brethren at once"— in Galilee.— 

1 Cor. 15:6. 

LAST APPEARANCE IN JERUSALEM 

(10) At the close of the forty days our Lord appeared 
to the Apostle James only, probably at Jerusalem.— 

1 Cor. 15:7. 

(11) At the end of the forty days our Lord appeared 

to all of the apostles at the time of his ascension. This was 
at the Mount of Olives. -Luke 24:50,51; Acts 1:6-9. 

It was years after this that Paul wrote, "Last of all he 
was seen by me also, as of one born before the time." He 
was seen of the other apostles as the gardener, as a stranger, 
as the Crucified One, etc., etc., but when Paul, the last of the 
apostles, saw him it was not so, but as we shall see him by 
and by when we are changed to his likeness— he saw him 
as one of premature birth. The Church of the First-Born 
are at the resurrection changed to be like their Lord and 
see him as he is. Any special revelation of the Lord might 
have been withheld from the Apostle Paul until the same 
time except that it was necessary that the apostles should 
be "witnesses," testifiers to the fact that Christ had 
not only died but had also risen from the dead; and in 
order that Paul as an Apostle might thus testify he was 
granted the vision of the glorified one. He saw him as we 
shall see him in that he saw him in the brightness of his 
excellent glory and not as the others, veiled in the flesh. 
Thank God that the time is not far distant when, those who 
sleep in Jesus having been changed to his image, we who 
are alive and remain shall also be changed, in a moment, in 
the twinkling of an eye, to be made like him, to see him as 
he is, to share his glory. Not all in the same moment, but 
each in his own moment, changed instantly— until gradually, 
thus being changed by passing from death to life, the 
full number of the very elect shall be completed and the 



reign of glory shall begin. 



Bibles, Testaments, Students' Helps, Etc. 

SUPPLIED AT WHOLESALE COST PRICES 



IN presenting our list of Bibles this year we have dropped 
a number which we previously carried and 
have selected others which we think more desirable. 
We give below a list which, although not very large, we 
think will cover a range sufficiently broad to suit the wants 
of nearly all. However, should any of the friends desire 
a more complete list to select from, we shall be pleased 
to mail publishers' catalogues upon postal card 
application. 

This list supersedes all previous lists. Bible publishers 
announce that, owing to increased cost of material 
and labor, they have found it necessary to advance the 
price of many of the cheaper grades. 

THUMB INDEX ON ANY BIBLE, 25c EXTRA 



TEACHERS' BIBLES 

No. (Add Postage on these, 20c each.) Pub. Our 

04403 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., round corners, Price Price 

red under gold, references, linen lined, 

7-1/4x5 1.35 .94 

8301 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, illustrated, full teachers' helps, references, 

linen, 7-3/4x5-1/4 1.45 .95 

(Add Postage on these, 26c each.) 

8701 Long Primer, French Morocco, div. cir., red 
under gold, helps, references, concordance, 
illustrated, linen, 8-1/2 x 6 1.95 1.25 

8702 Same as 8701, leather lined 2.35 1.55 

COMBINATION TEACHERS' BIBLES 

These Bibles show the variations of the Revised Version at 
the foot of each page. Otherwise it is an ordinary "Teachers' 
Bible," with maps, concordance, etc., illustrated. 

(Add Postage on these, 28c each.) 
610 Bourgeois, French Seal, div. cir., red under 

gold, 8 x 6 x 1-3/4 5.00 1.25 

614 Same as 610, leather lined 6.00 1.55 

LINEAR TEACHERS' BIBLES 

Hitherto these Bibles have been sold by Subscription 



Agents only. Its special feature, differentiating it from other 

Teachers' Bibles, is that it shows the readings of the Common 

and Revised Versions side by side in the same line, self pronouncing 

(This is the Bible of which we procured a special 

edition with wide margins and DAWN and TOWER references 

thereon; and of which edition we have no more.) 

(Add Postage on these, 30c each.) 
350 Small Pica, French Seal, red under gold, full 

teachers' helps, 8-3/4 x 6 x 1-1/2 6.00 2.10 

360 Small Pica, Levant Morocco, kid lined, otherwise 

same as 350 10.00 4.25 

POCKET BIBLES 

(Add Postage on these, 15c each.) 
01 153 Ruby, French Morocco, round cor., red under 

gold, div. cir., text only, 5-1/2 x 3-7/8 x 1-1/8... .85 .58 
01327 Minion, French Morocco, div. circ. red under 

gold, text and maps, 6x3-3/8 x 1-1/4 1.10 .75 

01329 Same as 01327, leather lined to edge 1.50 1.00 

194 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, text, 5-7/8 x 4 x 1-1/4 1.10 .75 

INDIA PAPER POCKET BIBLES 

"Mite" Bible (the smallest Bible). 
093x Venetian Morocco, div. cir., gilt edges with 

magnifying glass, 1-3/4 x 1-1/4 x 5/8 1.00 .75 

(Add Postage on these, 8c each.) 
01 103 Diamond, French Morocco, div. cir., red 

under gold, text only, 4-1/2 x 2-1/2 x 1/2 1.40 .98 

01112 Persian Morocco, leather lined to edge, otherwise 

as 01103 2.00 1.35 

01157x Ruby, French Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, red under gold, text only, 5-5/8 x 3-7/8 

x9/16 2.00 1.35 

03029x Pearl, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather lined 

silk sewed, red under gold, references, 

5-1/8 x 3-7/8 x 5/8 3.25 2.15 

03114x Ruby, Persian Levant, div. cir., leather 

lined, silk sewed, red under gold, references, 

5-5/8 x 4 x 3/4 3.25 2.15 

(Add Postage for these, 4c each.) 
0612 Diamond, Persian Morocco, div. cir., 

leather lined, red under gold, text only, 

3-3/4 x 2-1/2 x 7/8 2.25 1.55 

02002x Brilliant, Persian Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, red under gold, maps (smallest 

reference Bible made), 3-5/8 x 2-1/2 x 5/8 2.50 1.70 

INDIA PAPER BIBLES 

(Add Postage for these, 15c each.) 

8635 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, references, maps, 7 x 4-3/4 x 5/8 1.75 1.13 

8636 French Seal, leather lined, otherwise as 



8635 3.00 1.94 

9635 Brevier, large face, French Morocco, div. 

cir., red under gold, references, 7-1/8 x 5 x 1 2.75 1.94 

9636 French Seal, silk sewn, leather lined, otherwise 
as 9635 4.00 2.55 

03265x Minion, Levant Morocco, div. cir., calf 

lined, silk sewed, red under gold (thinnest 

minion reference Bible), 6-7/8 x 4-3/4 

x 5/8 4.25 2.85 

03274x Minion, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather 

lined, silk sewed, red under gold, references, 

index, concordance and maps 

5-5/8 x 4 x 7/8 4.50 3.00 

03554x Brevier, black face, Alaska Seal, div. cir., 

leather lined, red under gold, references, 

index, self-pronouncing, concordance and 

maps, 8-1/8 x 5-1/2 x 7/8 5.50 3.60 

0358 lx Long Primer, black face, same as 03554x, 

7-3/4 x 5-1/4 x 15/16 6.00 4.00 

0865-l/2xLong Primer, Levant, div. cir., calf lined, 

silk sewed, red under gold, teachers' helps, 

arranged as cyclopedic concordance, 7-3/4 x 

5-1/4 x 1-1/8 8.00 5.20 

THE FOLLOWING ARE NEW AND SPECIALLY DESIRABLE BECAUSE 
TYPE IS VERY LARGE AND CLEAR FOR SIZE OF BOOK. 

2596xB Bold Face Brevier, Alaska Seal, calf lined 

to edge, with maps, Biblical Gazetteer 

and Concordance 5.75 2.40 

2596xC Same type and binding as 2596x, without 

concordance 5.50 2.30 

REVISED VERSION BIBLES 

(Add Postage, 10c.) 
040 Pearl, Cloth, red edges, 5-1/2x4-1/2 40 .30 

(Add Postage, 20c.) 
0750 Bourgeois, Cloth, red edges, 8 x 5-5/8 1.00 .75 

OXFORD REVISED BIBLES (Amer. Com.) 

(Add Postage on these, 25c each.) 
3750 Brevier, Cloth, round cor., red edges, maps, 

8x5-5/8 1.00 .70 

3752 Brevier, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, 8 x 5-5/8 2.00 1.30 

AMERICAN STANDARD REVISED BIBLE 

(Add Postage on these, 20c each.) 

160 Bourgeois, Cloth, references 1.00 .80 

172 Bourgeois, Egyptian Seal, references, red 

under gold 2.00 1.60 

(Add Postage on these, 30c each.) 
260 Long Primer, Cloth, references, 8-3/4 x 6-3/4 1.50 1.15 



272 Long Primer, Egyptian Seal, references, red 

under gold, 8-3/4 x 6-3/4 3.00 2.25 

LAP BIBLES FOR THE AGED-References, Light 
Weight Large Print 

(Add Postage on these, 25c each.) 

2002 Pica, Cloth, red edges, 9-1/4 x 6-1/2 x 1-1/4 2.00 .90 

2014 Pica, French Seal, limp, size same as 2002 2.75 1.37 

2022 Pica, French Seal, div. cir., size same as 

2002 3.50 1.75 

CHILDREN'S ILLUSTRATED BIBLES 

(Add Postage on these, lie each.) 
216 Minion, French Morocco, limp, red under 

gold, 5-3/4 x 3-5/8 1.15 .82 

215B Minion, French Morocco, references, div. 

cir., red under gold, 7-1/4x5-1/4x7/8 1.50 .85 

TESTAMENTS 

(Add Postage on these, 3c each.) 
21 13 Nonpareil, French Morocco, limp, gold title, 

side and back, gold edges (vest-pocket 

edition), 4-3/8 x 2-7/8 x 1/2 36 .20 

2113P Same as above, with Psalms 46 .26 

21 15 Same as 21 13, with div. cir., and red under 

gold 52 .29 

2115P Same as 2115, with Psalms 62 .34 

013RL Same as 21 13, with words of our Lord in 

red letters 60 .33 

015RL Same as 013RL, with div. cir., red under 

gold 75 .40 

2142X Nonpareil, French Seal, limp, grained leather 

lining, red under gold, gold roll (thin), 

4-3/8x2-3/4x3/8 85 .42 

2142PX Same as 2142X, with Psalms 1.00 .50 

010 Diamond, Venetian Morocco, limp, gold 

edges, 3-3/4 x 2-1/4 x 1/4 50 .35 

014 Diamond, Arabian Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, red under gold, India paper, 

3-3/4x2-1/4x1/4 90 .65 

(Add Postage on these, 5c each.) 
287 Brevier, Roan leather, flexible, gold edges, 

with Psalms, 6-1/4x4-1/2 42 .42 

NEW TESTAMENTS FOR THE AGED 

(Add Postage on these, 10c each.) 

212 Small Pica, Roan, square cor., 5-3/4x8-1/4 45 .45 

283 Same as above, with Psalms, 8-1/4x5-1/2x3/4 50 .50 

REVISED TESTAMENTS 

0100 Brevier, Cloth, red edges, 16 mo., including 



postage, 23c. 

TEXT BIBLES 

(Postage, 7c.) 
178 Agate type, cloth, red edges, 4 x 5-3/4 17 .17 

(Postage, 12c.) 
131 Nonpareil type, cloth, red edges, 5-1/4 x 7-1/4 25 .25 

CONCORDANCES AND OTHER BIBLE STUDY HELPS 

First in this list we mention the several volumes of 

MILLENNIAL DAWN SERIES 

—referring inquirers to the second page of each issue of this 
journal for prices, etc. We commend also, as aids, the following 
publications by other presses, which we supply at specially 
low prices because of the assistance they will lend to the study 
of God's Word. We mention these somewhat in the order in 
which they seem to us to be desirable aids. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT 

This very valuable work, published under the author's 
copyright by Fowler & Wells Co., New York City, has been 
sold by them at $4 in cloth and $5 in half leather binding. For 
several years a friend, an earnest Bible student, desirous of 
assisting the readers of our Society's publications, has supplied 
them through us at a greatly reduced price; now he has purchased 
the copyright and plates from the Fowler & Wells Co., 
and presented the same to our Society as a gift, under our assurance 
that the gift will be used for the furthering of the 
Truth to the extent of our ability, by such a reduction of price 
as will permit the poor of the Lord's flock to have this help in 
the study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICES.-These will be sold with ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER only. In cloth binding $1.50 (6s. 3d.)— includes postage 
and one year's subscription, new or renewal, to Z.W.T. 
On thin paper, in full morocco leather, divinity circuit, red 
under gold edges, silk sewed, leather lined, $2.50 (10s. 6d.)— 
includes postage and one year's subscription to Z.W.T. 

THE TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENT 

This is the ordinary Common Version in cloth binding. 
As footnotes it gives the reading of the three oldest Greek 
MSS., Sinaiticus, Vaticanus and Alexandrine, wherever these 
differ from the Common Version. This is a very valuable little 
work, published in Europe, which we specially import for the 
benefit of our readers. Price, 40c, including postage. 

THE SYRIAC-PESHITO NEW TESTAMENT- 
MURDOCH'S 

This, too, is a valuable work, and an aid in critical study. 



It is translated from the Syriac instead of from the Greek. It 
is claimed by some that it was the language in which our Lord 
and the apostles spoke and wrote, and that the Greek was translated 
from this. Our price, in half leather binding, postage 
included, $2.00. 

LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD 
TESTAMENT 

This is the standard translation amongst English reading 
Hebrews, by one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is a 
valuable aid in critical study of the Old Testament. Our special 
price, in leather binding, including postage, is $1.10. 

ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE 
SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 
A valuable work for all critical students. Price, in 
cloth binding, $5, including postage. We are not permitted by 
the publishers to cut this price; but may and do give postage 
free and give besides a premium of any four volumes of the 
MILLENNIAL DAWN series in cloth binding with each Concordance, 
or six volumes if purchaser pays the expressage. 

THE EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE TO THE 
SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Strong (Methodist). 
This is also an able work and useful in critical study. 
It has some advantages over Young's; after getting used to it 
we prefer it. Special reduced prices,— in cloth binding, $3; 
half leather, $5. Carriage prepaid, 65c extra. 

CRUDEN'S CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

A valuable work, but scarcely necessary to those who have 
either one of the above mentioned. English only. Cloth binding, 
$1, postage included. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY 

This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's 
work. It is a large volume of 1020 pages. In cloth binding, 
$1.30, including postage. 

"BIBLE TALKS IN SIMPLE LANGUAGE" 

This is the best book of its kind we have ever seen. It presents 
the Bible stories in simple, but not childish language, and 
seems remarkably free from the bad theology so common in this 
class of books. All Christian parents should have a Sunday 
Bible lesson with their children, and this book furnishes interesting 
topics, to which may be added as much concordant "present 
truth" as the age of the children will justify. Parents are 
responsible for their children's training in theology as well as 



morals. This will assist you in the discharge of this duty, and 
thus be a blessing to yourself as well as to your children. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and 
corners, gilt edges. A subscription book at $3. Our special 
price 75 cents, plus 25 cents postage. 

HEAVENLY MANNA 

FOR THE HOUSEHOLD OF FArTH. 

This is a new publication of our own which we believe will 
be in great demand as soon as known. It is a text-book for 
each day in the year— and good year by year continuously. 

But this is more than a text-book; it has an appropriate 
comment under each text selected from the columns of back 
issues of the WATCH TOWER. 

The pages are of the same width as those of DAWN, but a 
little shorter. The paper, etc., are good and the cloth binding 
is neat and attractive; 190 pages, price 35c postpaid;— to 
WATCH TOWER subscribers at the wholesale rate, 20c each, 
postpaid, or in quantities, charges collect, 15c. Free to any 
WATCH TOWER subscriber too poor to pay for it, on request. 

Leather edition, handsome and durable, $1, postpaid; wholesale 
rate to subscribers, 60c, postpaid, or in quantities, charges 
collect, 50c. 

We hope that this little book will find a place at every 
breakfast table; and that spiritual refreshment may thus be 
enjoyed with the natural food, stimulating thankfulness to the 
Giver of all Good and thus inducing the peace of God and favoring 
both spiritual and natural health and well-being. 

DAWN-SCRIPTURE STUDIES-INDIA 

Calls for DAWNS divided into small portions, light, convenient 
for the pocket, that could be read on the cars, etc., led 
us to prepare an India-paper edition. The entire volume is on 
this very fine paper reduced to three-eighths of an inch in thickness 
and about four ounces in weight. The type is exactly the 
same size as in the regular editions. It is a beauty. Leather 
covers, gold edges. Its cost, with postage, is raised to 75c 
each for first three volumes and 85c each for the remainder per 
volume, at which price it is supplied to WATCH TOWER 
subscribers. 

We regret inability to promise these definitely, as we are 
experiencing great trouble in securing the India paper. We 
hope to have the first three volumes by April, 1907, and the 
succeeding three about June. 



Specimen Lines of Various Sizes of Type Referred to on 
Reverse Page: 

This line is Brilliant type. This line is Diamond type. 

This line is Pearl type. This line is Ruby type. 



This line is Nonpareil type. This line is Emerald Minion. 

This line is Emerald type. 

This line is Minion type. 

This line is Brevier type. 

This line is Bourgeois type. 

This line is Long Primer type. 

This line is Small Pica type. 

YOUR "GOOD HOPES" 1907. 

[The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," 
because nothing is actually promised— only your generous 
hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they 
now appear to you. The plan proved not only so beneficial 
to the cause of truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, for 
some years past, that we again commend it to all as Scriptural 
and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 
can fill out both of these memoranda. One should be kept 
for the refreshment of your memory; the other mail to us.] 

To the 
"WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY." 

Dear Friends:— I have read with interest of the openings 
for the Dawn and Tract work in foreign lands and here 
at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested 
in the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and 
breadths, the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed 
for us in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, 
voice, time, money, influence, all— to give to others this 
knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted 
my own heart and placed my feet firmly upon the 
Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 
glory and for the service of his people— those 
blinded by human tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 
for "the good Word of God," and those also who are 
naked, not having on the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 
righteousness, the unjustified, who stand at best in 
the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I have decided 
that so far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule 
so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 
and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according 
to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's blessings 
during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute 
to the several parts of the Lord's work specified on 
the back of this letter. Of course, I cannot in advance 



judge or state particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable 
me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand 
the sum indicated to be merely my conjecture or hope, based 
upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more 
than I here specify; and should I not succeed in doing as 
well, the Lord will know my heart, and you, also, will know 
of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to 
be able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of 
the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to 
form estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some 
idea of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this 
my highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission 
Work (to assist in circulating Millennial Dawn in foreign 
languages, and in publishing the "Old Theology Tracts" in 
various languages, and in supplying these gratuitously to 
brethren who have the heart and opportunity to circulate 
them widely, and in meeting the expenses of brethren sent 
out as "Pilgrims" to preach the divine plan of salvation, 
and in general to be expended as the officers of the Society 
may deem best), the amount of per week. 

To comply with United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for Watch Tower or O.T. Tracts sent to the Lord's poor 
or others, as the Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order 
or Postal Money Order as I may find most convenient, and 
will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 

"Bible House," Allegheny, Pa. 

or, 24 Eversholt St., London, N.W., England; or, Equitable Building 
Collins St., Melbourne, Australia. 

(Name) 

(Post Office) (State) 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 

-ON GOOD HOPES ACCOUNT.- 

The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes" (described 
on the reverse of this sheet) at times desire to send 
the Watch Tower to friends who are not yet interested 
enough to subscribe for themselves; or to deeply interested 
friends who are too poor to subscribe and backward about 
accepting our Lord's Poor offer. They are invited to give 
us such addresses below— the expense to be deducted from 
their donations. Give full addresses, and write very plainly 



please, mentioning the length of the subscriptions. 



CHRISTIAN HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 



For several years we have been supplying our readers 
with handsome text and motto cards for the walls of their 
homes. Their influence is excellent; for they continually 
and cheerfully catch the eye and remind the heart of our 
great favors present and to come, based upon the exceeding 
great and precious promises of our Father's Word. We 
commend these as helps in the "narrow way,"— helps in 
character-building . 

We have laid in a large supply of very choice mottoes 
this year and expect to be able to fill all orders promptly. 
Late orders last year we were unable to supply. 

We have for your convenience put these up in four assortments 
at $1.00 per package, including postage. We also 
have a 50c assortment of the smaller sized mottoes. If you 
get any of these you will be pleased; but if you have already 
had some, mention when and how many, that we may send 
you different ones now. 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 



These are published quarterly, copies being sent to all subscribers. 
Other copies, for distribution among friends, from 
house to house, for enclosure in letters, and in general for use 
in such ways as seem judicious, are supplied freely, the expense 
entailed by the great demand for them being borne by the 
Tract Fund of voluntary contributions. Write for the tracts as 
you feel able to use them, even if not so well able to contribute 
toward the expense; some who are not able, and do contribute, 
do not have opportunities personally to use all that their 
contributions pay for, so that the matter is equalized 
and all may have a part in this service of disseminating 
the truth. 

A PRIVILEGE AND A SERVICE. 



We are convinced that the Watch Tower lists do not contain 
the names of one-half of those deeply interested in its teachings. 
The total is small enough surely, and we are not content that 
the name of any should be missing. We believe that all such 
will be stimulated and encouraged on the "narrow way" by 
its semi-monthly appearance on their table, reminding them 
afresh of spiritual matters which the world, the flesh and the 
devil continually tend to crowd out of mind and heart. 



Hitherto we have required that all desiring the Watch Tower 
on credit, or free, as "the Lord's Poor," should make personal 
application; but now we request every subscriber to inquire 
among those whom he knows to be interested in present truth, 
and to obtain the consent of all such to send in their subscriptions 
either on credit or free, as their circumstances may necessitate. 
Any getting it on credit may at any future time request 
that the debt be cancelled, and we will cheerfully comply. We 
desire that as nearly as possible the Watch Tower lists shall 
represent all those deeply interested in its message. 

Our object is not the gain of "filthy lucre," but "the perfecting 
of the saints for the work of ministry"— present and to 
come. (Eph. 4:12.) We offer no premiums, desiring the 
co-operation of such only as appreciate the privilege of being 
co-workers with us in this ministry. Our list is now about 
22,000; but it should be at least 30,000, and we confidently 
expect the above program to bring it to that figure. Let as 
many as appreciate it as a privilege, join at once in this service. 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTION RENEWALS. 



Most of our subscriptions end with the year, so we take this 
opportunity to remark that we will be glad to hear promptly 
from such as desire the visits of the Watch Tower continued. 
This applies to all who get it on the Lord's Poor list as well 
as to those who pay. When names are dropped and afterward 
renewed it makes us unnecessary trouble. 



page 385 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVII DECEMBER 15 No. 24 
A.D., 1906-A.M., 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 387 

New Motives and Methods in Foreign 

Missions 387 

An Apostasy or a Revival 388 

The Cost of Conversions 388 

Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society's Report 
for 1906 388 

"A Little Child Shall Lead Them" (Poem) 394 

"If I Go Away I Will Come Again" 394 

Beginning at Jerusalem 395 

"This Same Jesus Shall So Come" 396 

The Story of Jesus in Review 397 

page 386 



LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



NEW MOTTO CARDS. 



We have new full lines of Motto Cards, put up in $1 packages. 
If you desire large cards, so specify; otherwise we will 
send the medium and small sizes and the more of them. We 
supply these at about cost. German Mottoes ($1 pks.) we send 
direct from Germany. 

WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 



These are substantially made of stiff cloth boards, and can 
hold two years' issues of the WATCH TOWER. They prevent 
soiling and loss. Price, postpaid, 50c. 



Friends sending in orders are specially requested to inquire 
at their local express offices about the time the package 



should arrive, as we fill all orders by express wherever possible, 

rather than by mail. In our usual great congestion of 

work at this season this will save unnecessary correspondence. 

R3909 : page 386 



ITALIAN Vol. I. is again in stock. Price same as the English 
edition. FRENCH translation of "Hell" booklet can also 
now be supplied at 10c. each, 50c. per doz. 



Colporteurs will please use our Order blanks and direct 
letters to "Colporteur Department." 



R3905 : page 387 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
NEW MOTIVES AND METHODS IN FOREIGN MISSIONS 



AS general doubt begins to overshadow the Bible and 
its teachings, many intelligent people begin to 
wonder whether or not there is any future life. 
Decrying the Bible as the work of man, all higher critics 
and evolutionists are thrown upon the resources of their 
own judgment respecting the future, and they are very 
conscious that their intelligence on the subject is a 
large blank— a guess. Rejection of the doctrine of 
eternal torment as the punishment for sin, and the supposition 
that that doctrine is taught in the Scriptures, 
was the foundation for their scepticism, which now has 
spread so that their entire faith has been undermined, 
and what Jesus said of the Samaritans of old is true of 
them, "Ye believe ye know not what."— John 4:22. 
The religious instincts of man lead him to some 
kind of worship, and a desire to serve his God in some 
manner, whether that god be a stick or a stone or the 
sun or the true God. Hence Christian people of various 
shades of faith and doubt have during the past century 
contributed liberally for mission work under the stimulating 
thought that the poor heathen were going into 
death at the rate of 90,000 a day without a knowledge 
of the only name given under heaven and amongst men 
whereby men must be saved. But now as doubts become 
confirmed and faith weakens there is a slackening 

R3906 : page 387 

of the energies formerly put forth on behalf of the 



heathen. Furthermore it is beyond question that missionary 
effort has accomplished little in heathen lands 
in the way of making saints, and that its chief showing 
has been along the lines of civilizing influences introduced. 
And is this not true throughout Christendom? 

The new thought is that this civilizing influence 
called Christianization can be introduced better and 
more quickly by national treaties, etc. Thus Secretary 
Root's last visit to South America in the interest 
of better business relationship between those countries 
and the United States is pointed out by some as having 
been a great missionary enterprise. So greatly do the 
ideas of man gradually swing around! We quote below 
from the Springfield (Mass.) Union on this subject as 
follows:— 

Rev. Newton M. Hall, pastor of North Congregational 
Church, preached yesterday morning on the modern 
motive for missions, as a timely topic, in view of 
the meeting of the American Board of Commissioners 
for Foreign Missions in North Adams this week. He 
showed how the old-time motive of soul-saving had 
largely given place to the motive of Christian work to 
uplift and better the conditions of the non-Christian 
peoples. He said in part: 

"We must admit that the impulse for missions 
simply from the standpoint of soul-saving is not as 
strong as it was a century ago. We may regret this, 
but we must face the facts. Yet the interest in missions 
must not die. No greater calamity, from both moral 
and economic standpoints, could happen to America 
than to lose interest in foreign missions. What, then, 
is to be the new motive for missions? It must be the 
motive, old, yet new, set forth by Paul in the text; the 
oneness of God, the brotherhood of all men as proclaimed 
and mediated by Jesus Christ. It is not our 
civilization which we wish to impose upon alien peoples, 
for we are far from being Christian, but the civilization 
which, please God, we mean to have. Brotherhood, 
fraternity, is the message, the lifting up of other races, 
not to our level only, but far beyond. 

"Now and then you will find a man who will defend 
the religions of the East. Do not believe him. Ask 
the men who have lived 
'East of Suez, 

Where the best is like the worst,' 
who have looked the gods of the East in the face, and 
they will tell you that the work of Buddha and Krishna 
and the rest is the work of the beast. 

"We want to save men from bestiality and the superstition 
of heathendom to the glory of the brotherhood 
of Jesus. The mission of Mr. Root to South America 
was in a large sense a missionary journey. He went 
not with threats, but in the Christian spirit of love and 
brotherhood. Every missionary is first an ambassador 

R3906 : page 388 



of the Lord Jesus, and then God's ordained apostle of 
liberty and democracy. The peoples of the earth, the 
downcast, the oppressed, the king-ridden are on the 
march to freedom. Missionary activity in the 20th century 
means that we are to aid them in their progress. 
The haystack missionaries sought its individuals. We 
are to seek the nations and help them in the struggle 
until all shall come in the unity of the faith, to the 
kingdom which hath no end, the joy and expectation of 
the whole earth." 

AN APOSTASY OR A REVIVAL 



The editor of Ram's Horn declares that the Christian 
Church is facing an apostasy or a revival. He 
says:— 

"For nearly twenty years we have been marking 
time, but we have not been making progress. True, 
we have been adding wealth and numbers, but 
we have not been gaining power. Sporadic revivals 
break out in places, but evangelism does not spread 
like a holy contagion. There is no use blinking 
facts. Conditions are serious. But they are not 
exceptional. Compared with those of some previous 
periods they are discouraging, but compared 
with other epochs they appear far from hopeless. The 
march of the Kingdom seems to be measured by the 
ebb and flow of the spiritual tide. Today the tide is 
low. It has been falling steadily since the stirring 
days of Dwight L. Moody. There are many signs that 
low-water mark has been registered, and that henceforth 
we will see a rising flood. But whether it comes 
this year, or next, or in five or ten years, Christ's people 
will not lose faith or courage. God is in this world 
with a purpose, and that purpose cannot be thwarted 
or defeated. He can do wonders with only a few to 
help him. He is in need of real Gideons, men and women 
whose primary business it is to serve God. Perhaps 
there are more of these faithful ones than we 
realize. Jonah was deceived by superficial appearances 
in Nineveh. Doubtless there are more amongst 
us than we think who have not bowed the knee to Baal. 
So we will be hopeful and charitable, yet alert and discerning 
God is calling the Church and individual 
Christians to higher walks of faith and duty. It must 
be either advance or apostasy." 

THE COST OF CONVERSIONS 



The value of a genuine conversion from sin to the 
Lord— to saintship, to a membership in the "little flock" 



of the footstep followers of the Lamb— is almost beyond 
estimation; because they are all "Jewels." But when 
we think of the common run of Church membership, 
unregenerate, merely bearing a gloss of civilization, the 
following figures from a more than ordinarily reliable 
channel seem very high for the results obtained. We 
quote the following from the Pittsburg 
Chronicle-Telegraph:— 

VILLAGE SINNERS CONVERTED CHEAPLY; IT'S DIFFERENT 
WITH THE CITY ONES 

Frankfort, Ind., Oct. 11.— The closing session of 
the Indiana synod of the Presbyterian Church was made 
interesting by a report on the money it costs to convert 
a sinner and bring him into the Church. The report 
was made by the Rev. Dr. Donald Morrison, who 
showed that the cost in cities with the large churches 
is greatest. 

He found that the average ranges from $27 in villages 
to $212 in cities. In large churches the cost is 
greatly increased. Dr. Morrison showed that the cost 
to a Church for each sinner brought within its pale in 
Indianapolis is $620. 

There was no adverse comment on these figures. 
The Indianapolis sinner is supposed to be worth the 
time, effort and money required to get him into the 
Church. 



R3906 : page 388 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY'S REPORT 

-DECEMBER 1, 1905, TO DECEMBER 1, 1906.- 

VIEWED from the standpoint of the great institutions 
of the world, Bible Societies, Tract Societies, 
etc., ours is a very small work, if the measurement 
be by the amount of dollars received and expended; 
but if the measurement, on the contrary, be by 
the amount of work accomplished, we are certainly in 
the first rank so far as we know. We distance all tract 
circulators in the tract matter distributed freely, in 
the Bible Study Helps put into the hands of the people, 
etc., etc. God forbid that we should boast: we have 
nothing that we have not received of divine favor, and 
if the work has prospered we believe that it is of the 
Lord's providence and blessing and not by human wisdom 
and might. However, surrounded by much opposition 
from the world, the flesh and the devil, and the 
nominal Church, we have need to encourage ourselves 
in every way possible, and believe it to be the Lord's 
will that we should communicate these encouraging 
features to you all, knowing well that you will share in 



the trials and discouragements which the Lord forewarned 
us we should expect if we would be faithful to 
him and his Word. 

By the grace of God the report of this year is the 
most encouraging we have ever had to present to you. 
It shows progress, increase, all along the line. But 
there is one report we cannot set forth in dollars or figures 
of any kind, yet it is the most important of all— 
the report of the spiritual condition of those who are in 
the light of Present Truth. It is not for us to judge the 
hearts except in the general sense that the Lord directed, 
that we may know the difference between thorns and 
grapes and between brambles and figs. "By their fruits 
ye shall know them." 

Viewing the entire harvest field from this standpoint 
which the Lord gives us, we are encouraged to 
believe that the spirituality of the flock is as high or 
higher than it has ever before been. We feel like saying 
higher than ever before, nevertheless remember that 
the Lord's dear people in various quarters have had 
some very severe trials during the year, from which, we 

R3906 : page 389 

trust, however, they are emerging purified and polished, 
better fitted for the presence of the King and for a 
share of his glory. These trials, for the most part, have 
come apparently from the outside: and although the 
Apostle suggests "false brethren," we like to hope that 
some who have apparently filled that role were not at 
heart false, but merely temporarily blinded by ambition 
or some other unworthy motive; and we like to hope 
also that, by the Lord's grace, some at least of these 
will ultimately overcome, realizing the force of the 
Apostle's argument that the Lord resisteth the proud 
and shows his favor to the humble. "Humble yourselves 
therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may 
exalt you in due time." 

R3907 : page 389 

Though such storms and shakings may, while being 
experienced, seem very disastrous, we feel sure that the 
Lord will not forget his own, as it is written, "The 
Lord knoweth them that are his." We may be sure that 
he will not suffer them to be tempted above that they 
are able— that if they see to it that their hearts are loyal 
to him such experiences will not work them injury but 
really benefit, for are not all the Lord's people to be 
"overcomers"? and is it not by the "trial of their faith" 
that they are to be tested and proved? and is it not for 
this reason that the Lord permits such shakings? And 
are not the brethren the stronger after they have passed 
through such an experience and reached the further 
side in safety? Are they not the more reliant upon the 
Lord and the power of his might? And will they not 



more closely watch, not only to keep their own garments 
unspotted, but to assist all the Lord's dear flock 
who may be in any danger or trouble through their own 
weaknesses or those of others? 

One lesson in this is that we are our "brother's 
keeper;" that in meekness and gentleness we are to be 
courageous for the right, for the Truth, and thus to assist 
the weaker ones of the flock. As the years roll on 
we may expect more and more of these testings and 
shakings and siftings. We are not to suppose that all 
who have heard the message and received it with joy 
will ultimately be worthy a place in the Kingdom: hence 
"think it not strange concerning the fiery trial that 
shall try you, as though some strange thing had happened 
unto you."— I Pet. 4:12. 

OUR GROWING Z.W.T. LISTS 

It is with great pleasure that we announce that our 
subscription list has grown about 5000 since our last 
report a year ago. Today we have approximately 27,000 
WATCH TOWER subscribers, which we may hope represents 
at least twice or three times that number of readers. 
We print 30,000 of each issue now, which allows 
some for sample copies, etc. Our financial sheet shows 
that our 27,000 subscribers paid us $12,666.59. Thus, 
with 5,000 increase in numbers on our lists, we have 
but $542 extra in money to show for it. Some might say 
that this was a bad showing, but not so we— we are glad 
to have it so. We have known for some time that many 
have been interested in the reading of the DAWNS and 
attending meetings that have not felt that they could 
afford to subscribe for the WATCH TOWER even at its 
low price of $ 1 per year. We have urged that these be 
encouraged by all the dear friends to send in their 
names either with the subscription price or without it— 
either telling us that they are too poor or that they 
would like to have the TOWER on credit, etc. 

The increase of our list with the small increase of 
money receipts encourages us to think that some of 
these friends, who ought to be getting the WATCH TOWER 
(free, if they cannot afford to pay for it), have been 
reached and are being thus served with the spiritual 
food according to the Lord's good pleasure. We urge 
that all the dear friends keep this in mind— that we are 
desirous of having on our lists the addresses of all who 
are truly interested in the Present Truth, in the harvest 
work and message— especially the consecrated. If you 
know of those who are not subscribers but interested 
in the Truth, assure them of our good pleasure in respect 
to the visits of the TOWER whether they can afford 
to pay for it or not. Assure them that there are good 
friends of theirs and of the Truth glad to make good 
the deficiency, and that we would much prefer to have 
them on the lists. Please remember, too, that we like 
to hear from subscribers yearly, and that those poor 



who request the TOWER are expected to renew their request 
each year about June 1st, because that is a less 
busy season with us. 

THE COLPORTEUR WORK 

This branch of the harvest work seems to be particularly 
blessed and used of the Lord, and our friends 
as well as our enemies are astonished at the results 
being obtained. In every part of the civilized world 
these ministers of the harvest time, of the King and his 
coming Kingdom, are going persistently and quietly, 
making their way against opposition. Our opponents, 
indeed, are almost without exception those who have 
never read our books or tracts, and we look for great 
things from the wide circulation of this reading matter 
in the near future. By and by, when some of the 
changes which we see clearly set forth in the Scriptures, 
and which we see rapidly approaching, shall have 
reached the world so as to be visible to others, then we 
may be sure there will be a great awakening of the foolish 
virgin class, a great trimming of their lamps, a 
preparation of them for the great time of trouble 
through which they must pass to wash their robes and 
make them white in the blood of the Lamb.— Rev. 7:14. 

It will astonish you all, dear friends, as it does us, 
to find it possible to make a better report this year than 
last. When last year we announced that 254,083 copies 
of the DAWN had been put into circulation during the 
year, we were afraid to express any hope of even equaling 
that large number for the year ensuing. We merely 
determined to do all in our power. Now we have to 
announce to you that during the past year, 1906, we 
have exceeded the output of 1905 by nearly 50 per cent., 
the total being 377,959. What this means can to some 
extent be grasped when we point out that this represents 
an output of over 1200 volumes for each working 
day of the year. 

Now, how about next year? Shall we set our standard 

R3907 : page 390 

higher or lower? We believe that we may not go far 
astray if we set our mark for the coming year at 500,000 
copies. No other books in the world are selling at this 
rate— no, nor anything like it!— and no other books in 
the world carry this glorious message of the Millennial 
Dawn, of the Parousia of the great King, of the harvesting 
of the wheat, and the things necessary to the 
preparation of God's people for a share in the Kingdom. 
Under God's providence much depends, of 
course, upon each one of our readers, as well as upon 
the colporteurs who reach the public in a more direct 
manner. 

The secret of this large output during the year has 
been the realization on the part of the dear friends that 



the harvest is great and the laborers are few, that the 
work of harvest will not last very long, and that he that 
reapeth receiveth wages— most wonderful wages of divine 
favor and blessing upon his own heart now, besides 
the gracious things which the Father hath in reservation 
for them that love him. The thought is gradually 
pressing itself home upon the dear flock that not 
many years remain in which this harvest work can be 
carried on— that "the night cometh in which no man 
can work"— that we are even now approximately in the 
eleventh hour. We have every reason to suppose that 
we shall have at least three more years of good 
opportunities; by that time apparently the forces of 
evil will be permitted to more or less shackle and restrain 
our efforts to tell the good tidings, because the 
work of harvest will be nearly ended, the wheat will 
nearly all be garnered. With such expectations, hopes, 
prospects before us, who that has the opportunity could 
sit idly by? Who that has the Spirit of the Lord will 
not strive to make opportunity for service? 

We encourage those who are free from encumbrances, 
whose hearts are full of zeal for the Lord and 
his cause, and who have any kind of reasonable address, 
to engage in this blessed service. And as for 
others, whose time and opportunities are less, we suggest 
to them that they earn those gracious words which 
our Lord gave to Mary, "She hath done what she 
could." Do what you can to forward the Truth amongst 
your friends, neighbors and acquaintances, either by 
loaning the books or, preferably, by selling them— 
because people will generally read more carefully that 
for which they have paid money, from the natural desire 
to get back again their money's worth. And when 
we consider that these books are sold at about one-fifth 
the usual price of such books, and that the Lord's 
message is precious beyond price, we see readily that 
we are extending the richest and best of bargains to 
all our dear acquaintances. If each of our readers 
would sell during the year but one half-dozen copies, 
we might feel very sure of being able to reach the high 
mark set; and if each would sell at least a dozen copies, 
we should be almost certain of reaching that high mark, 
Love— Service. 

THE TRACT WORK OF THE YEAR 

Notwithstanding a handicap put upon us by the 
post-office department in ruling our Old Theology 
Quarterly Primary Scripture Studies as not entitled to 
the specially cheap newspaper rate of postage, our 
tract distribution for the year shows up wonderfully. 
It cost considerably more, too, for the extra postage ran 
into thousands of dollars. However, what we cannot 
hinder we must conclude that the Lord has permitted, 
and neither murmur nor repine. We are glad that we 
can render so good a report for the year. 



What we term the "volunteer" work has handled 
almost all of these tracts. We explain its operation for 
the benefit of those unfamiliar. We get out a special 
issue of our quarterly at the beginning of each year and 
use it as our "volunteer" number. All the dear friends 
far and near, in every land, are welcome to order of this 
special issue all that they can use in free distribution. 
We pay the freight charges. The method is that in each 
little Bible Study class a Captain be elected to take the 
supervision of this volunteer work. He in a general 
way districts the city and asks for the election of 
enough lieutenants to take charge of the different divisions 
of the city as he outlines them. Then, as many 
of the dear friends as can arrange their affairs to suit, 
meet every Sunday for tract distribution, each being 

R3908 : page 390 

enrolled as a worker under the general direction of the 
captain and the special care and direction of the lieutenant. 
In this way the distribution is thoroughly done, 
no part skipped and none done twice. Many of these 
companies of volunteers, after having completed their 
work of distribution in their own city, go out in little 
bands of two or three or more to adjoining towns and 
cities by electric or steam cars or otherwise. Thus the 
work of circulating the Truth is done in a most 
thorough manner. Only districts known to be strongly 
foreign or Roman Catholic are omitted. 

The dear friends assure us (and we could see it 
without their assurances) that this work, whether it 
accomplishes much or little for others, is a great blessing 
to their own hearts. It certainly does help to develop 
the courage necessary to those who would be 
"more than conquerors." Some who at first felt like 
hiring newsboys to be their substitutes in the work 
have found how great a blessing they have been missing, 
and are now engaging regularly in the service- 
soldiers of the Truth, soldiers of the Lord. Amongst 
those who are thus engaged are many brethren and 
sisters of fine education, good address, and some of 
them of considerable business standing as merchants, 
bankers' clerks, physicians, etc. The intelligence of 
the person handing the tract or putting it under the 
door gives weight and influence to the tract itself, and, 
as for the day, no better day than Sunday could be found 
for such a circulation of the words of the living God. 
We would be glad to know that ministers in their pulpits 
accomplish as much good by their sermons as do 
those who thus circulate interesting and profitable discourses 
free of all charge. 

Whatever the world may think of these dear volunteers, 
and whether it hates their message or forbears, 
we know how the Lord and the brethren esteem them, 
and that the day is coming when the Master— who said, 



R3908 : page 391 

If any man be ashamed of me and of my words, of him 
will I be ashamed when I come in the glory of the 
Father and all the holy angels with me— to each one 
of these will say, "Well done, good and faithful servant, 
enter thou into the joys of thy Lord." Not that we are 
putting works before faith, but as the Apostle says, we 
show our faith by our works. We believe, and therefore 
speak— give utterance to the Truth, scattering it 
everywhere by word and pen and printed page. The 
great Chief Reaper has so arranged matters as to test 
us along these various lines of love for him, for his 
Word, for his brethren— to test our courage or our 
shame, to prove whether or not we are true soldiers of 
the cross and followers of the Lamb. 

All cannot engage in the colporteur work, but nearly 
all deprived of that privilege can if they will engage in 
the volunteer work. If they do not so engage we do not 
judge them: we will rather think kindly and generously 
of them, and assume that circumstances, of which we 
may or may not have knowledge, hinder them from doing 
all that they would do in this blessed work. But 
God, who knoweth the heart, will say the "Well done, 
good and faithful servant," only to those who are found 
zealous in his service. Let us strive to be pleasing to 
the Lord; let that be our standard. And in harmony 
with our text for the year let us "set our affections on 
things above, and not on things on earth." Let us 
remember that, whatever the opinions of men may be 
respecting us, we serve the Lord Christ, we have accepted 
his standard, receive our directions from him, and 
are satisfied to be found well pleasing in his sight, even 
though some who have named the name of Christ have 
not received the Truth in the love of it— 2 Thess. 2:10. 

THE PILGRIM WORK 

This branch of the service is, we believe, a very useful 
one— one which we feel sure has been very profitable 
to the Lord's dear flock during the year past. The "Pilgrims" 
are brethren recognized as having not only a 
clear knowledge of the Truth, but as additionally possessing 
more than average ability in its presentation to 
others. They go from place to place at the Society's expense, 
and meet with the dear friends for usually about 
two days at each place. They are prepared to speak at 
least twice every day if suitable arrangements can be 
made for them. We urge that not more than one-half 
of the meetings at any place be for the public, allowing 
the other half to be especially for the interested, 
and we are urging that the "Pilgrims" during the coming 
year shall make a specialty of giving examples of 
the successful way of conducting Berean Studies at 
each of their visits. 

We do this because we know how profitable these 



studies are to those who have learned how to conduct 
them along proper lines, and how insipid they may be 
if the real spirit of them be not caught by the leader 
and the class. In those classes where these studies 
have been most carefully and earnestly followed, and 
where tactful leaders have been chosen— leaders who 
will draw the answers to the questions from the classes 
rather than give the answers themselves, and then in 
conclusion will summarize the answers— results are 
excellent. We trust that all the dear friends will take 
hold of these Berean Studies. The majority of people 
neither know how to study nor how to teach, and hence 
fail to get the real food, nourishment, out of what they 
hear and what they read. Permit the "Pilgrims" to 
help you still more in this direction during the coming 
year. 

"Pilgrim" appointments are only made where we 
have a positive request, and each May we publish a 
series of interrogatories, requesting answers thereto 
from those who desire "Pilgrim" visits, that we may 
judge the better as to the needs and the possibility for 
public and private meetings. We are always glad to 
receive these from any of the dear friends, and your 
contributions to the Tract Fund, while appreciated, are 
not allowed weight or influence in the matter. We 
seek to supply the "Pilgrims" where they are needed 
and would do the most good, leaving it to the Lord to 
find the means for the expenses thus incurred. 
The fact that you may be quite a distance need 
not hinder you from answering these questions, 
and be assured that we shall respond as well as we are 
able to all such appeals and as often as the men and 
the expenses and the money at our command will permit. 
It is too late to make the request when you notice 
that a "Pilgrim" is headed your way, for their 
routes are made out several months in advance, and 
they generally go in continuous journey, thus effecting 
a great saving of traveling expenses. The labors of 
this department and the cost of the same shown in our 
reports will be interesting and are encouraging, though 
not all that we could have hoped. 

THE YEAR'S CONVENTION WORK 

We need not go into details respecting these gatherings, 
as we keep you informed from time to time. 
We merely remark here that we are realizing the Lord's 
blessing upon this feature of the work more and more. 
We are finding that the One-Day Conventions as a rule 
are preferable as respects opportunities for reaching 
the public, that the General Conventions are preferable 
as respects the assembling of those who are already 
interested in the Truth, for spiritual refreshment and 
further development. The latter, we find, can advantageously 
cover a longer period of time, even though 
all cannot attend throughout the entire session. Some 



combine with the Conventions their vacation, and anyway 

are much less fatigued by having the Convention 

meetings spread over a longer period with larger opportunities 

for rest and social intercourse in the interim. 

The General Conventions of the year at Asbury 

Park, N.J., St. Paul, Minn., and Dallas, Tex., were 

very interesting indeed, and we believe highly profitable 

to the Lord's dear people, who attended in large 

numbers. 

The One-Day Conventions are growing in interest 
and in results as the dear friends learn the necessity 
for business methods in respect to their arrangements. 

R3908 : page 392 

To reach the public it is necessary first to have a first-class 

hall, and such halls are expensive and cannot be 

indulged in advantageously unless a corresponding 

amount of money be spent for advertising purposes. 

This the dear friends have learned, and, following it 

with success, are greatly encouraged. This year we 

have requested the treasurers of these One-Day Conventions 

to send us a report of the total amount of the 

cost of the Conventions to the local congregations for 

hall, advertising, etc., and the amount of the expenses 

has been credited to those congregations as so much 

donated to the Tract Fund. This item, therefore, 

swells the Tract Fund contributions and correspondingly 

appears as an increased outlay in connection 

with the increased branch of the "Pilgrim" branch of 

the work. Of late we think it an excellent plan to follow 

these One-Day Conventions and their large crowds 

with Chart talks on the following Sundays, the latter 

being advertised at the large meeting. We thus seek 

to gather and hold all the interest created by the first 

widely advertised meeting. The Chart talk usually 

helps to fix the Truth in the minds of these dear 

friends, and the larger number are thus introduced to 

the local classes. 

PILGRIM WORK SUMMARY, INCLUDING ALL CONVENTIONS 

Total number who served as "Pilgrims," 1906 30 

" of visits made 1821 

" of miles traveled in preaching tours.. 176,167 

" of public meetings held 1667 

" of parlor meetings 3529 

The above does not include Pilgrim and Convention 
work of other lands, Great Britain, Germany, Denmark, 
Sweden, Switzerland, France, Italy and 
Australia. 

R3909 : page 392 

NEWSPAPER HARVEST WORK 



Very few probably realize what a great work is possible 
through the newspapers. This work does not conflict 
with the other departments of the service, but 
rather co-operates. The immense circulation of newspapers 
in our day amongst all classes of thinking people 
gives the public press a wonderful power for good 
or for evil. Why should we not seek to use these channels, 
these implements, in the harvest work? The Lord 
directed that in the Jewish harvest the message should 
be scattered everywhere, and we apply the same rules 
to the present harvest. At the present time and for a 
good while back Brother Russell's discourses are published 
regularly in five different newspapers whose 
combined circulation is 1 19,000 copies. This in a year 
represents 6,188,000 sermons printed and scattered 
broadcast amongst reading people. Besides this, in all 
the cities where one-day conventions are held the newspapers 
publish one of these discourses. So that altogether 
we would be quite safe in estimating that over 
7,000,000 sermons were printed and scattered during 
the year. While we cannot say that 7,000,000 people 
were turned to the Lord and to his Truth thereby, 
we do know that some have been interested, profited, 
blest, brought into the Truth through this channel. 
What more can we expect? Besides, these lessons reach 
many who are not entirely convinced thereby, but whose 
prejudice against the Truth melts away gradually, preparing 
them for further blessings of the Lord now or in 
the future. The cause is indebted to many of the Lord's 
people for this circulation, for if you did not subscribe 
for these journals and thus encourage their publishers 
many of them would surely discontinue the service. 
All subscriptions should be sent through the WATCH 
TOWER office, except where the newspapers can be 
bought on the street. 

If these sermons in the newspapers were calculated 
on the basis of tract pages they would represent 20 
pages each or a total of over 140,000,000. We estimate 
therefore that this is a very valuable feature of the 
harvest work. Indeed, we all know that many will read 
a newspaper article who will decline to read a tract. We 
are looking to the Lord for possible further opening of 
doors in this direction, and if we learn of any way in 
which you can assist we will be pleased to communicate 
with you. Postal cards to the editors of journals 
publishing the discourses serve to show the interest 
and encourage publishers. 

OUR CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT 

We are always glad to have letters from the interested 
and rejoice that the Lord has granted such wonderful 
opportunities for mail communication in our 
day. Should we not estimate that all these arrangements 
are designed of the Lord primarily as aids in the 



harvest work? We see that the harvest of the Jewish 

age covered but a small field, Palestine and vicinity, 

whereas the harvest of this age properly extends to 

every part of the world where there are thoroughly consecrated 

Christian people. And yet the same length of 

time, forty years, was apportioned to each harvest. How 

necessary, then, it was that the Lord should arrange 

greater convenience for the harvest work in our day. 

And how we see that railroads, steamships, telegraph 

and mail services all co-operate and were evidently expected 

to co-operate as factors in this harvest work. 

Shall we say that these things were designed for the 

world, and that we are permitted to profit by them? 

Shall we not the rather say that these things were necessary 

and intended for the harvest work, and that the 

world is permitted to profit by them? 

Total letters and cards received 51,656 

Total letters and cards sent out 40,681 

If sometimes the dear friends receive very brief 
replies to their lengthy letters they must not understand 
this to signify a lack of appreciation. Your letters 
are all very welcome indeed, but especially so if 
they are plainly written and concisely stated. Some 
letters do not seem to need a reply. When you do wish 
for information please make your question quite distinct. 
Do not be surprised if sometimes to your 
lengthy questions we send very brief replies, perhaps 
on postal-cards. We answer many questions by referring 
to our wide-margin Bible, noting there the reference 

R3909 : page 393 

to the treatment of the verse in the DAWNS or 
TOWERS. We call your attention to the same, knowing 
that the printed explanations are much more comprehensive 
than anything that we could take time to write 
by pen in a letter. Give us credit always, dear Brethren 
and Sisters, for having the very best and kindest 
intentions toward you all and toward the cause we 
serve, and be assured that we feel the same interest in 
those who get their TOWERS free and make no remittances 
to the Tract Fund. When receiving a brief letter reflect 
that we have 26,000 subscribers, and that we write 
lengthy letters twice every month to every one, to you 
—the various issues of the WATCH TOWER. Accept 
these as our principal replies to your kind letters, and 
our brief replies as mere post-scripts. 

In this connection, we remark that the wide-margin 
Bibles can no longer be supplied, and the little booklet 
promised some time ago, giving helpful references and 
texts, may be expected early in the new year. Due 
notice will be given in these columns. 

HARVEST WORK IN FOREIGN LANDS 



The harvest work is prospering greatly in Great 
Britain and Australia and fairly well in other quarters, 
Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Germany, Switzerland, 
France, Italy, Greece and near our own doors in the 
island of Jamaica— amongst the colored people. Reports 
from these fields are crowded out of this issue, 
but may be expected in the January 1st number. 

THE FINANCIAL SHOWING 

The receipts and expenditures of the year exceed 
those of any previous year. Not only so, but the shortage 
of last year has been overcome and we have a 
credit balance to carry over for 1907. We do not boast; 
—we are aware that our totals are as nothing compared 
with the millions devoted annually to the propaganda 
of error in its various compounds and delusions. 
Were it not for those millions spent in salaries for ministers, 
in Church edifices, etc., the bad tidings of great 
misery for all people except the elect would speedily give 
place to the "good tidings of great joy which shall be 
unto all people." 

Evidently the Lord has designed the permission of 
this great misrepresentation of his character and name 
by the Adversary who for so long has deluded so many 
of the true household of faith and totally blinded those 
who believe not. (2 Cor. 4:4.) And doubtless, too, it 
is of the Lord's permission that now, as the clearer 
light shines in upon his Word, that those millions 
should gradually turn to the support of that "religious 
infidelity" called "Higher Criticism" and its twin sister, 
the Evolution theory, which repudiate the Bible 
record that Adam was created an earthly image of 
God and fell into imperfection and death through disobedience; 
that hence the race needed the work of the 
Redeemer at Calvary for their forgiveness; and will 
yet need that Redeemer's work of restitution back to all 
that was lost in Adam (during the Millennium), ere 
God's plan of salvation is completed. (Acts 3:19-21.) 
Doubtless these "strong delusions," together with that 
of Spiritism and Christian Science falsely so-called 
are permitted now for the testing of Laodicea (Rev. 3:14), 
the separation of the wheat from the chaff and 
tares. "Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy 
sight." It consoles us to know that "The Lord knoweth 
them that are his," and that none of these shall be 
plucked from his hand, his power, his care. It will 
not be possible in this day for those strong delusions 
to "deceive the very elect," however ignorant or humble 
they may be. 

On the other hand we note that the Lord wonderfully 
blesses what money his wisdom does provide. 
And the very scarcity of money becomes a blessing in 
that it encourages the faithful to economy and self-denials 
which doubtless inure to their greater spiritual 



profit, in various ways. Doing what we can let us be 
thankful and content. "Thy will be done!" 

1906--SUMMARY OF THE OUTPUT--1906 

Total output of DAWNS, "Scripture Studies," cloth-bound, 

sold at cost 377,959 

Total output DAWN, Vol. I., magazine form, sold at 

cost 43,100 

Total output of free TOWERS, Tracts and newspaper 
publication of our sermons, stated in usual form 
of tract pages 215,308,672 

1906-FINANCIAL STATEMENT-- 1906 

Receipts 

"Good Hopes" realized $36,127.02 

Tract Fund from other sources 29,134.05 

$65,261.07 

Expenditures 

Deficit of 1905, paid $ 3,952.73 

Pilgrim and Convention expenses 11,752.45 

For Tracts, free TOWERS and newspaper 

publishings 36,490.31 

Maintenance of Foreign Branches 9,715.83 

$61,911.32 

Balance, overplus, 1906 $ 3,349.75 



R3910 : page 393 

Let us permit the blessings of this year to encourage 
and strengthen and nerve us for the New Year. It may 
be a strain upon our faith to expect still greater things 
in 1907, but who knows the mind of the Lord to the 
contrary? Let us do our parts faithfully and leave the 
results to him. He is able to put millions into the work 
through seemingly natural means if he choose; and 
as we approach the close of the reaping time it should 
not surprise us to see the work extend wonderfully in the 
next three years, and then more rapidly close. 

If we are doing all in our power, let us not worry 
but go on contentedly. If we on examination find that 
we are not doing all in our power we should not be content, 
but should watch and pray and strive to be of 
those of whom the Lord will say, "She hath done what 
she could." Remember that the best thing for your 
friend to read is STUDIES (or DAWN), Vol. I. Remember 
that every DAWN reader should be on the TOWER 
list. Remember that you can at no cost but time be a 
"Volunteer" -tract distributor. 



R3919 : page 394 

"A LITTLE CHILD SHALL LEAD THEM" 

-ISAIAH 11:6.— 

A little child shall lead them! 
Oh blessed, blessed time— 
The Universe will be at peace, 
The Bells of Heaven will chime, 
As Angel Choirs again will sing 
The song of Bethlehem's plain, 
Glory to God! "How good He is!" 
On Earth good will to men. 

A little child shall lead them; 

The fierce— the meek— the strong 

No chains shall hold, nor fetters bind 

The captives in that throng. 

But Love shall be the leading string 

The Universe to sway! 

A Baby's fingers will control 

And guide them in the way. 

A little child shall lead them; 
The pride and pomp of War, 
The captives' groan, the angry tone 
The battle's awful roar- 
No more disturb the harmony 
Of Earth's long-sought repose; 
And Wilderness and desert place 
Shall blossom as the rose. 

A little child shall lead them; 
The meek, so long oppressed, 
Will then rejoice in perfect peace 
And all the earth possess. 
No more will vain ambition rule 
Nor drench with blood the sod, 
But all the ransomed human sons 
Rejoice before their God. 

Oh Precious Master, in whose arms 
The little ones were blessed, 
Unmindful of the clamoring crowd 
That round thy pathway pressed,— 
Fill our hearts with childlike faith, 
Let Love expel the leaven 
Of Sin's unholy blighting power, 
For of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. 
—Anonymous. 



R3910 : page 394 



"IF I GO AWAY I WILL COME AGAIN" 

--LUKE 24:36-53.-DECEMBER 23.- 

Golden Text:— "While he blessed them, he was 
parted from them, and was received up into heaven." 

THIS lesson connects with our previous one, and is 

Luke's brief summary of our Lord's manifestations 

during the forty days of his presence up to the time 

when he left his disciples by ascending to heaven. It presents 

what in our last lesson we designated the fifth and 

eleventh manifestations of the risen Messiah to his faithful 

apostles, who were to be his witnesses to the Jews and indirectly 

to the whole world. The forepart, from verses 36-43 

inclusive, show how carefully, how wisely, our Lord presented 

the Truth, so that none of his followers would have occasion 

for stumbling, although he well knew that he was to 

be for a stone of stumbling, a rock of offence, to both the 

houses of Israel, the Jewish and the Gospel nominal 

churches. 

The account graphically sets forth how on the evening 
of his resurrection, while his apostles were gathered discussing 
the incidents of the day, the reported meeting, interview, 
etc., Jesus himself stood in their midst, the doors being 
shut. No wonder they were affrighted, for they were in a 
nervous condition throughout the day, not only fearing apprehension 
by the rulers but perplexed respecting the meaning 
of the day's incidents. What could they think now but 
that a spirit being stood in their midst? how could any other 
come in while the doors were shut? As a matter of fact, we 
have seen that although the Lord was put to death in the 
flesh, he was quickened, made alive in the Spirit, and that 
he was no longer a human being but born of the Spirit, and 
that it was by reason of his power as a spirit being that he 
was able to come into their presence, the doors being shut. 

We have seen that he could have manifested himself as 
a spirit being as he did to Saul of Tarsus later, but that instead 
of so doing he assumed a body of flesh so that they 
might be without distraction. The wisdom of his course is 
shown by the alarm of the disciples and his ability to assure 
them that what they saw was not a spirit but flesh and 
bones. His words were, "A spirit hath not flesh and bones 
as ye see me have." But spirit beings had assumed flesh 
and bones as Jesus did, and had thus appeared to men to 
deliver divine messages. We have already noticed such an 
appearance of our Lord and two angels to Abraham, and how 
they ate and talked with Abraham. Similarly in this case 
our Lord, to prove that his body was of flesh and bones, 
called for food and ate before them some broiled fish and 
honeycomb. 

Their fears thus allayed, they were the better prepared 
to receive the appropriate instructions of the hour— prepared 
as they could not have been under any other conditions of 
which we can think. Evidently our Lord chose the very best 



way of proving the two facts: first that he was risen, that it 
was his very self; and, secondly, that he was changed, not 
the same as previously, because now, as the angels, he had 
power to come and go, to appear and disappear, to assume 
one form and clothing or another as suited convenience and 
the objects he wished to serve. 

OPENED UNTO THEM THE SCRIPTURES 

Their fears allayed, they were prepared for further instruction 
—an explanation of the wonderful experiences 
through which they had recently been passing. We could 
hardly think of our dear Redeemer speaking to his loved 
ones upon any other topic at such a time. He explained 
that what they were experiencing was the fulfilment of his 
words while he was yet with them— intimating that he was 
no longer with them in the same sense as formerly. He proceeded 
to explain to them the necessity for their trying experience 
and his, that the Father had so arranged from the 
beginning, and had so outlined the matter in the prophecies 
of Moses and all the prophets, including the Psalms wherever 
they referred to him. Thus he opened their understanding, 
their minds, that they could appreciate the Scriptures. His 
words served as a Bible Key, bringing order out of their previous 
confusion. 

The fact that the Scriptures are so written that they 
cannot be understood without certain divine assistance is incomprehensible 
to the world. Not seeing the divine plan 
worldly minds think it unreasonable that God should hide 
his purposes from the wise and prudent and reveal them 
unto babes (Matt. 1 1:25); they think it strange that he so 
arranged his revelations through the prophets that they could 
not be understood except as he would furnish the necessary 
elucidation, keys or instructions. However, to us who do see 

R3910 : page 395 

the divine plan with a measure of clearness, it was evidently 
not only the wisest way but the best in every sense of the 
word for God to arrange his plan so that only those in heart 
harmony with him would be able to appreciate it in advance of 
its fulfilment, as the Lord declared, To you it is given to know 
the mysteries of the Kingdom, but to all outsiders these things 
are spoken in parables and dark sayings, that they might not 
understand; and again he said even to his faithful ones, "I 
have many things to tell you, but ye cannot bear them now." 
-John 16:12. 

The things which our Lord revealed to his disciples on 
this occasion as a key to their understanding of the Scriptures 
could not properly have been given them previously; 
those truths would not have been meat in due season to the 
household of faith earlier. They would do them more good 
now than at any other time— now that their minds were 
quickened and they were awakened, energized by the stirring 
events and perplexities; they now were ready to see the 
course of divine wisdom in the arrangement of the plan. And 



is it so now— today? As one by one the Lord's people come 
to that condition of mind and heart development where they 
are ready for it the Lord is pleased to give them more light 
of "present truth"; and when once their eyes of understanding 
are opened they wonder why they have been so blind 
that they did not see these things before. The secret is that 
they were not previously prepared: other lessons must first 
be learned before the deeper truths could be appreciated; 
and the great Teacher, reading the heart, was able to give 
them the opening of the understanding at the appropriate 
time for the highest welfare of his followers. 

We are not to suppose that our Lord worked some miracle 
upon the minds of his followers to open their understanding: 
rather we are to suppose that he operated then as 
he still operates in giving instruction; that he used natural 
means, that he reasoned with them, explaining to them the 
necessity for the one feature and the other of the divine plan, 
until they got before their minds the logical order and 
sequence of affairs and were able to some extent to grasp 
the divine purpose. We are sure, however, that they did not 
comprehend the Scriptures perfectly, because this was not to 
be their experience, according to our Lord's own words, until 
after he had ascended on high and sent forth the holy Spirit, 
which would guide them into all Truth, yea, into the deep 
things of God. 

What our Lord did do was to give all the details that 
the natural man in a consecrated condition of mind could 
appreciate and act upon. He doubtless showed them briefly 
that the sacrifices of the Law typified his own sacrifice, that 
the atonement for sin was necessary on a higher scale by 
better sacrifices before the real reconciliation could be effected 
and the whole world of mankind be permitted to come 
back into relationship with God and to have an opportunity 
for life eternal. He doubtless showed them that natural 
Israel was not worthy to constitute the Kingdom class, that 
therefore only those accepting him had been chosen— "The 
election hath received it and the rest were blinded."— 
Rom. 11:7. 

He showed them, further, the work expected of them— 
to declare not only his righteousness but that he was the 
sin-offering, and that although he died he arose again to give 
the blessing as the antitypical High Priest. He showed them 
that repentance would be granted through the merit of his 
death and the remission of sins, and that this would be open 
and applicable to all mankind— all nations. Evidently, however, 
he did not explain to them that the Gentiles were to be 
fellow-heirs with themselves in the great honor of being the 

R3911 : page 395 

antitypical Israel, Spiritual Israel, joint-heirs with Messiah 
in the Kingdom; because we find that Peter and the other 
apostles were quite ignorant of this feature of the divine 
plan until the time of Cornelius and the special manifestations 
connected therewith. Their witness was to begin at 
Jerusalem, but not to end there. 



"BEGINNING AT JERUSALEM." 

The call to membership in the Bride of Christ must be 
thoroughly promulgated amongst the natural seed of Abraham 
that it might select as many as were Israelites indeed 
before it would be extended to the Gentiles. They were to 
tarry in Jerusalem also to await enduement from on high— 
the holy Spirit's anointing and begetting. He referred to the 
Pentecostal blessing, saying, "Behold, I send the promise of 
the Father upon you, but tarry ye in Jerusalem until ye be 
endued with power from on high." The Apostle tells us that 
the sending of the holy Spirit at Pentecost became a witness 
or sign of God's acceptance of our Lord Jesus' sacrifice, and 
thus a sign of his acceptance of the Church and household 
of faith, whose sins alone were covered by that sacrifice. His 
words are, "Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, 
and having received of the Father the holy Spirit of 
promise, he hath shed forth this which ye now see and hear." 
This was the seal of the Father's approval of the sacrifice of 
Jesus, and of the forgiveness of sins of those for whom his 
precious blood was applied; as the Apostle Paul declares, 
"He ascended up on high there to appear in the presence of 
God on our behalf— as the Advocate of believers, but not as 
the world's Advocate."— Acts 2:33. 

The record is that the apostles did tarry at Jerusalem 
until they received the Pentecostal blessing, and the lesson 
to all the Lord's disciples from that day to the present time 
is that none except those thus endued with power from on 
high— none except those who come under the blessing of the 
Spirit of the Lord, the holy mind of Christ— none others are 
qualified to be the ambassadors for God and his representatives 
before men. When our Lord sent forth his apostles 
during his ministry he put his Spirit or power upon them, 
which enabled them to preach and cast out devils, in harmony 
with his wishes and instructions; but as soon as he was 
gone they might do no more work until they received the 
actual blessing in their own hearts. 

We fear that a general trouble amongst those teaching 
in the name of the Lord today and in times past has been 
that they did not tarry until they were endued with the holy 
Spirit, but recklessly pressed into the ministry without this, 
the real credential of divine authorization. Let us not make 
the same mistake; let us realize that work not done under the 
guidance of the holy Spirit is sure to be defective and in 
some respects evil, and to result in evil fruitage, of which we 

R3911 : page 396 

can see so much everywhere about us in Babylon. Let us 
then not only see to it that we have come under the anointing 
which has been on the body since Pentecost, but see also 
that we abide in this condition, that we grieve not the holy 
Spirit, and that thus we shall be qualified to be witnesses for 
the Truth, ambassadors for God, servants of the Most High, 
co-laborers in the vineyard. At no time was this more necessary 



than now in the harvest time. All of the Lord's people 
should be awake to a realization that the Truth, the light 
now due to the household of faith, is not to be expected 
through any but sanctified channels. 

"WITNESSES OF THESE THINGS." 

The apostles as witnesses were not merely to tell about the 
Redeemer's virgin birth, nor merely about his holy, devoted life, 
nor merely about his Calvary cross, nor merely of our Lord's resurrection, 
nor merely of his ascension, but in addition to all 
these facts they are to tell that he was a properly qualified Redeemer, 
that he met all the conditions of the Law, and that 
now he ever liveth to succor those who come unto the Father 
through him. How faithfully the apostles performed their 
mission! how truly, as the Apostle Paul declared, they 
shunned not to declare the whole counsel! Worldly wisdom 
might intimate that to own a Master and Teacher who had 
been executed as a felon would be to their discredit, and 
thoroughly hinder them from progress in gathering followers 
to their Leader. But these faithful witnesses consulted not 
with flesh and blood as to what they should preach— they 
told the story simply in all of its details, not neglecting even 
those features which showed their own weaknesses, as in the 
cases of Peter and Judas, and the disputing as to which 
should be greatest, etc. The Truth in the simplicity in 
which God intended it to be delivered has evidently come 
down to us in the Bible account. 

Now we in our turn are the witnesses charged with the 
responsibility of carrying forward this same message— the 
message of our Lord's purity, that he was holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners; the message of his loving 
devotion to the Father's glorious plan unto death, even 
the death of the cross, his resurrection and his ascension, and 
his promise to come again to receive his faithful to himself 
and establish his Kingdom. Nothing less than the whole 
Gospel should be witnessed, and it is for each of us to say 
to what extent we are faithfully using our privileges. He 
who is ashamed of the Lord and his cause, or of anything 
pertaining to him— he who is ashamed of his agents and 
agencies of the past or of the present, is not a faithful witness 
and has the Master's word that "he that is ashamed of 
me or of my words, of him will I be ashamed when I come 
in my Kingdom." (Mark 8:38.) Let us, therefore, dearly beloved, 
not allow pride or any other evil condition of mind to 
hinder us from full heart-confession of what great thing the 
Lord has done for us, and of all the steps which he has been 
pleased to use in the doing of them. 

"HE WAS PARTED FROM THEM" 

Bethany was on the Mount of Olives, but a little distance 
from Jerusalem, and thither the Lord led his disciples 
at the end of the forty days, after having given them the 
various manifestations of his resurrection and change already 
mentioned. We read, "While he blessed them he was parted 



from them and carried up into heaven." Another account 
says, "A cloud received him out of their sight." We must 
remember that the apostles were still natural men, that the 
holy Spirit had not yet been shed forth upon them: hence 
we see the necessity for the Lord's giving them such evidence 
as natural men could understand. 

He could have vanished out of their sight as he did 
after talking with them and eating of the broiled fish and 
honeycomb in the upper room. But had he so vanished and 
ascended to the Father how would they have known about 
the matter? Would they not have been in doubt as to 
whether or not he had ever gone away to appear in the 
presence of God on our behalf? But when the changed 
Lord, the quickened spirit, was about to ascend to the Father, 
his last manifestation was in a body of flesh, and he was 
gradually parted from them and gradually ascended into 
the sky and was lost to their sight, so that they might have 
before their minds the thought that he was gone, that they 
were not to expect him to appear and disappear in the future 
as he had done during those forty days, that they were to 
think of him now as being with the Father in the heavenly 
glory. Now they could call to mind his promise, "If I go 
away I will come again and receive you unto myself." 
Henceforth their minds would center upon his second coming 
and the glorious things then to be accomplished for them 
and for the world. Doubtless this was part of what our 
Lord made plain to them in opening the Scriptures— that he 
accepted them and all spiritual Israelites indeed as his 
jewels, and was selecting these during this Gospel age, and 
at its close would come again and would receive them to 
himself as his Bride, and establish his Kingdom with power 
and great glory in the earth. 

"THIS SAME JESUS SHALL SO COME" 

Another account tells us that while they were looking 
upward to the point in heaven where last they had seen the 
Lord, two angels appeared and said to them, "Ye men of 
Galilee, why stand ye here gazing up into heaven? This 
same Jesus ye have seen go into heaven will so come in 
like manner as ye have seen him go." The lesson was a 
complete one and was well understood by the apostles; they 
fully believed that the Master had gone from them and that 
as truly he would come again. 

They did not forget his statement either, "Lo, I am with 
you alway, even to the end of the age," but accepted this 
properly as signifying that he would be with them in the 
plenitude of his power to protect them, to oversee their interests 
through various agencies at his command. But as to 
his actual presence, that was gone— "Ye shall see me no 
more until that day when ye shall say, Blessed is he that 
cometh in the name of the Lord." (Matt. 21:9.) He went 
from them quietly, unostentatiously, unknown to the world. 
Hence his followers are to be on the watch for the signs that 
will indicate the presence of the Son of man in the end of 
the Gospel age, and are to remember that it will be in his 



day as it was in the days of Noah, men will be eating and 
drinking, planting and building, marrying and giving in 
marriage, not discerning, knowing not that the Son of man 

R3911 : page 397 

is present, that the Gospel age is closing, that a new dispensation 
is about to dawn, to be inaugurated by the complete 
change of the members of the body of Christ, because flesh 
and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom. 

"THEY WORSHIPED HIM" 

Although our Lord taught us to worship the Father in 
spirit and in truth, and again to pray, "Our Father which 
art in heaven," and although the Apostle said, "I bow my 
knees to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ," 
(Eph. 3:14), nevertheless the general sentiment of Scripture 
seems to imply that there will be nothing wrong in our addressing 
a petition to our Lord Jesus direct if any so desire 
at any time. As the head of the body it is but the appropriate 
thing that, as every member of the natural body makes 
known its desires, its petitions, to its own head, so the Church, 
the body of Christ, should be permitted to address him, and 
thus we read in our lesson that the apostles worshiped the 
ascended Jesus— they recognized his greatness and dignity 
and honor as the Messiah, the Son of the living God, the 
Redeemer of the world, who in due time shall come and receive 
his faithful to himself and establish his Kingdom for 
the blessing of the world. The Lord's own words are appropriate 
here: he says, "That all men should honor the Son 
even as they honor the Father."— John 5:23. 

Matters had now taken a changed form in the minds 
of the disciples: their perplexities were gone, they understood 

R3912: page 397 

why Jesus had died, the necessity for this, and that it 
was related to his second coming and the Kingdom then to 
be established— that it was the very basis of his future work. 
They knew not, indeed, how long it would be before he 
would come again— the Lord graciously kept this from them 
lest the length of the period might have discouraged them. 
Nor was it necessary either to them or their successors, because 
not one of them would live the entire period, and it 
was appropriate that each one should live his space of years 
in expectancy that the Kingdom might come in his day, and 
with the desire that he might be ready for it at any moment. 
We who live today have the happy lot to live "in the days 
of the Son of man"— in the days of his second presence— in 
the days of the establishment of his Kingdom— in the day of 
all days the best. 

Instead of being discouraged the disciples now had 
great joy as they waited for the promised holy Spirit of the 
fiftieth day. Meantime they were continually in the Temple 
—not that they lived there, but as we say today of a regular 



attendant of Church, "He goes to Church all the time," 
meaning regularly. So with the apostles: they were from 
Galilee, and had no special business in Jerusalem during the 
remaining ten days till Pentecost, and they improved the 
opportunity of spending much of their time in the Temple, 
praising God, thanking him, desiring to cultivate in themselves 
more and more the Spirit of the Lord. Applying this 
feature to ourselves, is it not true of us also that we have 
had great joy from the time the Lord opened the eyes of our 
understanding, that we might see his Word in its true light, 
that we might be his witnesses? All of this class, truly 
members of his body, are represented as abiding in the 
Temple, the Tabernacle, the Holy, as the Apostle says: "We 
are seated together with Christ in the holies," our hearts 
have fellowship with him, prayer and praise and worship 
seem to rank amongst the highest and most appreciated privileges. 
We have less to ask the Lord for than formerly, 
more to thank him for, as we begin to realize what great 
things the Lord hath done for us. 



R3912: page 397 

THE STORY OF JESUS IN REVIEW 

-DECEMBER 30.- 

Golden Text:— "His name shall be called Wonderful, 
Counsellor, The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, 
The Prince of Peace."— Isa. 9:6. 

THE closing lesson of the year is a review of the quarter's 
study of the blessed Redeemer, and truly the 
Golden Text serves well to congregate and crystalize 
all of our previous studies of the wonderful character 
and work of the Prince of Life, the world's Redeemer, the 
Church's Advocate, and soon to be the world's Mediator. 

Many are the names of the Son of man— the man 
Christ Jesus, the Son of God, who was made flesh that he 
by the grace of God should taste death for every man. The 
first name given in the list of the Prophet is called Wonderful, 
and is surely appropriate. His is the most wonderful 
career and the most wonderful character of which we have 
any knowledge. Who else than he left the glories of the 
heavenly state for human conditions? as he himself said, 
"No man hath ascended up to heaven save he which came 
down from heaven." (John 3:13.) He alone left the glory 
which he had with the Father before the world was; he 
alone exercised that wonderful faith in the Father which 
permitted him to sacrifice everything with joy, delighting to 
do the Father's will, with confidence that in due time the 
rewards of the Father's favor and love would more than 
compensate for every sacrifice. 

Wonderful, too, was his life amongst men, the Light 
shining in the darkness, the darkness comprehending it not. 



More and more as we come into the light ourselves we are 
able to comprehend this Wonderful One. As the Apostle 
suggests, the eyes of our understanding being opened we are 
able to comprehend with all saints the heights and depths 
and lengths and breadths of the love of God which passes 
all understanding, such love being manifested, exhibited, 
illustrated in this Wonderful One. Wonderful also was his 
resurrection, the "first that should rise from the dead," "the 
first-born amongst many brethren," "highly exalted, given a 
name that is above every name, that at the name of Jesus 
every knee should bow."— Rom. 8:29; Col. 1:15,18; 
Phil. 2:9,10. 

The second name on the list, "Counsellor," is also appropriate. 
Who else is such a Counsellor? Who else is 

R3912: page 398 

able to be touched with the feeling of our infirmities? Who 

else is able always to guide us with his eye? Who else 

has assured us that all things shall work together for our 

good? Happy are they who have made the acquaintance 

of this Counsellor, whom God hath set forth to be the satisfaction 

for our sins and to be the Counsellor, the Leader, 

the Guide, the Instructor of his people, and to bring them 

out of darkness into his marvellous light, out of the chains 

of sin and bondage of death back to full liberty of the sons 

of God. Let us more and more heed the voice that speaketh 

from heaven, our Counsellor. 

"The Mighty God," another of his names, is also appropriate. 
If the angels were called Elohim, gods, and if the 
angels appearing to men in the past were called Elohim, 
gods, because they were the representatives of divine power, 
surely much more appropriate is the name to him whom the 
Father specially sent as his special messenger to men. If 
elohim signifies a mighty one, surely he is above the other 
mighty ones, next to the Father himself, and may therefore 
most properly be termed the mighty Elohim— the Mighty 
God— the one mighty amongst the mighty. "Mighty to save" 
we sometimes sing; yea, says the Word of the Lord, "He is 
able to save unto the uttermost all who come unto the 
Father through him." (Heb. 7:25) Such a mighty Savior 
we need, one not only able to sympathize with us and to 
instruct us, but able also to deliver us from the Evil One and 
from our own weaknesses as well as from the divine sentence 
against our race as sinners. Let us exult in this "Mighty 
One," whom the heavenly Father, Jehovah, has sent forth 
as the Arm of Jehovah for deliverance from sin and 
death. 

The title "Everlasting Father" will in due time be appropriately 
his— but not yet. These words are a prophecy; 
some of them have been already fulfilled and others are yet to 
be fulfilled. When they were written Jesus had not yet left 
the heavenly glory. Jesus is not the everlasting Father to 
the Church. No; the Scriptures reveal him as our elder 
Brother, and again as our Bridegroom. The Apostle most 
explicitly tells us that Jehovah is our Father, saying, "The God 



and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ hath begotten us"— we 
are his children. The dear Redeemer himself taught us to 
pray, "Our Father which art in heaven"; and again after his 
resurrection he sent the message to Peter and others of his 
followers, "I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my 
God and your God."— John 20:17. 

In due time he will be the everlasting Father to the 
world— to those of the world who, during the Millennial 
age, will hearken to his voice and receive of his life— restitution 
blessings. Jesus purchased Adam and all of his children 
by the sacrifice of himself: they are his, to make out 
of them everything possible and to bring as many as possible 
back into harmony with the Father and to eternal life. 
They died under divine condemnation; what they now need 
is life, and the Father has arranged that Jesus may be their 
Life-Giver, and to this end he has already given his life, 
purchased them, that in due time, during his Millennial 
Kingdom, he may offer them the return of all that was lost 
in Adam, for it is written, "He came to seek and to save that 
which was lost." 

Since that life which Jesus will give to the world during 
the Millennial age is the fruitage of his own sacrifice, therefore 
he is said to be the Father, the Life-Giver to the world. 
And since the life that he will give will not be merely a 
temporary one, but by obedience to him all those who receive 
of his life may be brought to perfection, and maintain 
that life eternally, therefore he is the Everlasting Father. 
He gives the everlasting life in contradistinction to Adam, 
who attempted to be the Father to the race, but through his 
disobedience brought forth his children to a dying condition. 
No so the everlasting life: the life which he gives to his 
children during the period of the Millennium, and which 
will accomplish the regeneration of the world, or of so many 
of the world as will accept his favor, will be unto life 
eternal. 

Not yet is he the Prince of Peace and King of Glory, 
but very soon he will take unto himself his great power and 
reign. Far from peaceful will be its beginning. The Scriptural 
description is that the nations will be angry and divine 
wrath will come upon them, and that they shall be broken 
in pieces as a potter's vessel: that the Lord will speak to 
them in his sore displeasure, and that there will be a time 
of trouble such as was not since there was a nation.— Psa. 2:5; 
Dan. 12:1. 

But the Lord wounds to heal, he chastises to correct, 
and will not "keep his anger forever," but will ultimately 
prove that he is "plenteous in mercy." The result of his 
righteous indignation against sin and all unrighteousness 
and iniquity will be the establishment of justice upon a 
firm footing throughout the world. Then as a consequence 
peace will reign and the King of Glory will be known as 
the Prince of Peace, whose blessings will fill the earth for 
the refreshment of every creature and the bringing of so many 
as will into full harmony with God through the processes 
of restitution. 



page 398 

As we long for the glorious day let us prepare our 
hearts that we may be approved of the King— that we may 
be accepted even as his Bride through his mercy and grace. 
Let us not forget that there are conditions expressed by the 
Apostle in the words, "If we suffer with him, we shall also 
reign with him," "If we be dead with him we shall also live 
with him"— "heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our 
Lord, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be 
glorified together." A little while and the trials shall be 
over; a little while and if faithful we shall have the crown 
and hear the blessed words, "Well done, good and faithful 
servant, enter thou into the joys of thy Lord. Thou hast 
been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over 
many things. "-Matt. 25:21,23. 



