VOL. XXVII. APRIL 1, 1906 No. 7 



CONTENTS. 

"The Passover Must Be Killed" 99 

The Lord's Supper 100 

When the Hour Was Come 101 

"Let Us Keep the Feast" 102 

Berean Bible Study, for April 103 

"In Due Time" (Poem) 103 

"Take Heed Lest Ye Be Devoured" 103 

Sabbath Obligations and Privileges 105 

Propriety of Sunday Observance 106 

The Pharisaical Sabbath 107 

The Resurrection Power in Jesus 108 

Our Lord's Miracles Illustrative 109 

Prophet, Priest and King 110 

A Voice from Over the Sea Ill 

page 98 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



FOR YOUR FRIENDS. 



Some will read a newspaper who will not read a tract. We 
now can supply in any quantity— The Six Eaton-Russell Debates 
together in one issue of the Gazette and "To Hell and 
Back" in another issue, and "The Resurrection of Damnation" 
in a third. 

We can supply these post free at one cent each to any address 
in any quantity. Order at once. 

R3749 : page 98 

OUR NEW HYMN BOOK WITH MUSIC. 



Three hundred and thirty-three of the choicest hymns selected 
from every quarter, with some of the grandest tunes, 
cloth bound, 35c by mail, by freight or express collect, 25c— 
now ready. The same cost price in any quantity. 

page 98 

KEY TO THE BEREAN LESSONS. 



The friends everywhere are growing in their appreciation 
of these studies. Rightly conducted they are entertaining as 
well as profitable. We remind all once more of the meaning 
of the abbreviations used: Z'05 refers to the WATCH TOWER of 
1905, mentioning page, column and paragraph (par.). The first 
six letters of the alphabet refer to the six volumes of Dawn or 
Studies; T for Tabernacle Shadows; H for the hell booklet; 
S for Spiritism pamphlet. 



R3749 : page 99 

"THE PASSOVER MUST BE KILLED." 

-LUKE 22:7- 

THE TERM PASSOVER amongst the Jews was 
frequently applied as the name of a festival 
week, otherwise called the Feast of Passover, beginning 
on the fifteenth day of Nisan. But we must not 
confound this with the frequent references to the Passover 
found in the Scriptures when the word feast is not 
used, which generally referred to the lamb that was 
killed, the Passover. For instance, we read, "Then 



came the day of unleavened bread, when the Passover 
must be killed." Again, our Lord sent disciples to inquire 
of a friend, "Where is the guest-chamber, where 
I may eat the Passover with my disciples?" Again we 
read, "And they made ready the Passover." When our 
Lord sat down with the disciples to eat of the lamb he 
said, "With desire I desired to eat this Passover with 
you before I suffer. For I say unto you I will no more 
eat thereof until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God." 
-Luke 22:7,11,13,15,16. 

While the Jews still apparently think more of the 
Passover week than of the Passover lamb, we, on the 
contrary, and in harmony with the example of our Lord 
and the apostles, have special respect for the lamb, 
which typified the "Lamb of God which taketh away 
the sin of the world," and under whose blood of sprinkling 
we who now believe— namely, the "Church of the 
First-Born"— are passed over or spared in advance of 
the world. 

God's arrangements for the Jews were typical and 
full of valuable lessons for us who belong to antitypical 
or Spiritual Israel. In the type the Lord provided for 
two great religious occasions amongst his people, the 
one at the beginning of the secular year and the other 
at the beginning of the religious year. The religious 
year began in the spring, counting from the first new 
moon after the vernal equinox, approximately April 1st, 
but varying because of the difference between lunar 
and solar time. It was in connection with this, the beginning 
of their religious year, that the Lord appointed 
the Passover— the killing and eating of the Passover 
lamb on the 14th day, to be followed by a Passover 
week of unleavened bread. The civil year with the Jews 
began six months later, in the seventh month, approximately 
October 1 ; and it was in connection with this 
civil year that the Atonement Day sacrifices were appointed, 
in connection with the Feast of Tabernacles 
or Booths, in which the Israelites called to mind their 
wilderness journey on leaving Egypt en route for 
Canaan. 

These two great religious celebrations pictured the 
same lesson from different standpoints: the first emphasized 
more particularly the passing over of the 
first-born, who subsequently were represented in the 
tribe of Levi, at whose head stood the priesthood. Although 
the type seems to carry forward and to picture 
the deliverance of all Israel through this priestly tribe, 
to which Moses belonged, yet specifically, particularly, 
in detail, it dealt merely with the deliverance, the blessing, 
of the priestly tribe, the first-born. The other type, 
in the seventh month, more particularly pictures the 
atonement for the sins of the whole world, the forgiveness 
and reconciliation of all mankind who desire to be 
reconciled to God: nevertheless, in connection with this 
Atonement Day sacrifice, the special favor of God to 
the Church is also represented as preceding the blessing 



coming upon the world, reconciliation for the 
Church's sins being represented in the first sacrifice 
of the Day of Atonement, while the sacrifice for the 
sins of the world in general was represented in the second 
offering. 

"CHRIST OUR PASSOVER" 

There is a force and meaning in the Apostle's expression, 
"Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us," 
which is not generally appreciated. (I Cor. 5:7.) Our 
Lord is not the world's Passover, but the Church's 
Passover. All Israel prefigured or represented the 
world of mankind, and the bondage of the whole people 
represented all mankind under the bondage of sin and 
death, the great taskmaster in the type being Pharaoh, 

R3749 : page 100 

in the antitype being Satan. Deliverance is desired for 
all, and the Lord's arrangement is ultimately to deliver 
all. The Apostle so explains when he writes, "The 
creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage 
of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of 
God." 

But the Apostle divides the groaning ones into two 
classes, saying, "The whole creation groaneth and 
travaileth in pain together until now"— "waiting for the 
manifestation of the sons of God." (Rom. 8:19,21,22.) 
His reference here is to the world of mankind whose 
deliverance from the bondage of Satan and the power 
of sin and death will only come through the manifestation 
of the glorified Church, the Christ in glory and 
power, as God's Kingdom ruling the world. The 
Apostle also mentions the Church of the First-Born in 
her present condition, saying, "But ourselves also, who 
have the first-fruits of the Spirit, do groan within ourselves, 
waiting for the adoption, to wit, the deliverance 
of our body." Both classes have an experience of 
groaning, both classes have an experience of waiting, 
but they wait for different things. The latter, the 
Church of the First-Born, waits for her deliverance as 
the body of Christ through a share in the First Resurrection. 
According to the divine promise, the former, 
the world, waits until the Church class shall have been 
perfected, glorified, empowered, and shine forth as the 
sun in the Kingdom of their Father for the blessing of 
all the families of the earth, for the uplifting of all who 
desire divine favor on divine terms. 

Look now at the type: notice that it is not all Israel 
that is in danger from the destroying angel, but only 
the first-born. Only the first-born of the Egyptians 
were slain. Hence it was only the first-born of the 
Israelites that were spared or passed over. These first-born 
ones, protected by the blood of the lamb, the 
Lord declared to be specially his; and, with a view to 



marking them out and keeping them as a special, peculiar 
people, an exchange was made whereby the first-born 
of all the tribes were exchanged by the Lord for 
the one tribe of Levi, which he accepted as specially 
his and which in the type represents the household of 
faith. Out of this household of faith, in turn, a priestly 
family was selected, which typified Christ our High 
Priest and the Church his body, the under priesthood, 
the Royal Priesthood. So, then, those who perceive the 
matter clearly see that the Passover has to do only with 
the household of faith. It is in full accord with this 
that the Lord's Supper, which antitypes the eating of 
the lamb, is not offered to the world, but is strictly and 
exclusively an institution for the household of faith. 

"LET US KEEP THE FEAST" 

Seeing in the type the slain lamb, its blood sprinkled 
upon the posts and lintels of the home and its flesh 
eaten with bitter herbs, we apply this in the antitype 
and see Christ the antitypical Lamb, see that his blood 
sprinkled upon our hearts cleanses them from a consciousness 
of evil and gives us an assurance of our 
being PASSED OVER, of our being spared, of our being 
granted life through his blood. This sprinkling represents 
our justification by faith; and the subsequent eating 
of the lamb with bitter herbs is represented in the 
antitype by our consecration, our partaking of Christ, 
our participation with him in his sufferings and self-denials 
—also represented by the bitter herbs, which 

R3750 : page 100 

give zest to our appetite and encourage us to partake 
more and more abundantly of the Lamb. All who believe 
the testimony, all who trust in the precious blood, 
are passed over, and, more than this, are expecting a 
general deliverance of the whole people, of all who love 
God, who desire to do him reverence and service. So 
many as thus believe realize themselves pilgrims and 
strangers under present conditions, looking for a better 
country, even the heavenly Canaan. All this was represented 
in typical Israel, for while eating the lamb on 
that night of Passover they stood staff in hand, girded 
for a journey. Likewise the Lord's faithful today 
should realize themselves pilgrims and strangers, having 
no continuing city, but setting their affections on 
things above. 

THE LORD'S SUPPER 

All Christian people to some extent discern what 
we have above stated to be the basis or foundation for 
the commemoration of our Lord's death, usually designated 
the Lord's Supper, the Communion, the Eucharist, 
and by WATCH TOWER readers usually known as the 



Memorial. The difficulty seems to be that the majority 

of Christian people are not sufficiently critical and persistent 

in their study of the Word, and that for this 

reason their faith and hope— not only upon this subject 

but upon all religious subjects— are more or less confused, 

indefinite. To us the ministry appear to be considerably 

to blame in that they have not sufficiently 

taught the Word of the Lord but too frequently the traditions 

of men, indeed preaching chiefly to the world 

and comparatively little to the Church of the First 

Born— the passed-over ones, passed from death unto 

life, adopted into God's family as sons. 

This indistinctness of view respecting our Lord's 
sacrifice as our Passover Lamb slain for us is well represented 
by the confusion of thought respecting the appropriate 
times for commemorating our Lord's death. 
As we look throughout Christendom we find Protestants 
generally observing the celebration, observing the 
Memorial, not upon its anniversary but as irrespective 
of it, as though they had no knowledge of the relationship 
between the typical Passover and the antitypical 
one which our Lord enjoined upon us to celebrate. 
Some, therefore, have Communion every four months, 
some every three months, some monthly, some weekly, 
all except the latter considering it a matter of convenience 
and expediency, and not observing this special 
and appropriate annual observance. Our brethren of 
the Christian denomination, otherwise styled Disciples, 
hold tenaciously to a weekly observance, because they 
read in the book of Acts of weekly meetings of the 
Lord's people in commemoration of his resurrection, 
at which they had "breaking of bread." Not seeing the 

R3750 :page 101 

principles involved they have too hastily concluded that 
a communion service would be the only proper breaking 
of bread amongst the Lord's people. 

On the contrary, we see that as the early Church 
remembered that our Lord after his resurrection made 
himself known on several occasions in connection with 
breaking of bread— as at Emmaus and again in the 
upper room— they were glad to meet together on the 
first day of the week as a fresh reminder of the joys of 
that resurrection day which meant so much to them and 
to us all. There is no suggestion anywhere that these 
were anything more than ordinary meals or love-feasts, 
such as we often have at the conclusion of a general 
convention. There is no intimation that in so doing the 
early Church thought they were keeping the Passover 
the first day of the week, because Christ our Passover 
was slain and because we have been passed over by the 
mercy of God through faith in his blood of sprinkling. 
There is no intimation that they considered this the 
Lord's Supper— there is no suggestion anywhere of the 
cup, which was an equally important feature with 



the bread in the Lord's Memorial Supper. 
ONE ERROR LED TO ANOTHER 

The beginning of this carelessness respecting the 
annual celebration of our Lord's Memorial is easily 
traced. The early Church observed the matter annually, 
and this annual celebration is still preserved in the 
older Christian churches, Roman Catholic, Greek Catholic, 
Episcopal, etc., all of which celebrate Good Friday, 
as the memorial of this slaying of Christ our Passover. 
But to them the whole matter has lost much of 
its vital importance. The sacrifice of the mass— a 
gross error introduced somewhere about the third century 
—has drawn to itself the special interest which still 
should center in the annual Memorial and the great 
sacrifice which it commemorates. In the sacrifice of 
the mass it is held that the priest officiating, by the 
pronouncing of three sacred Latin words, works a miracle 
upon the bread and wine, by which they are transformed 
and become actually the flesh and blood of 
Jesus. Thus the officiating priest claims to make a 
fresh sacrifice of Christ, and as a priest to offer a fresh 
atonement for the particular individual sins represented 
in the mass, sinners for whom the mass is performed. 
Thus the hearts of mankind have been turned 
away from the one atonement sacrifice for sins, by 
which all believers were passed over once and forever, 
and have their gaze attracted to the priest and the mass 
and the blessings and the holy water, etc., etc. No 
wonder the Lord in his Word refers to this as the "Desolating 
Abomination" set up in his Church, his Temple. 
-Dan. 11:31. MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. Ill, Chaps. Ill, IV. 

As the Protestants received their earliest conceptions 
of religious matters from Roman Catholicism, 
with which they were originally identified, it is not 
surprising that many of the errors of that system clung 
to them, and blinded the eyes of their understanding 
as respects the deep import of many of the spiritual 
teachings of God's Word. And this is true of the subject 
we are now discussing as well as of others. What 
we all should desire would be to have our minds freed 
from the errors of the "dark ages," that we might see 
clearly the teaching of our Lord and the apostles, 
Moses and the prophets, the inspired instructors of the 
Church. 

WHEN THE HOUR WAS COME 

The entire Scriptural narrative pertaining to the 
Passover and pertaining to the Lord's Supper, which 
was instituted as a substitute for it, by which his disciples 
might commemorate him as the antitype, all indicate 
particularity of time— that it must be celebrated, 
in the evening, not in the morning, not at noon nor in 
the afternoon, the common custom of various denominations 



of Christians. Our Lord and his disciples did 
not sit down to the Passover until even— the beginning 
of the fourteenth day of Nisan. And so all who recognize 
themselves as members of the household of faith, 
as members of the Church of the First-born, should be 
careful in following the Master's guidance in this matter 
as well as in others. There is a blessing and meaning 
in it. It was the same night in which he celebrated, 
the one in which he was betrayed, that he took bread 
and brake and gave unto his disciples. We are still in 
that night, and the eating of that bread and the drinking 
of that cup are still in progress amongst the Lord's 
disciples. 

Our Lord, of course, was equally particular respecting 
the fourteenth day of the month as the proper time 
for the celebration— that all Israel might celebrate appropriately 
on the same day. But as for the proper beginning 
of the dating there was evidently less particularity. 
The Jewish method of reckoning, based upon 
the phases of the moon, was necessarily different from 
ours, and it was therefore very much less easy to determine 
an exact beginning for their month. Especially 
was this the case when the spring equinox had a bearing 
upon the matter, and when, as was the case with 
the Jews, another type demands that the Passover 
should come at the time of the harvest. All who have 
knowledge on the subject will admit that it would be 
practically impossible to fix dates for the beginning of 
the Jewish year by lunar time, in harmony with the 
harvest season, without there being room for dispute 
and difference of opinion. From our Lord's standpoint 
all that was settled for the people by the decision of 
the Scribes, whose business it was to fix a date as the 
beginning of the new year, and the fourteenth day of 
that year became the established date for the Memorial. 
In other words, whether the Scribes fixed a date earlier 
or a date later would not have particularly mattered; 
the object was to have a uniform date and to recognize 
the fourteenth day of the first month at even. 

So the matter remains today. We do not understand 
that any stress or hair-splitting is necessary in 
the ascertainment of the particular counting of the first 
day of the first month, Jewish time, but that there is 
appropriateness associated with a general commemoration 
upon the same day after sundown, a concensus of 
judgment as to which day shall be observed as the 
fourteenth of Nisan being all that is necessary and proper. 

R3750 : page 102 

In our issue of January 15 we have pointed out 
that this is one of the years in which the definite fixing 
of the first day of Nisan, the first day of the new moon 
after the spring equinox, seems to be difficult. We attach 
no importance to this, however, and have recommended 
the keeping of the Memorial on Sunday night, 



April 8. This is in harmony with the Jewish observance, 
and tallies with the fact that the full of the moon 
occurs on April 9, corresponding to Nisan 15. The 
important features to be remembered are: (1) that it 
be in the spring of the year, approximately at the Passover 
season; (2) that the date be uniformly observed; 
(3) that it be observed in the evening, to correspond 
with the original institution in Egypt and with our 
Lord's subsequent Memorial institution. 

R3751 :page 102 

ASSEMBLE 7.30 P.M., APRIL 8 

In harmony with the foregoing the congregation at 
Allegheny, Pa., hopes to meet at the time indicated (see 
last page) to commemorate the death of Christ, our Passover 
slain for us. We hope to hear later on that little 
companies all over the world celebrated at the same time. 
We meet not as Jews to remember the deliverance from 
Pharaoh and Egyptian bondage, but as antitypical Israelites 
seeking to escape the power of Satan and the 
dominion of sin. We meet not to eat literal lamb and 
bitter herbs and to commemorate the passing over in 
Egypt, but as Spiritual Israelites to recognize and commemorate 
the death of the Lamb of God as our Passover 
—to feast upon him, upon the truths which he 
gave us— to appropriate to ourselves the life rights 
which he gave up on our behalf. 

More than this, as explained by our Lord, we not 
only will use the unleavened bread to represent the 
purity of his flesh broken for us, and the fruit of the 
vine to represent his blood shed for us, but also in the 
light of the Apostle's explanation we perceive that it is 
a part of our privilege to be broken with Christ as a 
part of the same larger loaf, and to have fellowship in 
his cup of suffering and death as a part of the larger 
cup. From this double standpoint we view our relationship 
to the Lord, first as those whom he passes 
over, and secondly as those who join with him in the 
sacrifice, that we may have share also with him by and 
by in the great work of leading forth from bondage to 
sin and Satan all who will accept of the divine favor 
and liberty as the sons of God! How wonderfully 
grand is the privilege thus accorded us! No wonder 
the Apostle said,— 

"LET US KEEP THE FEAST" 

Our feasting upon this bread which came down 
from heaven and which was broken for us is not merely 
for the special occasion of our assembling annually. 
Rather that annual assembling which our Lord enjoins 
represents our experiences throughout the entire night 
of his absence, until he shall establish his Kingdom in 
the morning. It is for us to keep the feast, not merely 



in this special and commemorative manner once a year, 

but day by day, hour by hour, to feed upon the Lamb 

of God, to by faith realize and appropriate to ourselves 

his virtues and merits, and to grow in grace and knowledge 

and love and all the fruits and graces of the Spirit. 

Indeed, we remember the Master's words to be in the 

nature of a command, "As often as ye do this, do it in 

remembrance of me." There is no doubt in our minds 

now as to what we do in this annual celebration of our 

Lord's death— we are keeping the feast because we 

have come to realize that Christ was slain for us as our 

Passover Lamb. Evidently no other time would be so 

appropriate as the anniversary. Whether that be reckoned 

by sun time or moon time, according to the days 

of the week or according to the days of the month, it is 

unquestionably an annual celebration; and as oft as 

we do it, every year as we do it, every year as the anniversary 

occurs, we do it not in remembrance of the 

type, but in remembrance of the grand antitype, Jesus, 

our Redeemer. 

We trust that the coming celebration will be one 
very full of interest and profit to all. We urge that 
none overlook the privilege, and assure all who participate 
with honest intention of heart, as recognizing the 
Lord and the cleansing power of his sacrifice and the 
consecration which we have made to him, that a special 
blessing will surely result from the keeping of this 
feast, from the memorializing of the great central fact 
upon which the entire plan of God for this age and for 
the next is built. 

We urge that the dear friends remember that this 
Memorial may best be celebrated in little groups, and 
not by having various companies of the Lord's people 
assemble together as in a convention. The Lord and 
his twelve apostles met alone, and this was after the 
pattern of the Jewish custom, each family alone. So 
each little group of the Lord's people is a family, a 
brotherhood. If unleavened bread cannot be procured, 
soda biscuits are easily obtainable, and they are unleavened 
bread— that is, bread made without yeast. If 
grape juice be not obtainable raisins may be stewed, 
and thus fruit of the vine may be obtained: or, if any 
consider it preferable, wine may be used. Just what 
our Lord used is not possible for us to determine: for 
our own part we prefer the unfermented fruit of the 
vine, lest the taste of fermented liquor should arouse a 
dormant appetite for strong drink and thus prove a 
snare to some who might partake. As we meet we 
trust that each little company in prayer will remember 
all others of the Lord's dear people everywhere, asking 
the Lord for more and more of his Spirit in all of our 
hearts, which will enable us all the more acceptably 
and the more completely to partake of his cup of suffering, 
of sacrifice, of death, and to be broken with him 
as members of the one life, the one Church, which is 
his body. 



For the convenience of those desiring to symbolize 
their consecration to the Lord by baptism, such a service 
will be held in Bible House Chapel, Allegheny, on 
Sunday, April 8th, at 10 o'clock a.m. No doubt arrangements 
for baptism will be made by all the little 
congregations of the Lord's people everywhere, and 
those desiring the service as preceding their joining in 
the Memorial service of the evening here should communicate 
their desires, if possible, in advance. 



page 103 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY FOR APRIL. 

--FOR EXPLANATION SEE PREFACE OF WATCH TOWER 
BIBLES AND WATCH TOWER, MARCH 1, 1905.- 

STUDIES IN PRAYER 

3 1 . What is the relation between fasting and prayer? 
Z/96-194 (2nd col.) and 195; Z/05-334 (1st col. 

par. 4, to 2nd col. par. 3). 

32. What is the value of secret prayer? F.686, par. 3. 

33. What are the special advantages of family prayer? 
F.687, par. 1. 

34. What is the value of prayer in the Church? F.687, 
par. 2. 

35. Are promiscuous public prayers authorized? 
Z/96-196. 

36. What is the necessity for prayer in opening and 
closing meetings for the study of the Word of 
God? F.688, par. 1. 

37. What are some good suggestions respecting prayer 
and testimony meetings? F.314, par. 5; F.319, 

par. 1, to 322. 

38. Is it proper to pray for baptisms of the Holy Spirit? 
E.229, par. 1, to 235; F.445, par. 1. 

39. May the consecrated pray for physical healing? 
Z.'0 1-212 (1st and 2nd cols.); F.636, par. 1, and 637, 
par. 1; F.644, par. 1, to 654; Z/96-164 (1st col. 

par. 3) to 165 (1st col. par. 1); Z/05-202 (1st col. 
par. 4, to 2nd col. par. 3); Z/05-351 (1st col. 

40. What is our privilege with respect to the healing of 
soul-sickness? Psa. 103:2-5; F.145 to 149, par. 2. 

41. How should we regard modern faith-healing, miracles, 
etc.? F.638, par. 2, to 641, par. 1. 

42. How do we explain Jas. 5:14-16? Z/96-167 (1st 
col. par. 6, and 2nd col. par. 1); F.637, par. 2, and 
638, par. 1. 

43. What lessons should we learn from our Lord's example 
in prayer? Z. '00-184 (2nd col. par. 2) and 

185 (1st col. par. 1); Z/05-136 (1st col. par. 2). 

44. What was the nature of our Lord's petition in John 17:15-26? 
Z/05-136 (2nd col.) to 140. 



45. What is the import of "the model prayer" our Lord 
taught his disciples? Matt. 6:9-13; Z. '96-161, 

162; Z.'04-l 18 (1st col. par. 2) to 121 (2nd col. 
par. l);Z.'98-29 to 31. 

46. What should be the special nature of our petitions? 
Z/04-24 (1st col. par. 2, 3); F.685, par. 1, to 686, 

par. 1;E.242, 243. 

47. Why must we watch as well as pray? Mark 14:38; 
Z/00-268 (1st col. par. 2, 3); Z/03-118, 1 19; 
Z/01-80 (1st and 2nd cols.). 

48. What is meant by "the spirit of prayer"? Z. '01-80 
(2nd col., next to last sentence). 

49. How do we understand that "the spirit maketh intercession 
for us," etc.,— Rom. 8:26,27? 

E.311-315. 

50. What has been suggested as a probable and special 
occasion for prayer in the Millennial Age? 

D.640, par. 2, and 641; F.701, par. 2. 



"IN DUE TIME." 

In thy due time, our heavenly Father, shall be known 

Thy gracious plan, which now is hid 

Except unto thy saints alone. 
O glorious day, when thine All-wisdom, justice, power and 
love, 

The whole creation shall approve! 

In his due time, O blessed Jesus, thou shalt see 

The travail of thy soul, and shalt 

Be satisfied eternally; 
Thine agony on Calvary, the price that thou didst give, 

Shall cause the dead again to live! 

In God's due time, O pilgrim on the "narrow way," 

Thy painful journey ended, darkest 

Night shall turn to brightest day; 
Thine every trial, then, thine every tear, shall prove a gem 

To beautify thy diadem! 

In his due time, O weary, groaning, sin-cursed Earth, 

The Lord will wipe away your tears, 

And bring the promised "second birth," 
And there shall be no pain, nor any death in that blest day 

When sin and sorrow pass away! 

In his due time angelic choirs shall sing again 

In grander strain that heavenly message, 

"Peace on earth, good will toward men!" 
And every knee shall bow, and every loving heart confess 

The Christ who comes to reign and bless! 
-G. W. SEIBERT. 



R3751 :page 103 

"TAKE HEED LEST YE BE DEVOURED." 

"Brethren, ye have been called unto liberty, only use not liberty for 
an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. For the whole 
law is fulfilled in one word, even this, Thou shalt love thy 
neighbor as thyself. But if ye bite and devour one another, 
take heed that ye be not consumed one of another."— Gal. 5:13-15. 

WHERE the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty. 
This is illustrated in the world's history most 
remarkably. It was because the Jews had the 
instruction of the Law and more or less of its spirit that 
for centuries they were known as an unconquerable 
people. That is to say, they were conquered time and 
again, but were so dominated by the spirit of liberty 
that they made trouble for their conquerors and larger 
neighbors continually. 

Similarly, though to a larger extent, the same has 
been true of Christianity: wherever the Word of God 
has gone the effect has been stimulation of the love of 
liberty in the same proportion. When during the "dark 
ages" the Word of God was "clothed in sackcloth," 
and false teachings of men took its place, the spirit of 
liberty slumbered and the world had a measure of 
peace and a general serfdom of the people. With the 
Reformation movement came the love of liberty afresh. 
The latest illustration along these lines is to be seen 
in Russia. 

We do not mean to say that Christ and his apostles 
taught war, and discontent and strife,— neither did 
Moses and the Law. Quite to the contrary; love, 
peace, brotherly kindness, gentleness, patience, meekness, 

R3751 :page 104 

—these were the teachings of our Lord and his 
servants. The influences which proceeded from the 
Word were of two kinds: Some, with the enlightenment 
and liberty, received also the divine instruction 
and sought to cultivate the fruits of the Spirit; others 
receiving the spirit of liberty through the knowledge 
received not the spirit of the truth, but engrafted the 
knowledge upon the selfish stalk of the fallen nature 
and were more discontented because of their increased 
intelligence. 

EFFECT OF TRUTH ON THE CHURCH 

There is a Church nominal which is really part 
and parcel with the world, glossed with a little knowledge 
of the divine Word and plan and with some small 
endeavor to heed divine instruction; but the real Church 
includes only those who have turned from sin and accepted 



Christ with a full consecration of thought, word 
and deed. What effect has the truth upon these? We 
answer that even these "new creatures" find that the 
knowledge they receive and the spirit of liberty which 
comes to them through that knowledge have one effect 
upon their flesh and another effect upon their wills, 
their hearts. With their hearts they desire to serve 
the law of God, to live peaceably with all, to cultivate 
all the fruits and graces of the Spirit of Christ and to 
deal gently, lovingly, not only with the fellow-members 
of the body of Christ, the Church, but also to deal 
gently with the world. But they have, some more and 
some less, difficulty in contending with their own flesh 
and permitting the new mind to dominate it in word 
and in deed. 

What Christian does not know from more or less 
experience the meaning of the words of our text, "If 
ye bite and devour one another"? If the hearts of 
God's people, their wills, their intentions, could be appealed 
to, separate and distinct from the weakness and 
bias of their flesh, there would be no doubt at all that 
every one of them would agree perfectly in his desire 
to live peaceably with his brethren and to glorify God 
by his meek and quiet disposition, his gentleness, 
brotherly kindness. But we cannot have it thus, for 
the new will is in the old body that is sadly warped 
and twisted by selfishness, and it must "fight a good 
fight" against the flesh, and must conquer at least to 
the extent of loving, striving for the right, the gentle, 

R3752 : page 104 

the good, however imperfectly it may attain to it. 

The truth seems to take hold on the stronger 
characters rather than on the weaker ones. These have 
in their flesh more of the firmness, grittiness and the 
combativeness than have many others who are too 
pliable and wishy-washy to be acceptable to the Lord 
as members of the "little flock" of overcomers. Thus 
we see that the very quality which makes us acceptable 
to the Lord and which is one qualification of the 
overcoming position is a serious disadvantage in some 
respects, when a number of these of like strong character 
come together as a Church. Even a diamond surrounded 
by mud would cut nothing, would scratch nothing; but 
place a dozen diamonds together, and the more you 
get rid of the mud element the more gritting, scouring 
and cutting there is likely to be. So it is with the 
Lord's jewels— the more they come together the more 
they get wakened up, the more opportunities there 
will be for friction, and the greater necessity there will 
be that they all be thoroughly imbedded and covered 
with the holy Spirit, which, like oil, is smooth and unctuous 
and tends to prevent friction. 

TRIALS TEND TO INCREASE 



On the one hand we may see that as the Lord's 
people grow in grace and in knowledge and in the fruits 
and graces of the Spirit, there should be less danger of 
friction in the Church; but on the other hand let us 
remember that polished diamonds do more scratching 
than rough ones. Let us remember, too, that in our 
earliest experiences in the Truth we were somewhat 
like babes— we knew not enough to quarrel and dispute 
with each other respecting the lessons we were learning. 
As each grows, therefore, in knowledge and appreciation 
of the Truth he must likewise grow in the spirit of 
the Truth, or else his growth in knowledge will mean 
that he will be that much more of a trial to his dear 
brethren than when he was a babe in knowledge. 

From this standpoint it should not surprise us if 
in the light of our day on every subject, especially on 
the Word, there would be more room for friction year 
by year, and the greater need for our remembrance of 
our 1906 text, "Be patient, brethren." The context 
shows us that these words were intended to be especially 
applicable in the end of the age. The time of trouble 
is accurately described— the conflict between the rich 
and the poor, which is coming about on the lines of increased 
knowledge in connection with the selfishness of 
the fallen nature. Then comes the exhortation, "Grudge 
not one against another, brethren; the Judge standeth 
at the door," "Be patient, brethren, the coming of the 
Lord draweth nigh." 

The lesson here is in full accord with the text we 
are discussing. We need patience; we need to remember 
that it is not in order for us to nurse grudges or 
hard feelings of any kind, especially against those who 
like ourselves are striving to walk in the narrow way 
and to attain joint-heirship with our Lord in the Kingdom. 
Rather we should be willing to sacrifice something 
of our own rights and liberties and privileges in 
the interest of others. This does not signify that we 
should sit quietly and hear the truth misrepresented 
when we have the right and the opportunity to defend 
it. We should contend earnestly for the truth against 
the error, but we should not contend against the brethren. 
If there be any who deny the foundations of our 
Christian faith, the ransom, the Lord through the 
apostles has left us no room to doubt how firmly we 
should take a stand in respect to any kind of fellowship 
with them. (I Cor. 5:11.) But there are a thousand 
and one occasions of friction amongst the brethren 
where no principle of truth is at stake; and these we 
are to be willing and glad to waive in the interest of 
harmony and peace and fellowship. This, however, 
need not mean that we should not present our understanding 
of the truth on proper occasions, but we need 
not insist upon them nor force them upon others if they 
cannot see them as we do. 

In our text the Apostle seems to imply that such 



a condition might arise even amongst the Lord's people 
that some would not only be wounded to the extent 
of being "bitten" by the harshness and slander of 
others, but that the tendency to retaliate more or less 
in kind would arise, and that it would mean a general 

R3752 : page 105 

conflict unworthy of God's children and more nearly 
resembling a fight among dogs. 

"Take heed that ye be not consumed one of another," 
urges the Apostle. What if in our appreciation 
of the liberty that is ours, and of which we know through 
the Gospel, we should reach the point where we would 
be so contentious for our liberties, great and small, that 
we would consume some brother for whom Christ died! 
What if in injuring another the spirit of strife should 
so react upon us as to poison our own spiritual lives 
and we also should be consumed— lost as respects the 
gracious things to which the Lord has invited us and 
for which we have been running in the race! Let the 
Apostle's words ring in our hearts, "Lest ye be consumed 
one of another." 

With this thought before our minds let us more 
and more put on the armor of God to fight against our 
own fleshly weaknesses and to fight for our dear brethren, 
assisting them by example and by precept to war a 
good warfare also against the world, the flesh and the 
adversary. 



R3752 : page 105 

SABBATH OBLIGATIONS AND PRIVILEGES. 

-MATTHEW 12:1-14.~APRIL8.~ 

Golden Text:— "Remember the Sabbath 
day to keep it holy."— Exodus 20:8 

FEW seem to get the proper thought respecting the Sabbath. 
Some consider themselves as Jews under the 
Mosaic Law: others go to an opposite extreme, and, 
declaring that we are not under the Law but under grace, 
repudiate the Sabbath entirely. What we believe to be the 
correct view is the intermediate one between these two extremes, 
as we shall endeavor to set forth. 

God adopted the Jewish nation— all the children of 
Abraham, through Jacob— as his special possession in the 
world. With them he made the Law Covenant through 
Moses at Sinai— to them he sent his messengers, the prophets, 
and, finally, his Son. With them and with no other 
nation it was his agreement that by the keeping of the Law 
they would abide in his favor and have divine blessing upon 
flocks and herds, land and people, instead of sickness, pain, 



drouth and dearth. To no other nation was the Law of 
Sinai given, with no other nation was that Covenant made— 
as it is written, "You only have I known [recognized] of all 
the families of the earth."— Amos 3:2. 

When the Jews rejected Jesus, and when Jesus made an 
end of the Law Covenant on the cross, it did not imply that 
that Law was then extended to the other nations of the 
world as some seem to imagine: quite to the contrary. Nor 
did the Law Covenant extend to the Church— the followers 
of Christ selected from the Jewish nation and other nations— 
for we read, "Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness 
to every one that believeth." (Rom. 10:4.) Whoever sees this 
point clearly has the foundation for correct views respecting 
the Sabbath and every other feature of the Law; those who 
cannot see this will remain in confusion. 

"KINGDOMS OF THIS WORLD" 

Accordingly it is not for us to demand of the nations of 
Europe and America that they shall enforce the Jewish Sabbath 
or any other Sabbath. True, the civilized world 
is called "Christendom"— Christ's Kingdom; but this 
is a misnomer. The kingdoms of earth are still under 
the dominion of the "god of this world" (2 Cor. 4:4); 
they are kingdoms of this world and not kingdoms 
of God. True, God is aware of their existence and 
permits them for a time, but he has never attempted authority 
over them nor made himself responsible for the imperfect 
governments which they represent— they are not his kingdoms. 
When the God of heaven shall set up his Kingdom 
in the hands of the glorified Messiah, Head and body, during 
the Millennial age, its conditions and arrangements will be 
greatly in contrast with those of the kingdoms of this world. 
God, therefore, is not commanding the nations of the world 
to observe the Sabbath day, etc., etc.; whatever they do in 
this line is of their own volition, without command, for they 
are not under the Mosaic Law, and no other law has been 
given them. 

Christian believers, followers of Jesus since he made an 
end of the Law Covenant, nailing it to the cross (Col. 2:14), 
are not under the Law Covenant but, as the Apostle declares, 
"We are not under the Law but under grace." (Rom. 6:14.) 
Our relationship to God is of the same character as that 
which prevailed before Sinai's Law Covenant was effected at 
the hands of Moses over Israel— after the same order as that 
enjoyed by Abraham, Isaac and Jacob— grace under the 
terms of the Abrahamic Covenant: we are the real seed of 
promise. (Gal. 3:29.) Did Abraham, Isaac and Jacob prosper 
without a law? Yes! Much more can Spiritual Israel prosper 
under the same conditions, because we now have much 
advantage everyway through our special relationship by faith 
to the great Redeemer, and to the exceeding great and precious 
promises which centre in him, and which apply to all 
those adopted by him as members of his body— members of 
his Bride class. 



R3753 : page 105 

"WHOM THE SON MAKES FREE" 

Some are inclined to feel alarmed at the very thought 
of being free from a law covenant based upon obedience to 
a law. Such should be comforted with the thought that 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were approved to the Lord without 
the Law. Their faith in God constituted an obligation 
to do the divine will to the extent of their knowledge and 
ability: and the same is true of us, for the Scriptures assure 
us that, as children of God and adopted into his family, 
made partakers of his Spirit, our rule of action must henceforth 
be love, and that to us love is the fulfilling of the law. 
That is to say, if we receive the spirit of adoption into God's 
family it implies that we possess the spirit of love, because 
God is love; and this love for God as it develops signifies 
love for all that are in accord with him, and a love like his 
in respect to all of his creation— a sympathetic love. Such 
a love permits us to be and to do in harmony with the divine 
will to the extent of our ability; and the Lord, who is dealing 

R3753 : page 106 

with us according to our intentions and endeavors, and 
who is covering our unwilling weaknesses and imperfections, 
counts this service of the heart and intention as a perfect 
keeping of the divine law. Thus the Apostle says: "The 
righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us who walk not 
after the flesh but after the Spirit." (Rom. 8:4.) However 
short we may come of the full spirit of the divine law, we 
are counted as fulfillers of it so long as our daily walk is 
in that direction to the extent of our ability. 

From this standpoint we see that God is no longer 
dealing with Israel, nor has he adopted the other nations as 
his. Rather he is forming a new nation, gathering its citizens 
out of every nation, kindred, people and tongue. This 
new nation is the Church, of whom the Apostle says, "Ye 
are a Royal Priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people." 
(1 Pet. 2:9.) Presently this nation will be completed, and 
be ushered into glory, honor and immortality, to rule and 
bless and uplift all the families of the earth. God's dealings, 
instructions, tests, etc., are upon this new nation— yea, as 
we have seen, he has placed no law upon us except the law 
of love— for God and for our neighbor. Before our adoption 
into this holy nation we accepted its law of love, and recognized 
selfishness as part of the works of darkness; and in 
the school of Christ we have been learning more and more 
the full meaning of the word love in its application to God 
and to our fellowmen. These lessons still continue, but 
must reach a certain completion or fruition before we can 
be accounted worthy of transference to the heavenly and 
eternal state as members of this Kingdom. 

OUR RELATIONSHIP TO THE LORD 



Have we then no relationship to the Law given to 
natural Israel, as expressed in the ten commandments, etc.? 
No, we are free from the Law— thank God! Nevertheless, 
we may derive a great blessing through an examination of 
that Law from which we are free, because we recognize that 
it was just and holy and good— that it was not set aside 
because the Law was imperfect, but because man was imperfect 
and unable to keep that Law and to gain life thereunder. 
Looking, then, at that perfect Law, we should seek 
to get, not merely its outward form and letter, but especially 
its inner meaning, its spirit, to determine just what it did 
signify. Then, having ascertained its significance, we as New 
Creatures— while not depending upon it for our life, but 
recognizing that the precious blood of the Lamb of God has 
compensated for all of our unwilling weaknesses and deficiencies 
and imperfections— we should strive, nevertheless, 
to conform our lives to all the blessed thoughts we can 
gather respecting the spirit of the Law. 

We should do this, not thereby to merit salvation, but 
that having obtained the salvation, the forgiveness of sins, 
and having gone further and been begotten of the holy 
Spirit to a new life, a new nature, we no longer seek to justify 
ourselves by the Law, because justified by the blood of 
Christ. We now seek as New Creatures to please our 
heavenly Father, and rejoice to find anything in the Law 
given to natural Israel that would furnish us clearer conceptions 
of the divine will, that for love to God we might do 
with our might everything in our power. 

Accordingly, as we look at the Decalogue we say, "Yes, 
those laws are perfect," and the more closely we examine 
them the more do we grasp the depth of their signification. 
As, for instance, in the first and second of these commandments 
we see prohibited not merely the making of 
images and the worshipping of the same, but equally prohibited 
the having of any object of worship aside from God 
—wife or children or mammon or self, etc. Applying this to 
the fourth commandment respecting the Sabbath, Spiritual 
Israelites will realize that they are not under bondage to a 
day, but will nevertheless desire to know what was the Spirit 
or intent or object of this command, and to be in harmony, 
in accord, with all its spirit. The Israelites, as today's lesson 
shows, got merely the outward form of these three commandments, 
but wholly missed its real purport; and similarly, 
many Christians today merely take the Jewish view of the 
command and entirely overlook its real import. 

"WE WHO BELIEVE DO ENTER INTO REST"-A SABBATH 

The Apostle refers to the real meaning of this Sabbath 
rest of faith into which we Spiritual Israelites enter so soon 
as we accept the Lord Jesus as our Redeemer, the expiator of 
our guilt— our Life-Giver. As soon as we begin to believe 
we begin to enter into this rest, and thenceforth, if we are 
faithful to the Lord and abide in his love, our Sabbath 
never ends— "We which believe do enter into rest."— 
Heb. 4:3. 



Our lesson of faith should continue throughout all the 
days of the week, and thus Spiritual Israel keeps Sabbath 
every day— resting in the finished work of Christ, resting 
from our own works, from all endeavor to justify ourselves 
through the Law. Was not our Lord's ministry a perpetual 
Sabbath? and may not all of the Lord's people today so rest 
in the Lord by faith, and so continually seek to work the 
works of him that hath sent us as his ambassadors to the 
world, that every day with us should be a Sabbath day? 
Thus all the labor of life is sanctified to us. Whether we 
eat or drink, scrub or dig, write or talk, sleep or wake, we 
are to do all to the glory of God— to do all as unto him, and 
in all of our doings to maintain the Sabbath rest in our 
hearts— rest in divine love and care, which applies to us 
through our relationship to Christ Jesus our Lord. 

PROPRIETY OF SUNDAY OBSERVANCE 

The question comes, then, Should the Lord's people who 
see the true rest and who are enjoying it— should they 
observe the Sabbaths or Sundays appointed by the civil 
laws of Christendom? We answer, Yes! for three reasons: 

(1) It is the divine command that we should obey all 
the ordinances of human law that do not conflict with our 
conscience as Christians; and clearly nothing in the human 
law on this subject could violate our conscience. 

(2) Surely if others can afford to rest from their labor 
one day in seven the Lord's people can afford to do so as 
well, and indeed to better advantage than the world, because 
through our better knowledge of God and his Word we 

can make wiser and better use of the time thus taken from 
worldly affairs. 

(3) Spiritual Israelites are greatly advantaged by the 

fact that the world, nominal Christendom, has made a mistake 
in the matter, and is under the impression that the Jewish 
law obligates the keeping of one day in seven as a religious 

R3753 : page 107 

rest day. Thus all things work together for good to 
them that love God— even the world's mistakes and 
ignorance. 

Not only should Spiritual Israelites rejoice to have the 
privilege of one day in seven for a special rest from physical 
labor and for special engagement in spiritual works, pleasures 
and refreshments, but additionally they should realize 
that the world is watching them, and that their influence for 
good would be greatly interfered with by their violation of 
this civil law, which the world supposes to be backed by 
divine command. Our advice, therefore, to all true Spiritual 
Israelites is that they be as strict or more strict in their 
observance of Sunday as a Sabbath of rest than are their 
neighbors— that all works except those of necessity or mercy 
be avoided, that this precious day be considered a boon from 
the Lord, a great privilege and opportunity for growth in 
grace and knowledge and love. Let our homes be the most 



quiet of all in civilized lands on the appointed day of rest, 
let no sounds of labor or of worldly pleasure be heard in our 
habitations, but let our joys of hope and love and faith 
abound, and let our happy hearts manifest themselves in 
cheerful words and tones and looks, that thus our moderation 
as well as our joy in the Lord may be manifest to all 
with whom we have to do, that they may take knowledge of 
us that we have been with Jesus and learned of him. 
(Acts 4:13.) To those of our neighbors and friends with 
whom we are very intimate we might explain that from our 
standpoint every day is a Sabbath day of rest in faith— 
that though upon some days it is necessary we should labor 
also for the meat that perisheth, our hearts are resting still 
in the great Lord of the Sabbath and his finished work. 

This would not signify that we of today should attempt 
an observance of the outward forms of the Jewish Law, according 
to all that is proper and required of the Jew. For 
instance, no doubt it would be a violation of the fourth 
commandment to operate a street-car line; and if the 
Jewish Law were in force upon us it would be absolutely 
wrong and sinful for any of us to ride in a street-car, 
much less to operate the same. But since we are not under 
the Law but under grace, and since Sunday riding is 
not prohibited by the civil law nor regarded as evil by our 

R3754 : page 107 

fellows, there is no reason why in this and in similar matters 
we may not enjoy reasonably and with profit the conveniences 
of transportation on the Sabbath. 

THE PHARISAICAL SABBATH 

Our lesson applies to a time when the Jewish Law was 
still in force, and shows us that even then the right, the 
true, the proper interpretation of the fourth commandment 
was much more in accord with our observation of it than 
with the extreme observances accorded today by the Jewish 
teachers. The difference between then and now would be 
that the Jews under the Law were forbidden to do work of 
an earthly kind on the Sabbath, while we are not forbidden, 
except as earthly laws may limit without a commandment, 
and that we may delight to abstain from temporal labors 
that we may the more fully enjoy our spiritual privileges. 

Our lesson pictures to us Jesus and his disciples in a 
public pathway across a wheat-field (in old English called 
a corn-field). The wheat was ripe or nearly so, and the 
disciples, feeling hungry, had plucked a few of the heads 
and rubbed them in their hands to remove the chaff for the 
eating of the wheat. The Pharisees, appreciating the shell 
rather than the meat of the divine Law, were very particular 
for outward observances of it, while entirely overlooking and 
neglecting its real sentiment or spirit. Here they thought 
they saw an opportunity for showing off their religious devotion 
by calling attention to the disciples of Jesus as being 
law-breakers, and to Jesus himself as being little better, in 



that he as their teacher had not reproved them. We see frequently 
this same spirit in our day: Some today would be 
scrupulously careful not to ride in a street-car on the Sabbath 
who would think nothing of allowing their minds to 
rove not only after the worldly things but worse, to dwell 
upon evil subjects, or perhaps meditate how they could take 
advantage of their neighbor the day following. This is hypocrisy, 
one of the worst sins from the divine standpoint. 

It is really amusing how the Jews, while neglecting the 
real essence and spirit of the Law toward God and man, exaggerated 
that Law as respects the trifling and unessential 
matters. For instance, the ruling of the Rabbis was that 
catching a flea on one's person was hunting, and therefore 
prohibited on the Sabbath; that rubbing the grain in both 
hands and blowing away the chaff constituted winnowing and 
threshing, and violated the rest of the Sabbath. Our Lord 
did not accept the reproof, but, on the contrary, pointed out 
that his disciples not only had his approval in their course 
but that they were fully justified by the course of others 
whom the Pharisees recognized. Our Lord's illustration of 
what constituted necessity and mercy was drawn from the 
Bible narrative of David's eating the shew-bread, lawful 
only for the priests to eat, because of the necessities of his 
position, his hunger. Also the labor performed every Sabbath 
in the Jewish Temple, in connection with the worship 
there, by the priests and Levites. Our Lord held logically 
that these approved matters showed the proper principle 
governing the Sabbath. He did not claim that reaping, 
threshing and winnowing on the Sabbath day would be 
justifiable; his argument was that no such interpretation 
should be put upon the Law as would make the satisfying 
of hunger, as the apostles did, a crime, a violation of the 
Sabbath commandment. 

"LORD ALSO OF THE SABBATH" 

But after convincing them from the Scriptures that 
their position was untenable, our Lord asserted to them his 
authority as an interpreter of the Law, saying, "I say unto 
you, One greater than the Temple is here." If it was right 
for the Levites to perform the Temple services on the Sabbath, 
Jesus was greater than the Temple in that he was the 
Son of God, the mouthpiece of God, and his disciples might 
therefore rest secure in anything done in his service and 
with his approval. What a personality our Lord must have 
possessed that he could make such a statement before his 
enemies without its being challenged! We are convinced 
that he not only spake as never man spake, but that his 
appearance must have been superior to that of members of 
the fallen race. 

Mark his statement again (v. 8)— "The Son of man is 
Lord even of the Sabbath day." As the Lord of the Sabbath, 

R3754 : page 108 

as the great Teacher, he had not indeed the right to abolish 



this feature of the Law except by fulfilling it, "nailing it to 
the cross"; but as the Lord of the Sabbath he was the proper 
Teacher to set forth its real significance to the Jew. Our 
Lord called the attention of his critics to the testimony of 
God through the prophet, "I will have mercy and not sacrifice." 
(Hosea 6:6.) Our Lord declares that if they had 
given heed to this direction their thoughts would have been 
more merciful, more in line with the divine sentiment, and 
this would have hindered them from condemning the disciples, 
who the Lord declared were entirely guiltless of any 
violation of the Sabbath day commandment. 

Similarly we may say today that the great lack of 
many critics and fault-finders is their lack of mercy, lack of 
love. Love is the fulfilling of the Law, and whoever has 
most of it will come nearest to the standard. The possession 
of love is always indicated by mercy— toward our friends, 
toward our brethren, toward the world, toward our enemies. 
Proceeding to the Synagogue the same question was raised 
—the predominance of Love above any law was manifested. 
A man there had a withered hand, and the Pharisees, seeking 
to prove Jesus and to catch him, inquired whether or not 
it would be right to heal on the Sabbath day. They fain 
would condemn him on some score; his defense of his disciples 
was complete— would he now commit himself to a matter 
of healing on the Sabbath? 

Our Lord's answer was along the lines of the prophecy 
he had just quoted, namely, that mercy was higher in God's 
estimation than sacrifice, and he proceeded to show mercy to 
the afflicted man. First, however, he showed them from 
their own course in life that they were inconsistent: that if 
they owned but one sheep and it fell into a pit on the Sabbath 
day it would be rescued— not for love of the sheep but 
for fear of the loss of its value. Our Lord inquired, "How 
much then is a man of more value than a sheep? Wherefore 
it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath day." This question, 
as to the superior value of a man over a beast, is one 
that the world seems to find difficult to answer, but one 
which should be quickly answered by the Lord's people of 
spiritual Israel. The Lord set the value of a man when by 
the grace of God he gave himself a ransom for man. Those 
who receive of his Spirit should more and more count it a 
privilege to do anything they can for the relief of their fellow 
man in matters temporal or spiritual. 

The Pharisees were answered at every point, and, less 
popular in Galilee than in Judea anyway, they felt that 
their influence before the people had been lessened by their 
conflict with the Lord, the great Teacher. So when Jesus 
had healed the withered hand by word they went out of the 
synagogue angry, to take counsel against him how they 
might destroy him. They were rabid sectarians, fully 
convinced of their own importance. They felt that anything 
that discredited them must be injurious to the Lord and to 
his cause, that they were the orthodox body, and that they 
would be fully justified in murdering anyone whose words 
and conduct so overmatched them as to hinder their influence 
from spreading more and more over all the people of 



Israel. A similar spirit prevails today, we aver, amongst 

many who are outwardly very zealous for religion. They 

are so deficient in mercy, love, so bound by the sectarian 

systems with which they are identified, that they would be 

willing to persecute as thoroughly as opportunity would 

permit any of the members of the Master's body whose presentations 

of the Truth today would seem to diminish their 

honor and standing before the world. Let us, dear friends, 

remember the Master's word, and understanding and appreciating 

our relationship to the Lord, let us be obedient to 

the very spirit of it. 



R3754 : page 108 

RESURRECTION POWER IN JESUS. 

-LUKE 7: 1-17.- APRIL 15.- 

"Jesus said unto her, I am the 
resurrection and the life."— John 11:25 

RESURRECTION power resided in our Lord Jesus because 

in the divine plan it was he who was to redeem 

the world by the sacrifice of himself and 

consequently to restore it. This included not merely an 

awakening from death, but also such vitalization as would 

overcome the dying processes of disease and ultimately bring 

the revived one up, up, to the full perfection of being originally 

enjoyed by our first parents in Eden but forfeited because 

of disobedience under the sentence, "The soul that 

sinneth it shall die." (Ezek. 18:4.) This is the most important 

feature of all the plan of God revealed to us, and if 

we discern it clearly it assists us in the understanding of 

every other feature of that plan. We must see that death is 

the absence of life, the loss of life— that it is a penalty upon 

our race because we are judged unworthy of life. 

All references to a future life imply a redemption from 
the curse or sentence which came upon us because of the 
original sin. The cancellation of the debt or sentence, however, 
does not revive or restore mankind, but it does remove 
the legal barrier to man's restitution to all that was lost. 

R3755 : page 108 

Hence it is that our Savior's work is to follow. First, it is 
to be a redemptive work: the redemption was accomplished 
at his first advent— though he has used this Gospel age as 
the period in which to accept also some of the redeemed ones 
as his members, his Bride, his Church, under him as their 
Head, to be his associates in the great work of restitution 
which belongs to the next age. 

Second, restitution is to be our Lord's work at his second 
advent, when his Church, his members, will have been 
selected, polished, prepared, glorified and associated with 



him in glory, honor and immortality. Then the full work 
of the redemption will be granted to the world of mankind 
—not by raising them from the dead to absolute perfection 
in an instant, but by first awakening them from the sleep of 
death, and then, under the disciplines and instructions of 
the Millennial age, lifting them gradually in harmony with 
their own wills and cooperation, step by step, out of sin and 
death conditions into life eternal, as they may respond to 

R3755 : page 109 

these mercies and opportunities. The disobedient, being 
counted unworthy of life eternal, will be cut off in the Second 
Death. 

JESUS, THE LIFE -GIVER 

The words of our Golden Text, although specially applicable 
to our Lord in the future, at the beginning of his 
Millennial reign, when he will abolish death by lifting mankind 
out of its power, out of the great prison-house and out 
of the weaknesses that are associated with the fallen condition, 
nevertheless were applicable also in some degree at the 
first advent. True, our Lord's own sacrifice was not finished 
until he died at Calvary, and the sacrifices of the members 
of his body would not be finished for centuries; but when 
our Lord at thirty years of age made a full consecration of 
himself to do the Father's will, to lay down his life, etc., 
that divine plan which he there undertook to carry out included 
all these subsequent features— the completion of his 
own sacrifice and that of his completed body, of the Church. 

That our heavenly Father so regarded his sacrifice was 
evidenced by the impartation of the holy Spirit, which 
anointing upon him constituted him the Messiah, the Christ, 
and the hope of the Church, which is his body, as well as 
ultimately the hope of all things. Hence, since our Lord 
had never abrogated that covenant of consecration, sacrifice, 
since he was still in line with his Covenant, and since the 
Father still so recognized him, it was proper for him to 
think and act and speak from that standpoint, which not 
only looked down to the end of his own course with faith, 
but also looked down to the end of this Gospel age with 
confidence, and to the end of the Millennial age with assurance 
that all the good purposes of God would finally be 
accomplished in and through him. From this standpoint, 
therefore, he said, "I am the resurrection and the life." He 
knew that the sacrificial work he had undertaken would secure 
to him the privilege of being the Life-Giver to the world, 
and that in the exercise of that right he would raise up not 
only from the tomb, but completely out of death conditions 
up to perfection, all who would come unto the Father 
through him— all who would have the right desire of heart 
to return to loving obedience to the Creator. 

OUR LORD'S MIRACLES ILLUSTRATIVE 



Our Lord's miracles were performed with a view to 
proving him to be the Life-Giver, not merely as having the right 
or privilege of giving life but as having pleasure in so doing. 
From this standpoint our Lord's miracles were small illustrations 
on a limited scale of that much grander work which 
he, with and through his glorified Church, will accomplish 
for mankind during his Millennial reign, when all the blind 
eyes shall be opened and all the deaf ears shall be unstopped, 
and all the mentally, morally and physically lame 
shall be healed, and all the dead in trespasses and sins will 
be revived and, through obedience, gradually obtain full 
restitution of all things lost, as promised through the mouth 
of all the holy prophets since the world began.— 
Acts 3:19-23. 

Our present lesson follows the Sermon on the Mount— 
the thought evidently in the minds of Matthew and Luke in 
thus arranging matters being to show that he who had given 
the wonderful teachings on the mount was fully attested by 
the miraculous powers shown to reside in him. He had returned 
to Capernaum on the Sea of Galilee, the home city of 
Peter and others, and now the home city of Jesus, since he had 
been spurned and rejected at Nazareth. We remember that on 
a previous occasion at Capernaum he had healed many, and 
cannot doubt that his fame had reached all classes. A centurion, 
captain of the Roman guard, with a company of soldiers, 
resided here, and a much-prized servant having been taken 
sick the centurion was anxious to have Jesus cure him. That 
he was a man of humble mind, as well as full of faith and 
benevolence, is clearly shown by the narrative. Indeed, so 
far as we remember, all three of the centurions mentioned in 
the New Testament were evidently reverential: this one, 
the one who put Jesus to death and who subsequently declared, 
"Surely this man was the Son of God," and the centurion 
Cornelius, the first Gentile convert— Matt. 27:54; 
Acts 10:1. 

THE NOBLE CENTURION 

The centurion of our lesson was both wise and humble. 
He realized that as a Gentile he could have no special claim 
upon this Jewish Prophet and the work he was doing for the 
Israelites, and hence he secured the cooperation of some of 
the elders of the city— not the elders of the Synagogue, but 
the chief men of the city— to present to Jesus on his behalf 
a request for the healing of his servant. A man of less 
humble mind would doubtless have thought of the dignity 
of his own position, and would have ignored the distinctions 
which the Jews and the Scriptures both fix, the "middle 
wall of partition" between Jew and Gentile excluding the 
latter from the divine mercies of the former. He was like 
the Syro-phenician woman who desired a crumb from the 
children's table without claiming to be one of the children. 

The elders, his representatives, besought Jesus on his 
behalf, testifying that although he was not a Jew he was a 
noble character, a lover of Israel; he had built them a synagogue 
for their worship, in which he himself could not 



engage because a Gentile. Had he taken any other position, 
had he ignored the fact that he was not one of the "children," 
doubtless it would have been necessary for our Lord 
to have impressed this lesson before granting the request; 
but since all this was conceded in the request our Lord 
promptly acceded thereto. A lesson for each of us in this 
connection would be humility of mind in approaching the 
Lord on any subject, which would make us ready for his 
favors and blessings. We, too, should concede that we have 
nothing of right or of merit to demand, that we should approach 
the Lord from the standpoint of unworthy suppliants, 
seekers of grace and mercy, not justice, at his hands. 

Then the centurion bethought him of the fact that, being 
a Gentile, according to Jewish custom it would be an impropriety 
for a Jew to enter his house, that a certain measure 
of defilement would be implied. Doubtless, too, he thought 
of himself as a sinner, and that here was a representative of 
the Almighty, whose power he acknowledged. His feelings, 
doubtless, were akin to those of Peter when the latter cried 
out, "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord."— 
Luke 5:8. 

The centurion reasoned that if the Lord could exercise 
the power when present he could also exercise the power of 
healing though absent, and possibly he had heard of the 
healing of the son of the nobleman of his own city, Capernaum, 

R3755 :page 110 

when Jesus was at Cana and merely spoke the word. 
For these reasons the centurion at once sent a messenger to 
Jesus, explaining his own disinclination to incommode the 
Master, his unworthiness to have him under his roof, and 
his complete faith that a word from him would be sufficient. 
He explains this faith in the Lord's word by the illustration 
that he himself had been given a certain amount of authority 
by which he could tell his servants to go and to come, 
and that, recognizing Jesus as the Lord's anointed, he was 
sure that he had control over the influences of nature as his 
servants, so that he could bid the disease go from the servant 
and he should be well. 

MARVELLOUS FAITH OF AN ALIEN 

Jesus took him at his word and went no further, but he 
expressed his astonishment at the amount of the man's faith, 
saying to the multitude with him, "I have not found so great 
faith, no not in Israel." Only in one other place do we read 
that Jesus "marvelled," and that was at the instance of the 
unbelief of the people of Nazareth. (Mark 6:6.) The people 
so long favored, so greatly blessed, so richly fed with 
divine promises and instructed by divine providences, lacked 
the faith that might have been expected of them, while the 
Gentiles, unfavored, were possessed of faith in many respects 
remarkable. No wonder our Lord contrasted the people of 
Capernaum with the heathens of Sodom and Gomorrah. No 
wonder that he declared that if the mighty works done in 



Capernaum had been done in Sodom and Gomorrah they 
would have remained— would never have been destroyed— 
would have repented in sackcloth and ashes. 

How glad we are that the Scriptures assure us that it 
is the divine plan to give all the heathen peoples— yea, and 
all the Jews— the favorable, gracious opportunities of the 
Millennial age whereby to rise out of sin and death conditions 
and to restore to the obedient the life conditions lost 
through sin, redeemed by the precious blood. Are we not 
sometimes surprised today, likewise, to find that some prominent 
in religious affairs seem to have less faith in the Lord 

R3756 :page 110 

in his goodness, in his power, in his wisdom, in his love, 
than have some who are of the world? What surprises there 
may be in this respect by and by when the knowledge of the 
Lord shall fill the whole earth and the eyes of understanding 
of all mankind shall be opened to appreciate the knowledge 
of the glory of God. How many who were not God's 
people shall then become his people; and how many who 
now have much advantage everyway, and who have forms 
of godliness without the power, may then be seen to be inferior 
to some who now appear to be their inferiors. 

Soon afterward (R.V.) our Lord, the disciples and 
quite a multitude of followers were approaching the little 
city of Nain, when forth from the gateway of the city came 
a funeral procession, a widowed mother and mourning 
friends, pall-bearers, and a bier or litter on which lay a 
dead young man, the widow's only son. Our Lord was 
touched with compassion as he saw the widow's tears, and 
he said to her, "Weep not," and, approaching, the pall-bearers 
stood still and Jesus touched the bier and said, "Young 
man, I say unto thee arise." The dead man stood up and 
began to speak. In a manufactured story it would be considered 
the proper thing to suppose that the widow fell at 
the Lord's feet, praised him in a loud voice, and that the 
whole multitude would join in acclaiming him; but in the 
simple narrative of our lesson, "there came a fear upon all" 
—a realization that God was very near to them as represented 
in the power of Jesus. 

The very thought of the imminence of God is very sure 
to bring awe to mankind as they realize the holiness, the 
absolute perfection of the Almighty and their own blemishes 
and imperfections in contrast. The multitude glorified God, 
not with loud hosannas, but with a reverential appreciation 
of the fact that a great Prophet, a great Teacher, was in their 
midst, and that God was thus with him, saying, "God hath 
visited his people." The Jews at that time looked back to 
God's special dealings with their fathers, in which miracles 
attested the Lord's favor. They remembered also the promise 
that a Prophet like unto Moses would be raised up to them 
with still greater power than Moses. They expected to some 
extent what Peter refers to in Acts 3:19-21, that "times of 
refreshing would come from the presence of the Lord"— 
that the Lord Jehovah would manifest his favor toward his 



people in reviving them, blessing them, sending them times 
of restitution spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets. 

PROPHET, PRIEST AND KING. 

Their anticipations were quite correct: Jesus was the 
great Prophet, the representative of the Father and of his 
favor. And yet how long the test of faith! How long the 
period necessary for the raising up of the members of the 
body of Christ, and until the heavenly Father's plan should 
thus be fully developed and the times of restitution fully 
ushered in at the second advent of the Lord. Our Redeemer's 
work of healing and of awakening from the sleep of death 
were merely premonitions or foreshadowings or illustrations 
of the great universal blessings coming to mankind through 
the merit of his obedience even unto death as our sin offering. 
No wonder the message of Jesus and his work spread 
over all parts of the country. 

A greater work was being accomplished by our Lord's 
miracles than was apparent at the time. We are inclined 
to be surprised that only about "five hundred brethren" 
were gathered during the Lord's ministry— that only that 
number were counted worthy of the name brethren and of 
the privilege of meeting our Lord after his resurrection during 
the forty days. However, we may reasonably suppose 
that under the new dispensation, under the ministries of the 
apostles from Pentecost onward, a large fruitage was found 
to our Lord's ministry. For instance, we would think it very 
probable that this widow of Nain and her son would ultimately 
become followers of Jesus, and that others in that 
multitude who witnessed the miracle and who were in proper 
condition of heart would therein find a sufficiency for a 
foundation to their faith in the Messiah. We cannot doubt 
either that after "the middle wall of partition" had been 
broken down, and Cornelius the first Gentile convert had 
been brought into faith-fellowship, this centurion, whose 
servant was healed and who manifested everyway so noble a 
character, would be one who would be specially susceptible 
to the message of grace and truth. One lesson we may learn 
from this is that we must not at once look for the full fruitage 
to our own efforts in the Lord's service. We must be 
content to labor and to wait, and must realize that the Lord 
himself is behind his Word, his message, making the selections 
of those whom he esteems worthy of joint-heirship in 
his Kingdom. Another thought would be that there may be 
worldly persons who may now come to some knowledge of 
the Truth and yet not be blessed fully by it— who will by 
and by, under the trials and difficulties of the time of 
trouble, or later on during the Millennial age, be profited 
through our ministries of the Truth and our present endeavors 
to glorify the Lord in our bodies and spirits which are 
his. 

Let us then scatter the good seed everywhere as we 
have opportunity, for we know not which shall prosper, this 
or that. Sometimes that upon which we bestowed the greatest 
zeal and effort proves fruitless, and sometimes that from 



which we expected the least proves very fruitful. Let us 
remember that the Lord will reward us according to our 
zeal or efforts, and not according to results; and indeed the 

R3756 :page 111 

chief results he seeks are in ourselves, in the development of 
the graces of his Spirit, which will manifest themselves in so 
many ways in connection with our love for him, for his message, 
for the brethren, yea, for the whole world of mankind, 
even for our enemies. 

"QUICKEN YOUR MORTAL BODIES" 

Our Lord's ministries of healing lasted but a few years 
and reached comparatively few of the Jewish people, but 
since he ascended he has been carrying on a work of healing 
on a still higher plane— through his disciples whom he 
acknowledges as "members of his body." (1 Cor. 21:27.) 
Operating through these, many eyes of understanding have 
been opened, many deaf ears have been unstopped, many 
morally halt and lame have been cured, and many have 
been raised from the dead in the sense that the Apostle refers 
to when he says, "You hath he quickened who were 
dead in trespasses and sins;" and again, "If ye be risen 
with Christ seek those things which are above;" and again, 
"If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead 
dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall 
also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth 
inyou."-Eph. 2:1; Col. 3:1; Rom. 8:11. 

If we are inclined to marvel that the Jews rejected Jesus 
after seeing his mighty works, what might be said of us 
if for any reason we become doubters or unfaithful to him 
who has so clearly spoken to us from heaven, by whose 
stripes we have been healed and who have realized him to be 
indeed the resurrection and the life? Whoever, therefore, has 
experienced this quickening to newness of life, this begetting 
of the Spirit, has come under so clear a demonstration of the 
divine power and goodness and wisdom and love operating 
through Jesus as to be without excuse "if they fall away." 
Hence the Apostle tells us that it would be "impossible to 
renew them again unto repentance." (Heb. 6:6.) He tells 
us that in their case such a falling away would be a wilful 
act, not one of ignorance or weakness, and that to thus fall 
away would imply the same attitude of heart which the Jews 
entertained toward our Lord when he was with them— that 
it would be virtually crucifying the Lord afresh and putting 
him to an open shame.— Heb. 6:6. 

But, dearly beloved, to use the Apostle's thought, we 
have more confidence in each other than to surmise such 
an unworthy ending to our call, such an unworthy response 
to the mercies and favors which we enjoy at the hands of 
him who loved us and bought us with his precious blood. 
Let us be faithful, let us remember that the resurrection 
work begun in us as New Creatures is the one which is to be 
completed by the grace of God in the First Resurrection, 



when in a moment of change we shall be like our Lord, see 
him as he is and share his glory. 



R3756 :page 111 

A VOICE FROM OVER THE SEA. 
-FROM OUR SOCIETY'S LONDON REPRESENTATIVE- 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

I have noticed that which seems to be a pointed corroboration 
of the parallel which you gave in the TOWER a 
little while back when you showed that the culmination of 
the "time of trouble" might be expected in 1915, since the 
Gentile powers have a lease which runs to the end of 1914. 
I refer to the first dispensation and its culmination in the 
year of the flood. I think this year with all of its particularized 
events is intended as a forecast of the year of trouble, 
1915, A.D. I will put my thoughts as briefly as possible. 

Since our Lord said, "It shall be in the days of the 
Son of Man as it was in the days of Noah," we have his 
authority for a comparison of the times, and this has led to 
the thoughts:— 

(1) That the whole of the first dispensation is a miniature 

R3757 : page 1 1 1 

of the permission of evil, the end of the first dispensation 
and the end of the permission of evil being alike in 
that they end in catastrophe. 

(2) The race which was destroyed at the flood represented 
Adam's whole progeny; while the replenishing under 
Noah represents the new race which shall find life under 

the Life-giver, the Everlasting Father, our Lord and his Bride. 

(3) Noah and his family, therefore, do not represent 
those of the human family which will be carried over from 
this present evil world into the Kingdom of heaven soon to 
be established on the earth. Rather he and his family with 
the ark represent the Church. Lifted up above the whole 
earth, saved by the flood, they will be preserved from the 
terror of the trouble, and "when the trouble is overpast" 
will come down from heaven to bless and replenish the 
earth. 

But it is in reference to the time features that I now 
write. From the day when Bible chronology was seen so 
explicitly, accounts of time in the Scriptures have always 
demanded their full measure of regard; and the account of 
the days of the year of the flood, given so particularly, have 
always been regarded as of importance. But as the forty 
days of rain and of the breaking up of the fountains of the 
great deep seem so clearly to correspond with the forty years 
of the present harvest, one has, perhaps naturally, looked for 
the other periods of the flood year to follow, in type, on into 
the establishment of the Kingdom. But without result, for 



there seems to be a complete lack of Scripture corroboration 
of this thought. Now, I think that way is not the correct 
one, and that probably we should view the matter from this 
standpoint:— 

(4) That the first dispensation covers the entire period 

of evil under present ruling powers, which last until October, 
1914, A.D.; and that 

(5) The year of trouble so remarkably detailed is a 
figure of the year of trouble, 1915, A.D., and that probably 
the details fit exactly to the events of this year. 

If the kingdoms of this world are undermined, as many 
Scriptures and parallels indicate will be the case, when the 
restraining power of God is removed little will be needed to 
bring about their destruction. Probably the forty days will be 
ample for the overthrow and utter ruin. The remaining 
part of the 150 will serve to let anarchy have its raging and 
tossing whirlpool, and, to an extent, to exhaust itself. From 
that time the trouble will begin to abate, partly for lack of 
power, and partly because the horror and desolation is being 
felt. The raven may signify that even yet trouble is rampant. 
It found no need to return to the ark, while the gentle dove 
soon came back. But a little later the dove brings the olive 
leaf: there is capitulation, the trouble is fast dying down 
and peace is wanted. Soon the waters are dried up, and on 
the "first day of the first month" of a new and blessed year 
and dispensation the earth is ready to be blessed by those 
whom God has prepared. 

No doubt most of these thoughts are old to you; but I wonder 
if you have connected the year of the flood with the year of 
trouble, and if you have whether you think this is the type. 
A little time ago one was almost precluded from seeing the 
above by reason of the thought that all the trouble would 
be over in October, A.D., 1914. Much love to you, as ever. 

Your brother in the Lord, J. HEMERY. 



page 113 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 