
STUDY ARTICLE 34
“Go On Walking in the Truth”

“Go on walking in the truth.”​—3 JOHN 4.
SONG 111 Our Reasons for Joy
PREVIEWa



 1. How do we benefit from talking about how we came into “the truth”?
“HOW did you come into the truth?” No doubt you have answered that question many times. It is one of the first questions that a fellow believer will ask when we are getting acquainted. We love to hear how our brothers and sisters came to know and love Jehovah, and we enjoy telling them what the truth means to us. (Rom. 1:11) As a result of these conversations, we are reminded of just how precious the truth is. We also become even more determined to “go on walking in the truth”​—that is, to keep living in a way that will bring Jehovah’s blessing and approval.​—3 John 4.
 2. What will we discuss in this article?
2 In this article, we will review some of the reasons why we love the truth. Then we will consider how we can continue to show our love for this precious gift. No doubt this review will deepen our appreciation for what Jehovah has done in drawing us to the truth. (John 6:44) It will also strengthen our desire to share the truth with others.



WHY WE LOVE “THE TRUTH”

 3. What is the most important reason why we love the truth?
3 We love the truth for many reasons. Most important, we love Jehovah God, the Source of the truth. Through his Word, the Bible, we have come to know him not only as the all-powerful Maker of heaven and earth but also as our loving heavenly Father, who tenderly cares for us. (1 Pet. 5:7) We know that our God is “merciful and compassionate, slow to anger and abundant in loyal love and truth.” (Ex. 34:6) Jehovah loves justice. (Isa. 61:8) It hurts him to see us suffer, and he is ready​—yes, eager—​to bring all suffering to an end at the appointed time. (Jer. 29:11) How marvelous! No wonder we love Jehovah so much!




Bible Truth Is Like . . . An Anchor
Just as an anchor steadies a boat, our Bible-based hope can stabilize us during trials. Bible truth also moves us to share our hope for the future with others (See paragraphs 4-7)



4-5. Why did the apostle Paul compare our hope to an anchor?
4 What is another reason why we love the truth? The truth brings great benefits to us. Consider an example. Bible truth includes our hope for the future. To illustrate the value of that hope, the apostle Paul wrote: “We have this hope as an anchor for the soul, both sure and firm.” (Heb. 6:19) Just as an anchor steadies a boat, our Bible-based hope can stabilize us when we face trials in life.
5 In this context, Paul was discussing the heavenly hope that anointed Christians cherish. But his words also apply to Christians who look forward to living forever on a paradise earth. (John 3:16) Certainly, learning about the hope of everlasting life has given our life meaning.
6-7. How has Yvonne benefited from learning the truth about the future?
6 Consider the experience of a sister named Yvonne. She did not grow up in the truth, and as a child she was afraid of death. She recalls reading a phrase that stuck in her mind: “Someday there will be no tomorrow.” She says: “Those words made me lie awake at night thinking about the future. ‘Surely there must be more to life,’ I thought. ‘Why am I here?’ I did not want to die!”
7 Later, as a teenager, Yvonne came in contact with Jehovah’s Witnesses. She relates: “I began to believe that I could have the hope of living forever in Paradise on earth.” How has learning the truth benefited our sister? She adds: “I no longer lie awake at night worrying about the future or death.” As you can imagine, the truth is very precious to Yvonne, and she finds great satisfaction in sharing her hope for the future with others.​—1 Tim. 4:16.




Bible Truth Is Like . . . A Treasure
Serving Jehovah now and having the prospect of doing so forever under the rule of his Kingdom is like a treasure. It is worth any sacrifice we have to make (See paragraphs 8-11)



8-9. (a) In one of Jesus’ parables, how much did one man value a treasure he found? (b) What value do you place on the truth?
8 Bible truth also includes the good news about God’s Kingdom. Jesus compared the truth about that Kingdom to a hidden treasure. As recorded at Matthew 13:44, Jesus said: “The Kingdom of the heavens is like a treasure, hidden in the field, that a man found and hid; and because of his joy, he goes and sells everything he has and buys that field.” Notice that the man was not looking for the treasure. But when he found it, he made major sacrifices to obtain it. In fact, he sold everything he had. Why? He knew how valuable that treasure was. It was worth far more than anything he had to give up.
9 Is that the way you feel about the truth? No doubt it is! We know that nothing this world has to offer can compare to the joy we have in serving Jehovah now, with the prospect of everlasting life in the future under Kingdom rule. The privilege we have of enjoying a close personal relationship with Jehovah is worth any sacrifice we have to make. Our greatest joy is “to please him fully.”​—Col. 1:10.
10-11. What prompted Michael to change the course of his life?
10 Many of us have made considerable sacrifices in order to obtain Jehovah’s approval. Some have abandoned prestigious careers in the world. Others have given up the pursuit of wealth. Still others have completely changed the course of their life when they learned about Jehovah. That is what Michael did. He did not grow up in the truth. As a young man, he was trained in martial arts. He says: “I took pride in keeping myself in fit physical condition. At times, I felt invincible.” But when he started studying the Bible, Michael learned Jehovah’s view of violence. (Ps. 11:5) Regarding the Witness couple who studied with him, Michael says: “They never told me that I had to give up martial arts; they simply continued to teach me Bible truth.”
11 The more Michael learned about Jehovah, the more his love for Him grew. He was especially touched by Jehovah’s compassion for His worshippers. In time, Michael realized that he needed to make a life-changing decision. “I knew that giving up karate would be the hardest thing I had ever done,” he says. “But I also knew that it would please Jehovah, and I was convinced that serving him was worth any sacrifice.” Michael appreciated the value of the truth he had found, and that appreciation moved him to make big changes in his life.​—Jas. 1:25.




Bible Truth Is Like . . . A Lamp
A powerful lamp helps us to find our way in the darkness. Similarly, God’s Word shows us how to find our way through Satan’s dark world (See paragraphs 12-13)



12-13. How did Bible truth enlighten Mayli?
12 To highlight the value of the truth, the Bible compares the truth to a lamp shining in the dark. (Ps. 119:105; Eph. 5:8) Mayli, from Azerbaijan, deeply appreciates the enlightenment she has received from God’s Word. She grew up in a religiously divided household. Her father was Muslim, and her mother was Jewish. She says: “Although I never questioned God’s existence, there were issues that puzzled me. I wondered, ‘Why did God create humans, and for what useful purpose would someone suffer his entire life only to be tormented forever in hell?’ Since people said that everything that happens is God’s will, I wondered, ‘Is God just a puppeteer who enjoys watching people suffer?’”
13 Mayli continued to search for answers to her questions. In time, she accepted a Bible study and came into the truth. “The Bible’s convincing logic changed my whole outlook on life for the better,” she says. “The credible explanations I found through God’s Word bring me inner peace.” Like Mayli, we all praise Jehovah, “the One who called [us] out of darkness into his wonderful light.”​—1 Pet. 2:9.
14. How can we deepen our love for the truth? (See also the box “Additional Comparisons.”)
14 These are just a few examples that illustrate the value of the truth. No doubt you can think of many others. Why not make it a personal study project to find other reasons why we should love the truth? The more we love the truth, the more we will find ways to show our love for it.





Additional Comparisons
In this article, we have seen that “the truth” can be compared to an anchor, to a treasure, and to a lamp. We can compare the value of the truth to other things as well. For example:





Bible truth is like a mirror. When we look into it, we can see what we really are on the inside and where we need to make improvements.​—Jas. 1:22-25






Just as water refreshes us on a hot day, the waters of Bible truth refresh us in this spiritually parched world.​—Ps. 23:2, 3







HOW WE SHOW THAT WE LOVE THE TRUTH

15. What is one way that we can show our love for the truth?
15 We can show that we love the truth by regularly studying the Bible and Bible-based publications. After all, no matter how long we have been in the truth, we always have more to learn. The very first issue of this magazine stated: “Truth, like a modest little flower in the wilderness of life, is surrounded and almost choked by the luxuriant growth of the weeds of error. If you would find it you must be ever on the lookout. . . . If you would possess it you must stoop to get it. Be not content with one flower of truth. . . . Gather ever, seek for more.” Study is hard work, but it is well worth the effort.
16. What study method do you find effective? (Proverbs 2:4-6)
16 Not all of us love to read and study. But Jehovah invites us to “keep seeking” and to “keep searching” for a deeper understanding of the truth. (Read Proverbs 2:4-6.) When we put forth such effort, we always benefit. Regarding his personal Bible reading, Corey says that he focuses on one verse at a time. He explains: “I’ll read every footnote, look up every cross-reference, and do additional research. . . . I get so much out of my reading with this method!” Whether we use that method or another, we show our appreciation for the truth when we put time and effort into studying it.​—Ps. 1:1-3.
17. What does it mean to live the truth? (James 1:25)
17 Of course, we know that it is not enough simply to study the truth. To benefit fully, we must live the truth, that is, apply what we learn in our life. Only then will the truth bring us real happiness. (Read James 1:25.) How can we make sure that we are living the truth? One brother suggests making a personal examination to identify areas where we are doing well and areas where we want to make improvement. The apostle Paul put it this way: “To the extent we have made progress, let us go on walking orderly in this same course.”​—Phil. 3:16.
18. Why do we do our best to “go on walking in the truth”?
18 Just think of the benefits that come from doing our best to “go on walking in the truth”! Not only do we improve the quality of our own life but we also bring joy to Jehovah and to our fellow believers. (Prov. 27:11; 3 John 4) Really, could we have any greater reasons to love the truth and to live the truth?



HOW WOULD YOU ANSWER?
  Why do we love “the truth”?

  How can we deepen our appreciation for the truth?

  How can we show that we love the truth?




SONG 144 Keep Your Eyes on the Prize!
We often refer to our beliefs and way of life as “the truth.” Whether we are new in the truth or we have known it all our life, we can benefit greatly by considering why we love the truth. In doing so, we will strengthen our resolve to obtain Jehovah’s approval.

