
STUDY ARTICLE 28
Continue to Benefit From Godly Fear

“The one walking in his uprightness fears Jehovah.”​—PROV. 14:2.
SONG 122 Be Steadfast, Immovable!
PREVIEWa



1-2. Like Lot, what challenge do Christians face today?
REGARDING the moral standards promoted by this world, we feel as did righteous Lot. He “was greatly distressed by the brazen conduct of the lawless people,” knowing that our heavenly Father hates bad conduct. (2 Pet. 2:7, 8) Fear of God and love for him moved Lot to reject the low moral standards of the people around him. We too are surrounded by people who have little or no respect for Jehovah’s moral standards. Despite that, we can remain morally clean if we maintain our love for God and cultivate a healthy fear of him.​—Prov. 14:2.
2 To that end, Jehovah provides loving encouragement and motivation by means of the book of Proverbs. All Christians, men and women, young and old, can truly benefit from considering the wise counsel found there.



FEAR OF GOD PROTECTS US





At our workplace, we need to guard against inappropriate friendships and invitations to share in questionable activities (See paragraph 3)



 3. According to Proverbs 17:3, what is one reason why we need to protect our heart? (See also picture.)
3 A key reason to protect our figurative heart is that Jehovah examines our heart. This means that he looks past what we appear to be to others and sees who we really are on the inside. (Read Proverbs 17:3.) He will love us if we fill our mind with his life-giving wisdom. (John 4:14) We will thereby leave no room for the moral and spiritual poison coming from Satan and his world. (1 John 5:18, 19) As we draw closer to Jehovah, our love and respect for him will grow. Because we do not want to hurt our Father, we will hate even the very thought of sinning. When tempted to do wrong, we will ask, ‘How could I deliberately hurt Someone who has shown me so much love?’​—1 John 4:9, 10.
 4. How did fear of Jehovah protect a sister from giving in to temptation?
4 Marta, a sister in Croatia who was tempted to commit immorality, wrote: “I found it hard to think clearly and to suppress the urge to enjoy the temporary pleasure of sin. But fear of Jehovah protected me.”b How did fear of God do that? Marta said that she meditated on the consequences that a bad decision would bring. We can do the same. The worst consequence is that we will sadden Jehovah and not be in line to worship him forever.​—Gen. 6:5, 6.
 5. What can you learn from Leo’s experience?
5 When we fear Jehovah, we are careful not to excuse bad behavior. Leo, who lives in Congo, learned that lesson. Four years after his baptism, he got involved with bad association. He thought that as long as he personally did not engage in bad practices, he was not sinning against Jehovah. Soon, though, his bad associates led him to abuse alcohol and to commit immorality. He then began to reflect on what his Christian parents had taught him and on the happiness that he had lost. The result? He came to his senses. With help from the elders, he returned to Jehovah. Today he serves happily as an elder and a special pioneer.
 6. What two figurative women will we now discuss?
6 Let us consider Proverbs chapter 9, where we read about wisdom and foolishness, personified as two women. (Compare Romans 5:14; Galatians 4:24.) As we do so, bear in mind that Satan’s world is obsessed with immoral sex and pornography. (Eph. 4:19) So it is vital that we continue to cultivate godly fear and turn away from bad. (Prov. 16:6) Consequently, all of us, whether male or female, can benefit from what this chapter presents. Each of the two women is described as extending an invitation to the inexperienced​—those “lacking good sense.” Each says, as it were, ‘Come into my house and have a meal.’ (Prov. 9:1, 5, 6, 13, 16, 17) But there is a vast difference in the results, or outcomes, presented.



AVOID THE COURSE OF FOOLISHNESS





The “stupid woman” extends an invitation that can lead to tragic consequences (See paragraph 7)



 7. According to Proverbs 9:13-18, to what does one of the invitations lead? (See also picture.)
7 Consider the invitation from the “stupid woman.” (Read Proverbs 9:13-18.) She boldly calls out to those lacking good sense, “Come in here” and feast. With what result? “Those powerless in death are there.” You may recall similar figurative language found earlier in Proverbs. We are warned about “the wayward” and “immoral woman.” We are told: “Her house sinks down into death.” (Prov. 2:11-19) Proverbs 5:3-10 contains an alert about another “wayward woman” whose “feet descend into death.”
 8. What choice is presented?
8 Those hearing the “stupid woman” face a choice: Will they accept her invitation or reject it? We might find ourselves facing such a choice. When confronted with sexual immorality or pornography, as is featured in the media and on the Internet, what will we choose?
9-10. What are some reasons why we should avoid sexually immoral conduct?
9 There are valid reasons why we should avoid sexually immoral conduct. The “stupid woman” is described as saying: “Stolen waters are sweet.” What are “stolen waters”? The Bible likens sexual intimacies that a married couple may enjoy to refreshing water. (Prov. 5:15-18) Husband and wife can find pleasure in appropriate sexual acts within their legal marriage. How different, though, with “stolen waters.” That may refer to illicit, immoral sex. Such often occurs in secret, just as a thief often steals in secret. The “stolen waters” may seem particularly sweet if those involved feel that they are getting away with their sinful course. What a sad deception! Jehovah sees all. Nothing could be more bitter than losing his favor, so there is nothing “sweet” about that tragic loss. (1 Cor. 6:9, 10) But there is more.
10 Sexual immorality can cause shame, a sense of worthlessness, unwanted pregnancies, and broken families. Clearly, it is the course of wisdom to avoid the stupid woman’s “house” and the meal. In addition to facing spiritual death, many immoral people contract diseases that lead to a premature literal death. (Prov. 7:23, 26) Verse 18 of chapter 9 concludes: “Her guests are in the depths of the Grave.” Why, then, do many accept her deceptive invitation that leads to tragedy?​—Prov. 9:13-18.
11. Why is viewing pornography extremely harmful?
11 A common trap is pornography. Some think that viewing pornography is harmless. On the contrary, pornography is harmful, degrading, and addictive. Immoral images have staying power; they are difficult to erase from the mind. What is more, pornography does not deaden wrong desires; it inflames them. (Col. 3:5; Jas. 1:14, 15) Yes, many who view pornography go on to commit immoral acts.
12. How do we show that we are on guard against sexually arousing images?
12 What should we as Christians do if a pornographic image shows up on our electronic device? We should immediately reject the image. We can be helped to take such action if we recall that our most treasured possession is our relationship with Jehovah. Actually, images that are not generally considered pornographic might be sexually arousing. Why avoid them? Because we do not want to take even a small step toward committing adultery in our heart. (Matt. 5:28, 29) An elder in Thailand named David says: “I ask myself: ‘Even though the images may not be pornographic, will Jehovah be pleased if I keep looking at them?’ This kind of reasoning helps me to act wisely.”
13. What helps us to act wisely?
13 We are helped to act wisely by cultivating a healthy fear of displeasing Jehovah. Godly fear is “the beginning,” or foundation, “of wisdom.” (Prov. 9:10) This is illustrated positively in the opening part of Proverbs chapter 9, where we read about the other figurative woman, identified as “true wisdom.”



ACCEPT THE INVITATION FROM “TRUE WISDOM”

14. What contrasting invitation is presented at Proverbs 9:1-6?
14 Read Proverbs 9:1-6. Here we read of an invitation that originates with the Source and Foundation of true wisdom, our all-wise Creator. (Prov. 2:6; Rom. 16:27) The imagery here used mentions a large house with seven pillars. This illustrates that Jehovah is generous and welcomes all who want to apply his wisdom in their life.
15. What does God invite us to do?
15 Jehovah is a generous, abundant Provider. These qualities are reflected in “true wisdom,” personified in Proverbs chapter 9 as a woman. The account mentions that this figurative woman has fully prepared her meat, mixed her wine, and arranged her table in her house. (Prov. 9:2, ftn.) Further, according to verses 4 and 5: “She [personified wisdom] says to the one lacking good sense: ‘Come, eat my bread.’” Why should we come to true wisdom’s house and eat the meal she offers? Jehovah wants his children to be wise and safe. He does not want us to learn life’s lessons the hard way​—through bitter experience and with nagging regrets. That is why “he treasures up practical wisdom for the upright.” (Prov. 2:7) When we have a healthy fear of Jehovah, we will want to please him. We hear his wise counsel, and we are happy to apply it.​—Jas. 1:25.
16. How did godly fear help Alain to make a wise decision, and with what result?
16 Consider how having godly fear helped Alain to make a wise decision. This Christian elder and school teacher related, “Many of my colleagues regarded pornographic films as a form of sexual education.” But Alain was not deceived. “Out of godly fear,” he said, “I categorically refused to view those films. I also explained the reason why to my colleagues.” He was applying the advice from “true wisdom” to “walk forward in the way of understanding.” (Prov. 9:6) Impressed by Alain’s firm stand, some of his fellow teachers now study the Bible and attend Christian meetings.




Accepting the invitation from “true wisdom” can lead to life (See paragraphs 17-18)



17-18. What blessings are being enjoyed by those who accept the invitation from “true wisdom,” and what can they look forward to? (See also picture.)
17 Using the imagery of two figurative women, Jehovah has laid the basis for us to enjoy a blessed outcome. Those responding to the invitation from the loud and “stupid woman” focus on enjoying “sweet,” secret pleasures. Frankly, they are living for the moment, ignoring the future. Their outcome is in “the depths of the Grave.”​—Prov. 9:13, 17, 18.
18 How different it is for those who accept the invitation from “true wisdom”! Her guests now enjoy a banquet that is well-arranged and healthful, a feast of well-presented spiritual dishes. (Isa. 65:13) Through the prophet Isaiah, Jehovah says: “Listen intently to me, and eat what is good, and you will find great delight in what is truly rich.” (Isa. 55:1, 2) We are learning to love what Jehovah loves and to hate what he hates. (Ps. 97:10) And we find satisfaction in inviting others to benefit from “true wisdom.” It is as if we were to “call out from the heights above the city: ‘Whoever is inexperienced, let him come in here.’” The benefits for us and for those who respond are not just for the here and now. They are enduring, allowing us to “live” forever as we “walk forward in the way of understanding.”​—Prov. 9:3, 4, 6.
19. In harmony with Ecclesiastes 12:13, 14, what should we be determined to do? (See also the box “Godly Fear Benefits Us.”)
19 Read Ecclesiastes 12:13, 14. May godly fear continue to safeguard our heart and help us to stand morally and spiritually upright during these wicked last days. That healthy fear will motivate us to keep on inviting as many as possible to seek “true wisdom” and benefit from it.
Godly Fear Benefits Us
  It draws us close to Jehovah.​—Ps. 25:14; Heb. 5:7.

  It makes obeying him a “great pleasure.”​—Ps. 112:1.

  It fosters humility, wisdom, and hatred of badness.​—Job 28:28; Prov. 8:13.

  It gives us courage and moral strength.​—Ex. 1:15-17, 21.

  It moves us to be kind and trustworthy.​—Neh. 5:15; 7:2.







HOW WOULD YOU ANSWER?
  How can a healthy fear of Jehovah protect our heart?

  How can we stay clear of the “stupid woman” and the consequences that come with accepting her invitation?

  What benefits will be ours if we accept the invitation from “true wisdom”?




SONG 127 The Sort of Person I Should Be
a Christians want to cultivate a healthy fear of God. Such fear can safeguard our heart and protect us from sexual immorality and pornography. In this article, we will consider Proverbs chapter 9, which provides a vivid contrast between wisdom and foolishness by using two figurative women. We can enjoy lasting benefits from this chapter.
b Some names have been changed.

