
STUDY ARTICLE 25
Elders​—Learn From Gideon’s Example

“Time will fail me if I go on to relate about Gideon.”​—HEB. 11:32.
SONG 124 Ever Loyal
PREVIEWa



 1. According to 1 Peter 5:2, what privilege do elders enjoy?
CHRISTIAN elders have been entrusted with the care of Jehovah’s precious sheep. These devoted men treasure their privilege to serve their brothers and sisters, and they work hard to be “shepherds who . . . really shepherd.” (Jer. 23:4; read 1 Peter 5:2.) How thankful we are to have such men in our congregations!
 2. What tests may some elders face?
2 In caring for their responsibilities, elders face many challenges. For one thing, caring for a congregation involves a great deal of work. Tony, an elder in the United States, had to learn to be more modest when it came to the amount of work he accepted. He explains: “At the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, I took on more and more work to organize meetings and the ministry. But no matter how much I did, there was always more to do. Eventually, my Bible reading, personal study, and prayer started to slip.” Ilir, an elder in Kosovo, faced a different challenge. When he was in a war zone, he found it difficult to obey theocratic direction. He says: “My courage was tested when the branch office offered me an assignment to help the brothers and sisters in a dangerous area. I was afraid, and the direction did not seem practical.” Tim, a missionary in Asia, found it hard just to keep up with the pace day after day. He says: “At times, I felt mentally and emotionally exhausted.” What can help elders who are facing similar challenges?
 3. How can all benefit from considering the example of Judge Gideon?
3 Elders can learn from the example of Judge Gideon. (Heb. 6:12; 11:32) He was both a protector and a shepherd of God’s people. (Judg. 2:16; 1 Chron. 17:6) Like Gideon, elders have been appointed to care for God’s people during a very turbulent time. (Acts 20:28; 2 Tim. 3:1) We can learn from Gideon’s modesty, humility, and obedience. His endurance was tested as he carried out his assignments. Whether we serve as an elder or not, we can grow in appreciation for our elders. We can support these hardworking spiritual men.​—Heb. 13:17.



WHEN YOUR MODESTY AND HUMILITY ARE TESTED

 4. How did Gideon show modesty and humility?
4 Gideon was a modest and humble man.b When Jehovah’s angel told Gideon that he had been chosen to deliver Israel from the powerful Midianites, that humble man replied: “My clan is the least in Manasseh, and I am the most insignificant in my father’s house.” (Judg. 6:15) He felt unqualified for the assignment, but Jehovah knew better. With Jehovah’s help, Gideon completed his assignment successfully.
 5. How may an elder’s modesty and humility be tested?
5 Elders do their best to display modesty and humility in all things. (Mic. 6:8; Acts 20:18, 19) They do not exaggerate their abilities or accomplishments; nor do they beat themselves up for their flaws or failings. Nevertheless, an elder may face tests. For example, he may accept a number of assignments and then find it difficult to fulfill them all. Or he may be criticized for the way he handled one assignment or praised for the way he handled another assignment. What can elders learn from Gideon that will help them in such situations?




Following Gideon’s example, a modest elder is willing to ask for help, such as in caring for cart witnessing (See paragraph 6)



 6. What can elders learn about modesty from Gideon? (See also picture.)
6 Ask for help. A person who is modest is aware of his personal limitations. Gideon was modest in being willing to ask others for help. (Judg. 6:27, 35; 7:24) Wise elders do similarly. Tony, quoted earlier, explains: “Because of my upbringing, I tended to accept more work than I could reasonably handle. So I decided to include the topic of modesty in our family worship and get my wife’s observations. I also reviewed on jw.org the video Train, Trust, and Empower Others, as Jesus Does.” Tony began to invite others to help with his workload. The result? Tony says: “The work in the congregation is being cared for, and I have more time to build myself up spiritually.”
 7. If criticized, how can elders imitate Gideon? (James 3:13)
7 Respond mildly if criticized. Another test for elders comes if they are criticized. Again, Gideon’s example can help. No doubt aware of his own imperfections, he responded mildly when the Ephraimites criticized him. (Judg. 8:1-3) Gideon did not reply in anger. He showed lowliness of mind by listening to their concerns, and he tactfully defused the tense situation. Wise elders imitate Gideon by listening carefully and responding mildly if criticized. (Read James 3:13.) They thus contribute to the peace in the congregation.
 8. How should appointed men respond if they receive praise? Give an example.
8 Direct praise to Jehovah. When Gideon was honored for the victory over Midian, he focused the attention on Jehovah. (Judg. 8:22, 23) How might appointed men imitate Gideon? They can credit Jehovah for what they accomplish. (1 Cor. 4:6, 7) For example, if an elder is commended for his teaching ability, he can direct attention to the source of the instruction, God’s Word, or to the training we receive from Jehovah’s organization. Elders might at times reflect on whether they are drawing undue attention to themselves. Consider the experience of an elder named Timothy. When newly appointed, Timothy loved giving public talks. He says: “I would come up with elaborate introductions and illustrations. These often drew praise from others. Unfortunately, the attention tended to be on me instead of on the Bible or Jehovah.” In time, Timothy saw the need to adjust his teaching style in order to avoid drawing undue attention to himself. (Prov. 27:21) With what result? He explains: “Different ones tell me how my talk has helped them to cope with a problem, to endure a trial, or to draw closer to Jehovah. I get more joy from those comments than I ever did from the praise that was directed to me years ago.”



WHEN YOUR OBEDIENCE OR COURAGE IS TESTED





Gideon obediently reduced the size of his army, selecting 300 men who manifested alertness (See paragraph 9)



 9. How were Gideon’s obedience and courage tested? (See cover picture.)
9 After Gideon was appointed as judge, his obedience and courage were tested. He was given the dangerous assignment to destroy his father’s Baal altar. (Judg. 6:25, 26) Later, after gathering an army, Gideon was twice directed to reduce its size. (Judg. 7:2-7) Finally, he was told to attack the enemy camp in the dead of night.​—Judg. 7:9-11.
10. How may an elder’s obedience be tested?
10 Elders should be “ready to obey.” (Jas. 3:17) An obedient elder readily submits to what the Scriptures say and to direction from God’s organization. He thus sets a good example for others. Still, his obedience may be tested. He may, for instance, find it hard to keep up with the direction he receives. In some cases, he may wonder whether certain direction is really practical or wise. Or he may be asked to take on an assignment that could put his freedom at risk. How can elders imitate Gideon’s obedience in such situations?
11. What can help elders to be obedient?
11 Listen carefully to direction and apply it. God told Gideon how to destroy his father’s altar, where to build a new altar to Jehovah, and which animal to sacrifice. Gideon did not try to second-guess the direction​—he just followed it. Today, elders receive instructions from Jehovah’s organization by means of letters, announcements, and guidelines related to our spiritual and physical welfare. We love our elders for faithfully following theocratic direction. The whole congregation benefits.​—Ps. 119:112.
12. How can elders apply Hebrews 13:17 if there is a change in theocratic direction?
12 Be willing to adjust. Recall that at Jehovah’s request, Gideon reduced his army by more than 99 percent. (Judg. 7:8) He may have thought: ‘Is this change really necessary? Will this work?’ Nevertheless, Gideon obeyed. Elders today imitate Gideon by implementing recommended changes in theocratic direction. (Read Hebrews 13:17.) As an example, in 2014 the Governing Body changed the way Kingdom Hall and Assembly Hall construction projects are financed. (2 Cor. 8:12-14) Congregations would no longer repay a loan. Instead, congregations worldwide would pool their resources so that theocratic facilities could be constructed wherever they were needed, regardless of the local congregation’s ability to pay. When José learned of the change, he doubted that it would work, thinking: ‘Not even one Kingdom Hall will ever be built. This is not how things are done in this part of the world.’ What helped José to support the direction? He says: “The words of Proverbs 3:5, 6 reminded me to trust in Jehovah. And the results have been wonderful! Not only are we building more Kingdom Halls but we have learned to contribute in different ways so that an equalizing takes place.”




Even where our work is under ban, we can courageously give an effective witness (See paragraph 13)



13. (a) Of what was Gideon convinced? (b) How can elders imitate Gideon? (See also picture.)
13 Courageously do Jehovah’s will. Gideon obeyed Jehovah despite his fears and the risk involved. (Judg. 9:17) After receiving assurance from Jehovah, Gideon was absolutely convinced that God would support him as he protected God’s people. Elders living in areas where the work is under ban imitate Gideon. They courageously take the lead at the meetings and in the ministry despite the threat of arrest, interrogation, loss of employment, or violence.c During the great tribulation, elders will need courage to obey instructions they will receive​—regardless of the dangers involved. The instructions may relate to delivering a symbolic hailstone message and to surviving the attack of Gog of Magog.​—Ezek. 38:18; Rev. 16:21.



WHEN YOUR ENDURANCE IS TESTED

14. How was Gideon’s endurance tested?
14 Gideon’s assignment as judge involved a lot of physical exertion. When the Midianites fled during the nighttime battle, Gideon chased after them from the Valley of Jezreel all the way to the Jordan River, which possibly was surrounded by thickets. (Judg. 7:22) Did Gideon stop at the Jordan? No! Though tired, he and his 300 men crossed over and continued the pursuit. Finally, they caught up with the Midianites and defeated them.​—Judg. 8:4-12.
15. When may an elder’s endurance be tested?
15 An elder may at times feel physically, mentally, or emotionally drained from taking care of the congregation and his family. In such circumstances, how can elders imitate Gideon?




Loving elders have been able to strengthen many who need support (See paragraphs 16-17)



16-17. What helped Gideon to endure, and what confidence can elders have? (Isaiah 40:28-31) (See also picture.)
16 Trust that Jehovah will strengthen you. Gideon trusted that Jehovah would give him strength, and he was not disappointed. (Judg. 6:14, 34) Once, Gideon and his men were pursuing two Midianite kings on foot while the kings may have been riding camels. (Judg. 8:12, 21) Yet, with God’s help, the determined Israelites prevailed. Elders can likewise rely on Jehovah, the one who “never tires out or grows weary.” He will give them strength when they need it.​—Read Isaiah 40:28-31.
17 Consider the experience of Matthew, a member of a Hospital Liaison Committee. What helps him to endure? Matthew says: “I have experienced the reality of Philippians 4:13. Many times when tired and completely spent, I have prayed intensely, begging God for the physical and mental energy that I need to support my brothers. In those moments, I have felt Jehovah’s spirit energize me, helping me to endure.” Like Gideon, our devoted elders may face obstacles while unselfishly shepherding the flock. Granted, they need to recognize their physical and emotional limits and work within those limits. They can, though, trust that Jehovah will hear their requests for help and will strengthen them to endure.​—Ps. 116:1; Phil. 2:13.
18. In review, how can elders imitate Gideon?
18 There are timely and practical lessons that elders can learn from Gideon. Elders ought to display modesty and humility in both the amount of work they take on and the way they respond to criticism or praise. They must display obedience and courage, especially as the end of this system of things draws near. And they need to trust that no matter what obstacles they may face, God can strengthen them. Certainly, we appreciate such hardworking shepherds and “keep holding men of that sort dear.”​—Phil. 2:29.



HOW CAN ELDERS IMITATE GIDEON’S . . .
  modesty and humility?

  obedience and courage?

  endurance?




SONG 120 Imitate Christ’s Mildness
a Gideon was appointed by Jehovah to shepherd and to protect His people during a very difficult period in the history of the nation of Israel. Gideon faithfully carried out that assignment for some 40 years. However, he faced a number of challenges. We will discuss how his example can help elders today when they face tests.
b Modesty and humility are closely linked traits. We show that we are modest by having a proper view of ourselves and of our limitations. We show that we are humble by displaying lowliness of mind. (Phil. 2:3) Generally, a modest person is also a humble person.
c See the article “Keep Worshipping Jehovah When Under Ban” in the July 2019, issue of The Watchtower, pp. 10-11, pars. 10-13.

