From Our Readers
Pit Bulls
I normally find your magazines well researched, so I was amazed to note mistakes in “Why Some Are Mean and Others Mild” (March 22, 1988). The dog called Pete in Our Gang was not a pit bull but an American bulldog. There are no white pit bulls with “black eyes”; the dog pictured on page 26 is not an Akita; there are no aggressive dogs, just aggressive dog owners. If a dog goes “crazy,” the owner is at fault.
D. H., Federal Republic of Germany
The source (“Sports Illustrated”) states that pit bull Pete’s black circle was “almost certainly the work of a make-up artist.” We stand by our identification of an Akita among the group pictured. Readers’ comments below may bear on your other point.​—ED.
As a healthy pastime, I train pit bulls, and I know from my experience of many years that certain pit bulls are a little difficult to manage, and in some cases they can be “dangerous.” But this is not the principal personality of these canines​—the character of the dog is “molded” by the owner. I agree with the article 100 percent. However, some who have read it claim that the article emphasized that pit bulls are “born killers” and “criminal from birth” without exception. I wish with all respect that you would make this point clear, since many are going to extremes about this breed after reading the article.
D. Q. H., Costa Rica
You presented the material in a way that helps people to understand the importance of the temperament of all dogs, plus the vital role the owner plays. As owners of a pit bull dog, we have found that with the proper training, a pit bull can be one of the most lovable pets. But I don’t think that anyone that owns a dog for a pet could make the statement, “He won’t bite,” for animals are animals. We can’t predict their behavior.
C. S., United States
With so much media hype about pit bulls, it was good to read a balanced article showing that much of the problem is attributable to abusive owners (some actually feed their dogs gunpowder and/​or metal shavings) and uncontrolled inbreeding, either of which can cause instability in any breed of dog.
S. S., United States
Running Away
“Is Running Away the Answer?” (March 22, 1988) talks of a 14-year-old girl who ran away because she didn’t have a close relationship with her parents and felt she couldn’t talk to them. She felt that there was no one who would understand her. I’m 14 years old, and recently I had the same experience as the Amy in the article. I left home and went to my friends for exactly the same reasons. The only difference in our stories is that I didn’t have sex or deal in drugs. The same night I left, my parents came and got me. We went to the congregation elders and talked. We are pulling together now, and I know now that my parents are there for me. I know they will understand whatever I have to say to them. If only I had read this article earlier, I would never have run away.
A. B., United States

