Cyprus
WHEN the apostle Paul and his traveling companions preached in Cyprus in the first century, they encountered intense opposition. A false prophet, a sorcerer named Bar-Jesus, sought to influence the proconsul in an effort to hinder their ministry. In view of the methods that the sorcerer employed, Paul straightforwardly described him as being ‘full of every sort of fraud and villainy, a son of the Devil, an enemy of everything righteous, one who distorted the right ways of Jehovah.’ (Acts 13:6-12) In modern times too some clergymen in Cyprus have employed similar methods in their efforts to prevent people there from learning about Jehovah’s grand purpose for blessing all the families of the earth.
But not all the people here in Cyprus agree with what these clergymen say and do. The Cypriots have a reputation for hospitality. Visitors are normally offered a sweetmeat; or if it is a hot summer day, they may be handed a cool glass of lemonade to enjoy while sitting in the shade of a grape-laden vine.
The climate here is temperate. Cyprus is located in the eastern Mediterranean, about 60 miles [100 km] west of the Syrian coast and 40 miles [60 km] south of Turkey. The island itself is beautiful. Sandy beaches reach out toward the warm waters of the Mediterranean. The Troodos mountains, which stretch across the southwestern part of the island, offer a cool, pine-scented environment for those who want to escape the summer heat. Grapevines and fig trees are common sights, as are olive and carob trees. When almond trees are in bloom, the countryside appears to be covered with a blanket of snow. And when the citrus trees blossom, the air is filled with exquisite perfume. In rural areas, shepherds are frequently seen leading their flocks of sheep and of goats to pasture. The way of life of many of these people reaches back to a time long before the Common Era.
Cyprus in History
This island, though only 128 miles [206 km] in length, has in various ways been influenced by all seven world powers of Bible history, and it has, in fact, come under the direct control of six of these. The eighth world power, the United Nations, has also made its presence felt, to keep peace between the Greek-speaking communities and those that speak Turkish.
Christianity was introduced into Cyprus in the early part of the first century C.E. After the wave of persecution that followed the death of Stephen at Jerusalem, some of the disciples who were scattered went to Cyprus and preached to the large community of Jews who lived on the island at that time. (Acts 11:19) Cyprus was later included on Paul’s first missionary tour, about 47-48 C.E. One of his traveling companions was a native Cypriot who had enjoyed association with the apostles of Jesus Christ in Jerusalem after the outpouring of holy spirit in 33 C.E. They had surnamed him Barnabas (Son of Comfort). (Acts 4:34-37) During their ministry in Cyprus, Paul and Barnabas first witnessed in Salamis on the east coast and then worked their way across the island to Paphos on the west. The ruins of Salamis and of Paphos testify to their prominence at the time that Paul and his companions carried on their ministry here.
It was at Paphos that the Roman proconsul Sergius Paulus was converted to Christianity in spite of agitation by the sorcerer Bar-Jesus. The proconsul was, as the Bible says, “astounded at the teaching of Jehovah.”—Acts 13:12.
About two years later, Barnabas along with his cousin Mark returned to Cyprus to do further evangelizing.—Acts 15:36-41.
‘The Bible Students Are the University’
In modern times, too, extensive evangelizing has been done in Cyprus. Sincere people have been grateful to learn what the Bible itself teaches, in contrast with the traditions of men. An early indication that such teaching had reached Cyprus appears in The Watch Tower of October 1, 1922. A letter published in that issue indicates that an Armenian clergyman had received a tract showing that the soul itself dies, that it is not immortal. He was grateful for what he read. But he was deeply disturbed by the spiritual state of the churches in Cyprus. Concerning them he wrote: “There are many . . . church buildings here. But there is no spiritual life; it has long been dead. The clergy live a much more degraded life than the common people. There is nothing else left for me, but to lament, weep and cry out like Jeremiah. I am trying to the best of my ability to give the milk of the truth to Greeks, Armenians, Turks, and Jews.” Other Armenians, outside Cyprus, were also doing what they could to share Bible truth with the people of Cyprus.
Then, in September 1924, Cyrus Charalambous returned to his native Cyprus from the United States. He was a Bible Student, and he brought with him many tracts, including a good supply of ones entitled Where Are the Dead? He went to the central post office in Nicosia, the capital, and sent a piece of literature to each one of the headmen of the villages as well as to the teachers in every town and village. In those days mail was taken on the back of a donkey, and deliveries were made to the villages once a week.
One piece of literature, a tract entitled Peoples Pulpit, reached the schoolteacher in Xylophagou, a village in a potato-growing region in the southeastern part of the island. That teacher was visited by a local farmer, Antonis Spetsiotis. Antonis, a studious man, started to look around for something to read. He saw the tract and was soon engrossed in its contents. He discussed it with another villager, Andreas Christou. In time they obtained and read more publications of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. They also shared with others what they were learning, and some of these joined them in a study of the Bible.
Cleopas, a theologian of the Greek Orthodox Church, was one of those who showed interest. Although he became a friend of Jehovah’s people, he never took a positive stand for the truth. Yet, he used to say: ‘Catholicism is the kindergarten, Protestantism is the elementary school, but the Bible Students are the university.’
However, not everyone spoke kindly of the Bible Students. The informal witnessing done by Antonis Spetsiotis and Andreas Christou brought upon them the anger of their village. The archbishop of Cyprus was informed, and theologians were sent to counteract the influence of the two brothers. During the next two years, a number of debates were held—a theologian on one side, Brother Spetsiotis on the other. No halls were rented for these occasions; the local coffee shop served well, since that is where people gathered. Eventually both of the brothers were excommunicated from the Greek Orthodox Church and were forbidden the right to be married or buried. In fact, when a child of Andreas Christou died, the local priest actually did refuse burial for the child in the village cemetery unless Andreas would attend the church service on Sunday morning. What was the outcome? Well, the child was eventually buried, but Andreas did not go to church.
Meanwhile, Tryfon Kalogirou, a health inspector from a village in the Nicosia district, was learning the truth. As he visited the villages in connection with his work, he made good use of the Bible to expose the teachings of hellfire and the Trinity. However, after one of his legs was amputated because of disease, people would taunt him, saying that God was punishing him for having changed religions. This caused him much suffering, just as the twisted arguments of Job’s companions added to Job’s grief. (Compare Job 4:7, 8; 12:4.) However, Tryfon remained a faithful brother until his death in 1960.
Zealous Pioneers Spread the Good News
A fine impetus was given to the work on the island in 1934 when two pioneers, Brothers Matheakis and Triantafilopoulos, arrived from Greece. The headquarters office in Brooklyn, New York, dispatched 43 cartons of books in Greek, in Turkish, and in other languages, for their use. These brothers were zealous but had to contend with much indifference at first. Misled by the clergy, the people thought the brothers were Communists or Protestants and were warned that they were trying to change people’s religion. However, people in the larger towns, particularly businessmen, were curious and wanted to know what this “new religion” was all about.
The pioneers received from Brooklyn the names of a few subscribers for the Society’s magazines. One subscriber was Cleopas, the theologian. He obtained many of the Society’s publications and even invited the pioneers to his home for a meal on several occasions. He also took Brother Matheakis along to the Hellenic Club in Larnaca, where he introduced him as ‘a man from Athens representing an organization publishing useful books explaining the Bible.’ That evening Brother Matheakis was able to place 84 bound books and 120 booklets as well as take 10 subscriptions for The Golden Age.
From Larnaca, on the southeast coast, the two pioneers made their way to Xylophagou, some 16 miles [26 km] away, where they met up with Antonis Spetsiotis and Andreas Christou. These two brothers were doing the best they could to share what they had learned, but how happy they were for the opportunity to come to a more accurate understanding of the Scriptures! The first congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Cyprus was formed in their village.
On to Famagusta the pioneers went. This was a place of orange groves and windmills near the ruins of ancient Salamis. While the pioneers were preaching there, a letter arrived from the Society. It notified them that a Greek-speaking couple by the name of Lagakos would be coming from Egypt to help with the work. What welcome news! On their arrival, the group decided that Brother and Sister Lagakos would concentrate on the towns while the other pioneers witnessed in the rural areas.
Soon another congregation was formed. This one in Nicosia. Inside the old walled part of the town, there was a sizable Turkish-Cypriot population, and the brothers had their meeting place in a home owned by a Muslim.
Gradually, further results were forthcoming. Some of the Greek-Cypriot brothers took hold of the pioneer service. One of these was Christos Kourtellides, a short man with a twinkle in his bright blue eyes. What an outstanding example of courage and loyalty he set! During his 17 years in the pioneer service, he covered almost all the 650 villages on the island. It was not an easy life. When no hospitality was offered, he often slept outdoors. Even his death opened the way for a good witness. The priest in his native village refused permission for him to be buried in the local cemetery. Appeal had to be made to the commissioner of the district. When his body was eventually interred, 150 were present to hear the funeral talk.
The return of Brother Triantafilopoulos to Greece and the departure of the Lagakos couple for Syria meant the end of the original band of pioneers. However, in 1938, there were four local pioneers and seven congregation publishers telling the good news, and 40 persons attended the Memorial of Christ’s death.
That same year Panagiotis Gavrielides, together with a neighboring family, came in contact with the truth. Amid great persecution the mother of that family and her three daughters, together with Panagiotis, formed a small group for Bible study and service in the village of Polemidhia. Regarding the reaction of the villagers, Panagiotis said: ‘When our small group met together, it was a usual thing for us to hear loud bangs on the door and windows. One man was so opposed that he went to the house of the sisters and beat them up. I too had to go to the hospital for treatment. Strangely, however, a few days later, as that same man crossed a bridge while riding atop a lorry on his way home from work, he fell into the river below and was killed.’
Wartime Censorship
During the second world war, censorship regulations were seized upon as a basis for confiscating literature published by the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. Magazines for Bible study that were sent to Cyprus were not received by the brothers. Instead, these were stacked up at the general post office in the capital.
With virtually no literature, how did the Witnesses cope? On sheets of paper, they printed extracts from the Society’s earlier publications and distributed these in the field ministry. From time to time, when a copy of The Watchtower reached them, they quickly translated it and used it for study. Assemblies were also held during this time. And as the number of publishers increased, an additional congregation was formed.
Finally, a few months before the end of the war, 3,000 magazines and 17 cartons of our books and booklets were released. Of course, the post office staff had watched the pile grow, and some of them showed interest. As a result, it was possible to place 45 books with them.
Could They Get Married?
Other situations involving Jehovah’s Witnesses also kept officials aware of the Witnesses’ presence. In 1939, Brother Matheakis wanted to get married. But getting married in those days was not easy for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Cyprus. Why? Because the authorities would not acknowledge Jehovah’s Witnesses as a religious group and so would not grant permission for a civil marriage. Wartime conditions hindered efforts to contact the brothers at headquarters in Brooklyn to ask for advice. Eventually the branch office in London issued a certificate stating that Jehovah’s Witnesses in Cyprus were connected with the International Bible Students Association in England. On the strength of this certificate, the British authorities in Cyprus agreed to a civil marriage for Brother Matheakis.
Over the years this faithful couple became well-known for their hospitality. Their home was always open to the brothers, and they are remembered for their kindness to all those in need.
Arrival of Gilead Graduates
The first Gilead graduate who arrived on the island was Antonios Karandinos, a Greek who had been residing in the United States. He came in 1947, when there were just 33 Kingdom publishers here. He had worked as a seaman and was a robust fellow. He was also a staunch supporter of the truth, and this was important in dealing with the tough opposition that he encountered during his ministry in Cyprus.
The opposition was especially fierce when the brothers began to offer the magazines in street witnessing. In Famagusta, a man operating as a tool of the church constantly harassed them. He would incite people against the Witnesses. As a result, on one occasion Brother Karandinos found himself surrounded by a mob, and this caused obstruction of traffic. Brother Karandinos and the instigator of the trouble were taken to court; both were fined. Other episodes followed. At times the brothers had to call the police to extricate publishers from a mob.
It was a happy day for the brothers in 1948 when two more missionaries, who had to leave Greece, arrived in Cyprus. In May of the same year, Don Rendell, a graduate of Gilead’s eighth class, also arrived, having had to leave Egypt. That year the Society established a branch office in Cyprus, with Anthony Sideris as overseer. Over a period of years, other Gilead graduates were assigned to Cyprus, and missionary homes were set up in some of the main towns. These brothers proved to be a great asset in organizing the congregations in a theocratic way and in taking the lead in training the publishers in the field ministry.
Before they could give much help, though, they needed to be able to speak Greek, and that led to some humorous incidents. One brother, when quoting Revelation 12:7, said, ‘Michael and the English battled the dragon,’ instead of “Michael and his angels,” because “angels” and “English” sound very similar in Greek. But householders very often paid attention to a foreigner who tried to speak their language. In one instance after a new brother had been baptized, he said to one of the missionaries: ‘The thing that impressed me when you called on me was the fact that, though you are a foreigner, you were taking the trouble to learn my language. It made me feel that I ought to look into what you had brought me.’
Church Stirs up Curiosity About the Witnesses
Although there were, on an average, only about 50 publishers of Jehovah’s Kingdom on the island in 1948, the Orthodox Church felt obliged ‘to put an end to this heresy,’ as they expressed it. What tactics did they use? An encyclical was published denouncing us, and this was printed in many of the daily newspapers and was read in the churches throughout the island. Children were sent out to distribute copies from door to door, and copies were pasted on walls and telegraph poles. We were branded as unpatriotic, antichrists, and agents of Zionism.
How did Jehovah’s people react? Well, the people were now curious about the Witnesses. They wanted to know why the church so strongly opposed us. So our brothers undertook a four-month campaign in which 72,000 booklets were left in the hands of the people—seven times as many as the total pieces of literature that had been distributed during the entire previous year. This gave people an opportunity to find out for themselves what Jehovah’s Witnesses teach. Many read our publications out of curiosity. On the other hand, some brothers were beaten and stoned. In Limassol a brother and sister were taken to court, charged with proselytism and troublemaking, and sentenced to one month’s imprisonment.
Discussion at the Archbishopric
During this time, Don Rendell met an influential gentleman in Nicosia who was closely associated with the Orthodox Church. Regarding the experience, Brother Rendell later said: ‘After an interesting discussion, I left the man the book “Let God Be True,” and on a return visit he wanted to know more. However, he said he would like to hear a discussion between me and the archbishop of the Greek Orthodox Church, with whom he was acquainted. “Would you be willing?” he asked.
‘Brother Sideris, the branch overseer, agreed to accompany me to the archbishop’s palace. On arrival, we were told that the archbishop was “indisposed” but that we could speak with a theologian of the church who was attached to the ecclesiastical court. After a lengthy discussion, I asked the theologian what the position of the Greek Orthodox Church would be when there was a conflict between the Bible and the traditions of the church. He answered that the church would accept the traditions of the church. And he certainly did! When Colossians chapter 1, verse 15, was quoted, which says that Jesus is “the firstborn of all creation,” he immediately exclaimed: “That is the heresy of Arius!” It was obvious who were the true supporters of the Bible.’
Plenty of Free Advertising
Despite continuing opposition, the average number of publishers rose from 141 in 1949 to 204 in 1950, and 241 attended the Memorial celebration in 1950. During that year a circuit assembly was arranged in Paphos, where the apostle Paul had preached. A cinema was rented, but the local bishop and other prominent people in town brought pressure on the owner in an effort to get him to break his contract with us. The local council tried to force us to call off our assembly by limiting the number of people who could be in the cinema and by imposing an exorbitant tax on use of the building. When efforts were made to see the British commissioner for the district to resolve the situation, these were all blocked. So the branch overseer, himself British, made a personal visit to the commissioner’s home and explained that Jehovah’s Witnesses were being harassed by the local officials. We greatly appreciated what the commissioner did to help us. A large yard adjoining the cinema was made available, and this provided plenty of room for those who could not be seated inside.
The bishop of Paphos was furious. Like the ancient sorcerer Bar-Jesus, who tried to turn the Roman proconsul Sergius Paulus away from the preaching of Paul, the bishop employed all his wonder-working “ecclesiastical magic.” (Compare Acts 13:6-12.) He had a leaflet distributed to notify people that the two pioneer Witnesses living in the Paphos district were excommunicated. This was quickly followed by another leaflet denouncing Jehovah’s Witnesses as the “heresy known as chiliasm,” which, it said, was “a satanic invention of the unhealthy imagination of the last century.” In support of the church, young folks distributing leaflets took up positions alongside each publisher who was witnessing on the street. Anyone who showed interest in what the Witnesses were doing had opposition leaflets thrust at him by these youths.
Some newspapers, but not all, joined in the attack on Jehovah’s people. In 1950 the New Political Review of Paphos declared: “The followers of Jehovah already number hundreds in our district. They will grow to thousands by tomorrow and will endanger the very existence of our church. For these reasons it is necessary for our Holy Synod and our bishops to get on the move and to investigate this terrible matter immediately and without postponement or delay.” Another newspaper, Paphos, obviously getting in a gibe at the church, stated in its issue of May 4, 1950: “The condition of poverty and misery that holds sway in some villages, as well as the extensive property owned by the monasteries and the church, all these things have created the right climate for the growth of the chiliastic belief. We mention for example one village, namely Episkopi, where almost all the land belongs to the church and its inhabitants work as slaves renting land or entering into partnership. . . . No wonder then if half the population of this village became Jehovah’s Witnesses. . . . From the above the Cyprus church should understand that it will not prevail with a paper fight. The chiliasts have found the Achilles’ heel of clericaldom . . . It is not sufficient to fight them with leaflets.”
With all this publicity, Jehovah’s Witnesses became the talk of the town. The interest of the people being now thoroughly aroused, large numbers of them turned out for the public talk at the cinema. At least 500 were present.
First Visit of the Society’s President
An event that brought great joy to the Cypriot brothers was the visit, in December 1951, of Brother Knorr accompanied by Milton Henschel. The Royal Cinema was the site for a three-day assembly. It was a modern building, and Brother Knorr commented: ‘We would like to have a place like this for our circuit assemblies in New York.’ A three-day assembly had been planned, but because the Royal Cinema was in a residential part of the old city, the Pallas Cinema in the center of Nicosia was booked for the public talk to be given by Brother Knorr on Sunday morning. Arrangements were made to give full publicity to this talk. Four large banners prepared in Greek and English were mounted on the side of the Royal Cinema. Two hundred posters were distributed throughout the capital. Advertisements were flashed on the screens in the largest cinemas. English, Greek, and Turkish newspapers carried announcements of the public talk “Will Religion Meet the World Crisis?” Not surprisingly, personnel at the leading Communist newspaper said that they could not advertise the talk ‘because it was against party line,’ and members of the staff at the leading nationalist newspaper said that they ‘must first have the approval of the archbishop.’
With all the publicity, we wondered how our religious opposers would react. We soon found out. One night the banners on the Royal Cinema were ripped down. We informed the police. The archbishop had a leaflet printed in which he urged: “ATTENTION! KEEP AWAY FROM THE MILLENNIALISTS.” Part of the leaflet said: ‘Do you see? They have invited a stranger also to uphold them. . . . They are wolves in sheep’s clothing who come to devour the sensible sheep of Christ. . . . Do not approach them, don’t give them any attention. Ignore them, maybe they will come to their senses and be corrected. From THE HOLY ARCHBISHOPRIC.’
Would it be possible for Brother Knorr to give his public talk at the Pallas Cinema without disturbance? Let an eyewitness describe the scene. Don Rendell recalls: ‘It was just after 10:00 a.m. when I approached the cinema. There were police outside the entrance, and I could see a crowd of young men milling around with the intention of getting into the cinema to cause trouble. As there were brothers who knew many of the troublemakers, they were assisting the police who were keeping the mobsters away from the entrance. I had to push my way through them to get in. At 10:30 a.m., Brother Knorr began his talk with 420 present. But the religious hooligans outside started to bang on the doors. This was quickly stopped by the police. But the question now was, How will we be able to get out of the cinema after the program? The brothers decided that, with the help of the police, they would keep the mobsters at the front of the cinema. Then at the end of the talk, we were asked to leave the building by a rear exit, and this we did quietly, thus avoiding any confrontation.’
Church Bells Signal Another Attack
In 1952, Famagusta was a lovely town with orange and lemon groves and a long sandy beach. This town on the east coast of the island is just a few miles from the ruins of the ancient city of Salamis, where the apostle Paul and his companions preached. But Famagusta today, since the Turkish invasion in 1974, is for the most part a ghost town, with very few inhabitants. However, in 1952, Jehovah’s Witnesses had planned an assembly to be held in one of the town’s cinemas. Well aware that the Greek Orthodox Church had declared all-out war against Jehovah’s Witnesses and because of what had occurred at previous assemblies, we requested that the police be on hand. Sunday morning was beautiful, and the brothers were looking forward to the public talk scheduled for midmorning. However, ten minutes before the talk was due to begin and with 350 already seated in the cinema, there were indications that trouble was brewing. Antonios Karandinos, a missionary in the town, was one of the attendants at the front entrance of the cinema. This is how he described what happened:
“Just 10 minutes before the public talk was due to begin, the bell of a nearby Orthodox church began to peal. This, as we understood later, was the signal for priests and scores of secondary-school youths to begin a march on the cinema. What a sight came into view! There were priests heading a mob of youths bent on getting into the cinema. We braced ourselves for trouble. The door to the cinema was closed, and when they tried to force their way in, I was manhandled by a priest and my clothes were torn. The situation became more menacing, so police reinforcements were requested and were soon on the scene. Thwarted in their endeavor to break up the meeting, the mob shouted and raved against us outside the cinema.”
Their efforts frustrated, the priests led the mob back to the church. Jehovah had given us the victory.
Lawbreakers Taken to Court
Earlier, the bishops, priests, and theologians of the church had been sent out to towns and villages throughout the island to urge the people: “When Jehovah’s Witnesses visit your village or town, throw them out!” Not everyone did the clergy’s bidding. The brothers continued to find sheeplike ones. But such incitement was bound to have repercussions. Sister Galatia Matheakis tells about one incident in which she was involved:
‘Early one Sunday morning, 20 of us assembled for field service. Three villages had been selected. It took us about two hours to make our way to the territory. In the largest village ten of the brothers worked from house to house; the remaining ten were divided up to work the other two villages. In one of the smaller villages, the brothers had been driven out by 10:30 a.m. The largest village had almost been completed, with good results, when the fury of mob violence broke out. Chairs were brought down on the heads of two brothers witnessing in the center of the village, and stones were hurled at them as they left the village. The village priest then gathered a mob about 200 strong to round up all of us. Armed with heavy sticks and beating tin cans, they made a search for us. First a brother and a sister were found. Sticks landed across the back of the brother, and stones were hurled at the sister. The same happened to most of us. We were marched through the village. The marks left from the beatings served as a testimony against these villagers when some of the brothers had to report to a government hospital for examination.’
Our brothers filed a complaint in court. After hearing the testimony for three days, the judge said: “I have believed the evidence of the complainants in toto and I find the accused guilty on all counts. . . . I do not believe the allegation that the complainants were teaching that Christ was a bastard, etc. . . . The complainants went to the village of the accused in order to teach their creed; they did so peacefully and the accused had no right to attack them.”
Between 1952 and 1953 two missionaries, Antonios Karandinos and Emmanuel Paterakis, had to leave Cyprus. These brothers had put up a hard fight for the faith while in Cyprus, and they are remembered with affection.
Viewing The New World Society in Action
In 1955 we received the Society’s film The New World Society in Action. Large audiences turned out to see it. Not only the brothers but also worldly persons got a better insight into Jehovah’s organization.
Among the many interesting experiences was the following: In the village of Xylophagou, with a population of 1,500 inhabitants, the proprietor of the local cinema agreed to let us use his cinema without payment. On the evening the film was to be shown, the local priest sent a villager to write down the names of all who were present. With what result? When the priest asked for the list of names, the villager replied: “Seeing that nearly the whole village was present, how could I write down all the names?”
Times of Change
Since 1878, Cyprus had been under British control. But in the 1950’s, Greek Cypriots, under the direction of Archbishop Makarios, promoted a campaign for ENOSIS, or union with Greece, on the basis of such mutual ties as language and religion. The Turkish-speaking segment of the population opposed it.
Nevertheless, there was agitation for independence from British colonial rule. From 1955 to 1960, an organization called EOKA pressed the issue of independence by means of guerrilla attacks on the British. Jehovah’s Witnesses are completely neutral in such political matters, but they could not help being affected by what was going on around them.
One of the first incidents in this campaign took place in Famagusta quite close to the Society’s branch office. A British military camp nearby came under attack. Understandably, the five missionaries living at the branch, all of whom were British subjects, felt considerable pressure.
On another occasion, Dennis Matthews and his wife, Mavis, two missionaries, had just arrived home. When they opened the back door, a bomb exploded in the home of a neighbor, a British serviceman. While the person who had placed the bomb was being chased into an orange grove across from the missionary home, shooting broke out. Soon there was a knock on the door, but the missionaries were afraid to open up, so they called out to find out who was there. It was British servicemen, who were anxious to know if the occupants were safe.
Once when Brothers Rendell and Gavrielides were in Xylophagou to help with preparations for a circuit assembly, there was a great commotion outside during the congregation’s weekly Watchtower Study. British soldiers appeared in the doorway. They notified us that on the outskirts of the village, a British soldier had been killed and another severely injured. As a result, the whole area was now under curfew, and they asked Brother Rendell to tell all those in the hall to go to their homes immediately. The following day, all the male inhabitants of the area, including Brother Rendell, though he was British, were rounded up and put into a barbed-wire enclosure for interrogation. Of course, Jehovah’s Witnesses were not involved in the killing, so they were eventually released and continued their preparations for the upcoming assembly.
Time and again, however, theocratic activities had to be curtailed on short notice as confrontations between EOKA and the British forces brought curfews and other restrictions. No one could be on the streets after nightfall, so meetings had to be held during daylight hours. There were periods when people were confined to their homes for as much as four days. Everyone was suspicious of his neighbor and was fearful of expressing an opinion. However, despite the restrictions, Jehovah’s Witnesses continued to comfort honesthearted ones.
End of Colonial Rule
The struggle against British rule in Cyprus continued until 1960. Then at midnight on August 16, Cyprus became a republic and eventually a member of the United Nations. Amid scenes of great rejoicing, Greek Cypriots at last felt free from foreign domination. But was this true freedom? How did Jehovah’s Witnesses fare under the new republic? Let the historical facts speak for themselves.
Before the end of the year, there were two bomb attacks against the Witnesses. Who was responsible? The first took place in Xylophagou. Two bombs were placed on the veranda of the Kingdom Hall. The attack was obviously against Jehovah’s Witnesses as a religious group. Since the bombs exploded after midnight, no one was injured, although damage was done to the Kingdom Hall.
In the second incident, a bomb was thrown at the home where four special pioneers were living in Pentayia. Fortunately, they were out in the field ministry at the time. The owner of the house knew who was responsible and said: ‘I will visit the bishop and ask him to pay for the damage caused. At the same time, I am going to tell him that if he wants to gain followers for Christ, he must do this by preaching as Jehovah’s Witnesses do and not by violence.’
A brother and his family who had moved to the village of Liopetri to help the small congregation there also became targets of intolerance. Threats such as ‘we will burn him alive’ or ‘we must kill him’ were not uncommon. It was after midnight when a number of masked fanatics surrounded the brother’s home and began firing their pistols, shouting to the brother that if he did not leave the next day he would be killed. Since the police would not give protection to the brother and his family, they decided to move out of the village. Nevertheless, in spite of all attempts to intimidate the brothers in Liopetri, there is a congregation in the village today, and recently the brothers were able to build a fine new Kingdom Hall.
A despicable incident took place on the evening of September 11, 1962. Andreas Psaltis and his wife, Nina, together with Eunice McRae, were in the Famagusta missionary home when masked men entered through a window. They beat up Brother Psaltis. Then they tied up the two sisters and subjected them to indignity by shaving their heads. (Compare 1 Corinthians 11:6.) After ransacking the house, they left.
Finally, in December 1963 tension between the two major ethnic groups on the island reached a breaking point. Violence erupted. There was particularly fierce fighting in a suburb of Nicosia, the town called Trachonas, where there was a mixed population of Greek and Turkish Cypriots. There were a number of Jehovah’s Witnesses who lived in Trachonas, and they had built a large Kingdom Hall there. At the risk of their lives, brothers living outside that district got food to fellow believers in the troubled area. Sadly, however, one brother, Andronicos Michaelidis, was stabbed to death when trying to get to work.
A Test of Integrity
In 1964 the young male Witnesses in particular were faced with a test of their integrity. A conscription law was approved by the Cyprus government as the conflict between the Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities continued. Witnesses of military age who were called up for military service had a serious decision to make. Under pressure, would they adhere to the teachings of Jesus Christ? In the depths of their heart, were they truly Christian neutrals? (Matt. 26:52; John 17:15, 16) Would they continue to trust in Jehovah with all their heart?—Prov. 3:5, 6; Isa. 2:2-4.
Many showed such faith. However, some compromised and ceased to be part of the neutral Christian congregation. Other young Witnesses chose to leave the island, with the result that the average number of publishers dropped from 516 in 1963 to 394 in 1966. The congregations felt somewhat discouraged.
Measures were taken to strengthen the faith of the brothers. To this end, one-day assemblies were arranged where timely Scriptural counsel was discussed. The results proved encouraging. But the tests were not all past.
Framing Mischief by Law
In June 1966 another blow was aimed at Jehovah’s organization. The Council of Ministers presented to the parliament a bill that could greatly affect the preaching work of Jehovah’s Witnesses. It was a bill prohibiting proselytism, and it stipulated that anyone who visited people at their homes for that purpose or who distributed religious literature in order to proselytize not only would be subject to imprisonment for up to two years but would have to pay a fine as well.
Many protests were lodged with the Cyprus House of Representatives, and visits were made to resident representatives of the British and United States governments. A letter was sent by the Society to the Secretary General of the United Nations. As a result of appeals from many quarters, the bill has to date not been presented for ratification.
Building Program Gets Under Way
As the work of Kingdom proclamation expanded, there was a growing need for suitable meeting places. In 1967, when the publishers here numbered just 431, the Society’s branch in Cyprus started a building fund, and the brothers were enthusiastic about the prospects.
We were very much encouraged by Brother Henschel during his zone visit in April 1968. At that time a new missionary couple, Louis Kopsies and his wife, Stella, arrived on the island. Brother Kopsies gave valuable assistance to the building program by helping to organize the work and giving of himself in an exemplary way.
An important step in our plans for building was the formation, in March 1960, of a local corporation called The Jehovah’s Witnesses’ Congregation (Cyprus) Ltd. The charter included, among other things, arrangements for holding title to property.
The first project was the building of a spacious Kingdom Hall in Famagusta, with room for 230. Not only did this facility serve the local congregation but, along with an adjoining courtyard that was covered by a huge grapevine, it also provided a location in which to hold circuit assemblies.
Next to receive attention was the Society’s branch office. For about 20 years, we had used rented premises. Now the Society purchased a piece of land at Agios Dometios, a suburb of the capital. Here the brothers built a new four-story building, including a Kingdom Hall on the first floor. This building was dedicated in 1969 by F. W. Franz, who was then vice president of the Watch Tower Society.
Meanwhile, a beautiful Kingdom Hall had been built in Xylophagou, the location of the first congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Cyprus, formed in the early 1930’s. There had been much opposition in this village when the first ones that showed interest in the truth here started to witness to others. But as the villagers watched the brothers and sisters work together for three weeks, 15 or more hours a day, to build their Kingdom Hall, there were some who could not help being favorably impressed. Now there is a Kingdom Hall that seats 450 people right in the center of the village. In and around it, there was also ample room for holding assemblies and conventions.
Limassol, the second-largest town in the island and a seaside resort on the south coast, was the next town to get its own Kingdom Hall. In addition to the Kingdom Hall, provision was made for a missionary home upstairs. In 1974, when the branch premises had to be vacated in Nicosia, part of the space upstairs was adapted for use by the office.
The Biblical town of Paphos was also given attention. Although increase here came very slowly at first, in more recent years there has been tremendous growth in the Paphos area. The Kingdom Hall that was originally constructed has had to be enlarged and now accommodates two congregations.
A fine Kingdom Hall was constructed in the town of Larnaca, and a prefabricated hall in the village of Liopetri has now given way to a more suitable meeting place for the people in what are called the kokina choria, or red-earth villages, because of the red soil.
Zealous publishers and special pioneers have also been busy in the beautiful but wild northwest corner of the island, an area well known to tourists for its so-called baths of Aphrodite. Because of response to the Kingdom message, a plot of land was purchased in Polis Chrysochous. A Kingdom Hall that seats 70 people has now been built and is being used as a center for divine education in that area.
Marriages and Burials
Because for many years we were not recognized by authorities here as a religion, marriages and burials for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Cyprus have not been easy. As far as most Greek Cypriots were concerned, a person could be married or buried only by the established church of Cyprus. However, in 1948 the Society’s lawyer on the island filed application with the British colonial authorities to have a minister of Jehovah’s Witnesses certified by the government to perform marriages. How glad the brothers were when an announcement appeared in the government gazette in 1949 that a Witness, Savvas Droussiotis, had been certified for the performing of marriages! Later on, other brothers were also authorized by the government to provide this service.
The matter of burial also posed a problem, as there was often opposition from Orthodox priests who refused to allow Jehovah’s Witnesses or their children to be buried in what the church viewed as “consecrated ground.” In the towns, where each religious denomination had its own cemetery, this problem was particularly acute. In villages the situation was somewhat different; taxes paid by residents covered burial in the local cemetery. However, in some cases the clergy disputed this right. It was not easy for our brothers to deal with these problems at the same time that they were endeavoring to cope with the loss of a family member. The problem needed to be resolved.
Finally, in 1950, the authorities granted Jehovah’s Witnesses the right to have their own burial ground. A brother donated a piece of land outside the capital for this purpose. Years later, in 1989, a second cemetery was necessary, and we were granted permission to use a piece of land in the village of Nissou, where the present branch office of the Society is located. These provisions have proved to be a great blessing to Jehovah’s people and have helped to counteract the claim of Orthodox priests that ‘if you become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, you will be buried like a dog.’
Although Jehovah’s Witnesses had been granted the legal right to perform marriage ceremonies, efforts were made, in 1971, to interfere with this right. We were informed by the District Officer of Nicosia that before a marriage could be performed, the parties to the marriage must produce a certificate from the archbishopric to the effect that they were no longer members of the Greek Orthodox Church. As was to be expected, the archbishopric was unwilling to issue such certificates. This virtually meant that none of Jehovah’s Witnesses could get married. However, with the help of some freedom-loving officials who realized that the requiring of such certificates was a move instigated by the priests, that requirement was eliminated.
“Divine Victory” International Assembly
In November 1972, Brother Knorr visited Cyprus in connection with plans for the “Divine Victory” International Assemblies. Tours of the Bible lands were being arranged along with the conventions. To our delight, Cyprus was to be included, and an international convention was to be held in the capital, Nicosia, in July 1973.
We immediately made efforts to secure a stadium or other suitable location for the convention, but we had no success, mainly because officials and businessmen feared the reaction of the Church. So we decided to use property surrounding a large Kingdom Hall in Trachonas. The Society already owned a plot of land across from the Kingdom Hall, and we were able to rent adjoining land. It was quite an undertaking for us to build an overhead covering of bamboo canes for the entire area, to shelter delegates from the heat. Daily, in heat of over 100 degrees Fahrenheit [40° C.], our brothers and sisters worked to accomplish the task.
One of the biggest problems, however, was to get sufficient water to care for the convention’s needs. The winter prior to the assembly had seen little rainfall, and water was being rationed to three days a week. What could be done? A brother whose home was next to the Kingdom Hall had a well in his garden. He was willing to let the brothers use it, but no water had been taken from the well for some time. How much would it yield? Brothers cleaned it out, installed a pump, and then waited with bated breath to see the result. An ample supply of water began to flow! But was it suitable to drink? Tests were made. The result: 100 percent suitable! It seemed like a modern-day miracle. How grateful we were to Jehovah for this solution to a major problem!
Because of increased activity around the Kingdom Hall, opposers soon became aware that something special was taking place. Then, before daybreak one morning, the brother whose house adjoined the Kingdom Hall was awakened because his bedroom became illuminated by flames. A stack of bamboo canes was burning fiercely on the site. Arson! Our enemies were on the warpath again. From then on, greater precautions were taken to assure security.
The Society had requested that, for the benefit of the many visitors who would come to the island and who would not understand the Greek language, skits be prepared to depict local customs and the life of the inhabitants of the island. Each morning from 8:00 to 9:30, before the regular convention program, these informative skits were presented and were much enjoyed by all who were present. There were also tours to historic places associated with the Bible record.
Having an international convention in Cyprus was an exciting and upbuilding experience for the local brothers. It afforded them opportunity to associate personally with Witnesses of many nationalities. This helped to broaden their awareness of the international brotherhood. Furthermore, the publicity that resulted from opposition by the Orthodox Church in connection with this convention helped more people in Cyprus to be keenly aware of the activity of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
1974—A Year of Change
Cyprus was a mecca for tourists. The economy was booming. Many Cypriots thought that everything was just fine. But that underwent a dramatic change on July 15, 1974.
For a long time the islanders had been politically divided. There were two opposing factions in the Greek-Cypriot community. On the one hand were the supporters of the president, Archbishop Makarios; on the other, supporters of the late general Georgios Grivas, the well-known EOKA leader who had headed the revolt against British colonial rule. In an armed coup, President Makarios was overthrown and many lives were lost. But these events were just a prelude to more tragic happenings.
After being in England for 14 years because of ill health, Don Rendell had returned to Cyprus in 1972 and was serving as circuit overseer. At the time, he was living on the north coast of the island, just 40 miles [60 km] from the southern coast of Turkey. This is how he described what occurred:
‘Together with my companion Paul Andreou, I was living in the village of Karakoumi, about one and a half miles [2 km] to the east of Kyrenia. About five o’clock in the morning of July 20, I heard a loud explosion. From our kitchen window, I could see a column of smoke rising from the harbor area of Kyrenia. A Turkish radio station on the island announced that because of the unstable conditions that had developed as a result of the Greek-Cypriot “coup,” troops from mainland Turkey were arriving on the north coast to protect the Turkish-Cypriot minority living in Cyprus. We soon realized that we were in a theater of war. We counted 75 helicopters overhead. Paratroopers were being dropped just beyond the mountains that surround the town. Bombardment from the sea and the air continued for some days; then we were obliged to leave our home late one evening as Turkish troops advanced on the village.
‘After some days in the mountains, we returned to our home but were soon surrounded by Turkish troops. We were not molested. We wondered what had happened to the brothers of our small congregation in Kyrenia. We eventually found the family of Brother Kyriazis—seven Witnesses in all—and we were overjoyed to see one another. The following day, we were sitting under a tree in their garden, studying the day’s text, when Turkish troops arrived. We were told to go indoors. Soon we were taken to the Dome Hotel, which was under the control of UN troops. Paul and I were not permitted to return to our home, but together with Brother Kyriazis and his family as well as about 650 other people, we were kept in the hotel there in Kyrenia. After a few days, because I was British, I was taken to Nicosia, walked through no-man’s-land, and was released. But our Greek-Cypriot brothers were kept in the hotel for several months before their release. During that time, they kept spiritually strong by having regular meetings to study the Bible, and they kept busy sharing the Bible’s message of comfort with the others who were being held captive in the hotel.’
What was the outcome of that military action? Turkish troops occupied about one third of the island. Over 200,000 people had become refugees. Jehovah’s people were among them. Over 300 brothers lost all their earthly possessions. Four congregations were dispersed. The Bethel Home withstood the onslaught, but the scars of war showed in the bullet-ridden shutters of the building. Valuing life more than property, we decided to vacate the branch premises. Nevertheless, when the fighting died down, efforts were made to retrieve some of the files from the Society’s office. We found that soldiers had already raided the branch premises. The front door had been forced open, and a soldier had written across one of the walls: ‘God doesn’t love us because we didn’t find anything of real value here.’
Immediately a committee was formed to care for the needs of our refugee brothers. Those who had not been directly affected by the conflict opened their homes to their Christian brothers. Relief supplies from Jehovah’s Witnesses in Greece and funds from the Britain branch soon arrived. The local brothers really appreciated the concern shown by the Governing Body in helping them in their hour of need. What a marvelous bond of union holds all of Jehovah’s servants close to one another!
Provision of an Assembly Hall
With the movement of Turkish Cypriots from the south of the island to the north, a Turkish cinema in the town of Limassol became available to us, and we signed a contract with the Turkish owner before he left. The building had been badly damaged during the hostilities. But the brothers worked hard to repair the roof and generally make the place usable. One of the congregations in the town was able to use a part of the building for its meetings. The cinema could seat 800 persons, and there was an area around the cinema that could be used for convention departments. Getting a suitable site for our conventions had always been a problem, so this was just what we needed.
Before long, though, after the former owner died, there were some in authority who wanted to take the cinema away from us. But eventually an arrangement was worked out with the authorities for us to use the cinema and part of the surrounding property. Over the years many improvements were made to the building until it reached a standard that was acceptable for the worship of our God, Jehovah.
When we obtained the cinema, it provided enough room for all the Witnesses in Cyprus. However, in 1994, we planned to hold three district conventions there, to accommodate the Witnesses and interested persons who would attend.
An Issue of Christian Conscience
During 1978/79 there were various newspaper reports dealing with the neutral stand taken by Jehovah’s Witnesses with regard to military conscription. Because the law made no provision for conscientious objection, several Witnesses were sentenced to terms of imprisonment.
Since 1980, at least 130 of Jehovah’s Witnesses have been imprisoned for their neutral stand, and some have been sent back to prison for second, third, and fourth terms. Of interest is the case of 28-year-old Georgios Anastasi Petrou. On July 1, 1993, he was convicted as a conscientious objector for the fourth time and was sentenced to prison for six months. All together, his prison terms have amounted to two years and two months. Regarding this Witness, the newspaper Cyprus Weekly of September 9, 1993, reported the protest of Amnesty International, saying: ‘Unfortunately, there is nothing to stop the authorities from imprisoning him a fifth, a sixth, a seventh time. Isn’t it time the authorities stopped harassing him?’
Every week various elders visit our brothers who are in prison for reasons of neutrality to discuss with them The Watchtower as well as other upbuilding Scriptural information. We appreciate the cooperation of the prison authorities that has made this possible. The brothers facing the neutrality issue view it as a test of faith and as an opportunity to devote more time, while in prison, to personal Bible study. Characteristic are the following comments by some of them: ‘We are prepared to stay in prison as long as Jehovah permits it,’ and, ‘Never before have we done so much studying.’
Government ministers are receiving many letters of protest from human rights organizations asking that the Cypriot authorities resolve the issue of conscientious objection. As a result, a number of newspaper articles have recently urged the authorities to bring their legislation into line with what is now common in Europe. For instance, the newspaper Alithia, of January 24, 1994, said concerning conscientious objectors: ‘This matter must be settled as soon as possible, in line with suggestions of Europe and the UN.’
The European Parliament has urged member states of the European Community to give legal recognition to conscientious objection to military service. In 1993 an extensive article published in the Cyprus Law Tribune urged the authorities in Cyprus to give serious thought to what countries such as Sweden and the Netherlands have done in dealing with this situation.
New Branch Premises
In 1981, changes at the administrative level were made at the Society’s branch. To care for the needs of the branch, Don Rendell, who was then serving in the Greece Bethel, was asked to return to Cyprus to take over the duties of Branch Committee coordinator. The following year, a Greek-Cypriot couple, Andreas Kontoyiorgis and his wife, Maro, who had been serving as special pioneers in England, were added to the Cyprus Bethel family. As the premises in Limassol were proving to be too small, the Bethel family was overjoyed in 1985 when the Governing Body gave permission to build new branch facilities.
Although the brothers were eager to move ahead with the work on the new facilities, there were problems that had to be dealt with. Where would the new building be erected? It was decided that land owned by the Cyprus Corporation of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Limassol should be used for this purpose. During 1987, architectural plans were submitted to the local municipal authorities, and request was made for a building permit. However, as soon as it became known that Jehovah’s Witnesses planned to build, representatives of the Greek Orthodox Church canvassed the neighborhood in order to obtain signatures on a statement of protest. As a result, the authorities refused to issue a permit to build. The reasons given were “in order to safeguard public safety and order which will be endangered if the permit was granted” and also “the purpose of the proposed building.”
Since the ruling was obviously one based on religious prejudice, the brothers took the matter to court. There the decision was in favor of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The judgment stated that the municipal authority had “no authority for refusing the issue of a building permit for reasons of public safety or public order.” The judgment continued: “However, the other reason given, namely the ‘purpose of the proposed building,’ . . . does disclose the real reason why the applicants’ application was refused.” It was beneficial to have that matter settled judicially.
Even before the court rendered its decision, however, it became increasingly apparent that it would not be wise to locate the branch office in an area where there was such fierce opposition. Providentially, at that time a brother who owned a property in the village of Nissou, just a few miles from Nicosia, offered to sell it to the Society. On an acre [0.4 ha] of land, there was a building that consisted of four apartments. To the rear of the building was a citrus orchard, and at the front was a patio surrounded by flowering shrubs and palm trees. Next door was the local Kingdom Hall. The property was ideal for the branch. There was more space than would have been available in Limassol, very few alterations were needed, the property was centrally located, and the neighborhood was friendly. After approval was granted by the Publishing Committee of the Governing Body, the property was purchased in 1988, and in June of the same year the Bethel family moved in.
Legal Decisions Assist the Work
In addition to the legal case regarding proposed branch premises, there have been other occasions when it was necessary to take action to ‘legally establish the good news’ in Cyprus. At times appeals had to be made to the island’s Supreme Court.—Phil. 1:7.
One fundamental point that needed clarification was: Are Jehovah’s Witnesses what is legally termed a “known religion”? If so, then they should be treated the same as other already existing religions. Article 18 of the Cyprus Constitution says:
“1. Every person has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion.
“2. All religions whose doctrines or rites are not secret are free.
“3. All religions are equal before the law.”
Legal authorities have defined a “known religion” as a “religion that can be ‘known’ by anyone; a religion whose dogmas and principles are not secret, and its worship takes place publicly.” Jehovah’s Witnesses meet all these criteria.
Yet, in the field of education, Jehovah’s Witnesses were being discriminated against. Schools refused to list “Jehovah’s Witnesses” as the religion of students, although noting the religion of a student on school reports is customary. The matter was taken up with the education authorities. The Ministry of Education stated: ‘We do not have in mind the existence of a religion with the name Jehovah’s Witnesses. We understand Jehovah’s Witnesses are a movement or organization.’
In a memorandum to the minister of education, dated April 16, 1991, the attorney general reviewed the matter in the light of the Cyprus Constitution. He then rendered the opinion that Jehovah’s Witnesses are a “known religion,” so the students’ religion should be shown on their school reports.
This opinion of the attorney general had a favorable effect on other legal developments involving Jehovah’s servants in Cyprus. A nine-page memorandum issued by his office stated that ministers of Jehovah’s Witnesses should be treated in the same way as those of the mainstream religions of Cyprus. At a time when there was renewed pressure from opposers, this served to fortify a decision made by the authorities in July 1990 regarding Jehovah’s Witnesses. On the basis of that decision, elders and ministerial servants in the congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses were exempted from military service because they were recognized as being ministers of religion.
Another development following the opinion of the attorney general involved taxes. On June 17, 1992, the Ministry of Commerce made known its decision that the organization of Jehovah’s Witnesses would be exempt from paying land tax, and taxes already paid since 1981 were refunded.
Needless to say, Jehovah’s Witnesses in Cyprus are grateful to those in authority who set aside prejudice and treat all religions with impartiality.
The Ingathering Continues
In modern times, it was some 70 years ago that the preaching of the good news of Jehovah’s Kingdom reached Cyprus. What has been accomplished since then?
From one end of the island to the other—in towns, villages, and out in the countryside—people have been given opportunity again and again to hear the Bible’s message. Some prospective members of the heavenly Kingdom were found here. Now many more are being gathered with a hope of eternal life as worshipers of Jehovah on a paradise earth. By the early part of 1985, there were upwards of 1,000 in Cyprus who were publicly singing the praises of Jehovah.
But the ingathering did not stop then. By March 1994, there were 1,544 active Witnesses in Cyprus, and 3,141 attended the Memorial. So, many are still responding to the program of disciple making and are showing a desire to learn all the things that Jesus commanded his followers. Throughout the island, there are 16 congregations, and they show a zeal for Jehovah’s service. During the past service year, there has been fine evidence of a growing pioneer spirit, especially among the younger Witnesses. During March, a total of 295 Witnesses, which was 19 percent of the total publishers, participated in some form of pioneer service.
Progress has also been made in training the brothers to take on more responsibility. This has been so particularly with regard to congregation elders as well as convention and assembly organization.
Perseverance is required on the part of the publishers to keep on covering their territory regularly. Fear of man is still prevalent in Cyprus, where communities are close-knit, especially in rural areas.
When love for Bible truth takes hold in the heart of a young person, it is sometimes that young one who helps the rest of the family to surmount the barrier of fear. That was true in a family of six (father, mother, and four young children) in a small village. A pioneer started to study the Bible with the mother. After the third study, she attended a meeting with the Witnesses. But when family opposition arose, she stopped the study. However, her nine-year-old daughter cried without letup until, at last, the mother agreed to resume the study. Soon the entire family began attending meetings. In 1994 this woman was baptized. Her husband is now studying, and that daughter also continues to study.
As the publishers faithfully share in the ministry, they continue to locate such humble ones. They also learn to cultivate the fruits of God’s spirit. And they give evidence that they are loyal supporters of Jehovah’s sovereignty.
True Liberation for Honesthearted Cypriots
The history of Cyprus records the domination of its inhabitants by foreign powers. Many Cypriots have given their lives in what they understood to be the cause of freedom. However, the results have not always been what they envisioned. In this generation, many individuals have lost their ancestral lands, and at present they see no hope of returning to these. That is also true for some of Jehovah’s Witnesses. It has not been easy for them.
But true freedom is not dependent on where one lives or what property one has. This freedom is the sort that results from an accurate knowledge of the truth. Such knowledge, found in the Bible, frees people from superstition and unwarranted fear. It replaces religious intolerance with love for God and for one’s fellowman. It shows the way to deliverance from bondage to sin and death for all who put faith in the loving provision for salvation made by Jehovah God through Jesus Christ. It is to this good news that Jehovah’s Witnesses direct people of all sorts.
Yet, as was true when the apostle Paul and his companion Barnabas preached in Cyprus, religious leaders oppose the preaching of such good news. Throughout their modern-day history in Cyprus, Jehovah’s servants have been opposed primarily by the Greek Orthodox Church. But the Witnesses have ever been mindful of what is written at Jeremiah 1:19: “They will be certain to fight against you, but they will not prevail against you, for ‘I am with you,’ is the utterance of Jehovah, ‘to deliver you.’”
They are confident that Jehovah will continue to deliver them from their enemies and that soon he will deliver them through the coming great tribulation into his new world. Then what is stated at Micah 4:4 will be true not only in a spiritual sense but also in a literal way: “They will actually sit, each one under his vine and under his fig tree, and there will be no one making them tremble.” True, there are Cypriots who can even now sit under their vine and fig tree, but they do not do so without fear. However, in “the inhabited earth to come,” of which the Bible speaks, it will be possible to enjoy such conditions with no fear of crime, of war, or even of sickness and death. That will be true liberation! Yes, Jehovah promises: “Look! I am making all things new.” Also he says: “These words are faithful and true.”—Heb. 2:5-9; Rev. 21:4, 5; Ps. 37:9-11.
[Map on page 66]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
CYPRUS
 Paphos
 Nicosia
 Limassol
 Larnaca
 Xylophagou
 Famagusta
 Salamis
[Pictures on page 71]
Antonis Spetsiotis (right) and Andreas Christou, the first Witnesses in Xylophagou
[Pictures on page 72, 73]
The apostle Paul preached to Sergius Paulus in Paphos in spite of opposition from a sorcerer (At left: Ruins of the proconsul’s palace)
[Picture on page 76]
Panagiotis Gavrielides
[Picture on page 79]
Nikos and Galatia Matheakis, zealous Witnesses known for their generous hospitality
[Pictures on page 80]
A few of the early Gilead-trained missionaries:
1. Don Rendell
2. Anthony Sideris
3. Emmanuel Paterakis
4. Antonios Karandinos
[Picture on page 81]
A few of the sisters who served as missionaries in Cyprus (from left to right): Jean Baker, Yvonne Warmoes (Spetsiotis), Nina Constanti (Psaltis)
[Picture on page 86]
N. H. Knorr (2nd row, right) with Cypriot brothers and missionaries
[Pictures on page 87]
An exciting assembly was held at the Royal and the Pallas cinemas in 1951
[Picture on page 91]
Witnesses ready to leave for their territory, in 1955
[Pictures on page 100]
International convention under bamboo covering, in Nicosia, in 1973
[Pictures on page 107]
Assembly Hall in Limassol
[Pictures on page 108, 109]
Present branch office and Bethel family in Cyprus
[Picture on page 115]
Branch Committee now serving in Cyprus (from left to right): Andreas Costa Efthymiou, Andreas Kontoyiorgis, James Petridis

