From Our Readers
CRITICISM OF CATHOLIC CHURCH
I am a fairly frequent reader of “The Watchtower” and “Awake!” and I have always been, and still am, impressed by their sincerity and honour. However, almost in every issue I find articles criticising or implying criticism of the Catholic Church, of which I am a member. Often the criticism is unfair. An example comes under the heading “Is the Pope Infallible?” Romans 3:9, 10 does not refer to papal infallibility. It is completely unfair to perpetuate a commonly held prejudice that by papal infallibility the Catholic Church teaches or implies that the Pope is sinless.
E. H., England
We try to be fair and objective. We did not intend to imply that the Catholic Church teaches that the pope is sinless, but only that Romans 3:9, 10 shows that all men are sinners. The official Catholic position on papal infallibility is that when the pope, “‘in accord with his supreme apostolic authority, defines a doctrine concerning faith or morals to be held by the whole Church,’ he teaches infallibly by reason of the Spirit’s aid proper to his special role as ‘the center of ecclesiastical unity.’”​—New Catholic Encyclopedia, Vol. VII, p. 497.​—ED.
FIRE SAFETY
I was recently reading a copy of “Awake!” magazine when I came upon an article entitled “Don’t Get Caught in a Firetrap!” and I feel much could be learned from the story. As coordinator for the Fire Department’s upcoming seminar it occurs to me that everyone connected with the fire service would appreciate a copy of this story. Therefore, I am requesting 300 copies to be distributed to those in attendance.
J. F., Pennsylvania
SEXUAL “LEPROSY”
There is some disturbance regarding the remarks of “Awake!” under the heading “Sexual ‘Leprosy.’” A young unmarried woman we know contracted a herpes infection in her genital area. Her doctor assured her that the infection was not venereal. My little daughter broke out with a herpes infection in her genital area when she was about one year old. Assuredly it was not through illicit sexual conduct.
R. E., Tennessee
We should have stated that genital herpes is usually transmitted by sexual intercourse, and not that this is always the case. “The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy” lists genital herpes under sexually transmitted diseases and states: “It is moderately contagious and usually spread by sexual intercourse.”​—ED.

