Is Gabon Really “the Country of Friendship”?
“THE country of friendship”​—this is the way some tourist advertisements describe Gabon, a West African country that straddles the equator. But since April of 1970 doubts have been raised as to whether Gabon really is “the country of friendship.” Why? Because toward the end of April the government of Gabon took action to ban freedom of worship for the most peaceful people in the country.
On Wednesday evening, April 29, 1970, Radio Libreville announced that, in a cabinet meeting presided over by President Bongo, the decision was made to ban the work of Jehovah’s witnesses in all of Gabon. Thereafter the government expelled all missionaries of the Witnesses from the country.
The ban has meant that all Christian meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses and all preaching of the Bible from door to door are forbidden. Further, the Bible magazines mailed in to them were seized as they arrived at the post office. They were even refused the right to receive shipments of Bibles!
As a result of the ban two native full-time ministers of Jehovah’s witnesses were arrested. And why? Well, one was found carrying a Bible! And it is the same Bible that can be purchased in many places throughout Gabon. What do you think of a government that arrests peace-abiding people for carrying a Bible?
THE REACTION AMONG THE PEOPLE
The announcement to deny freedom of worship to these Christian witnesses was a shock to many, especially those who know that these Christians believe in living by the Bible’s command to “seek peace and pursue it.” (1 Pet. 3:11) One man said: “My wife just cried out at hearing the announcement.” A Gabonese man who was not a Witness expressed the feelings of many as he told a missionary: “Since the announcement of the expulsion of the missionaries was made I could neither eat nor sleep for several days but cried!”
Several persons asked: “Why does our government not respect its own Constitution? There should be freedom of religion in Gabon.”
Another man said: “We’re chasing out the good religion that minds their own business and we’re keeping those who are all the time mixing in politics and giving us trouble.”
Thus there were many Gabonese people who were very disappointed by the unfriendly actions of their government. One who thanked the missionaries for helping him was formerly a worthless drunk, but now he is pursuing the Christian ministry. Another expressed appreciation in a letter for the help the missionaries gave him. He had previously been a polygamist with four wives, but is now happily married to only one because of the influence of Bible truths on his life.​—1 Tim. 3:2, 12.
The people of Gabon in general are friendly. Many natives appreciate that the Witnesses preach the Word of God and stick to it; and they are continuing to show the same friendly spirit they always have. It is their government, however, that has taken such unfriendly steps against freedom of worship.
WHY THE BAN AND UNFRIENDLY ACTS?
Was this decision by the Gabonese government one motivated only by political rulers? There are indications that religious clergymen were involved. For example, soon after the ban was announced, Catholic priests began to visit the owner of the home where the missionaries of Jehovah’s witnesses lived. Had the priests come to sympathize with the homeowner and to express themselves in favor of freedom of worship? No, the priests tried to persuade the landlord to put the missionaries out of his house! But the homeowner refused to take such unfriendly action, despite much prodding on the part of the Catholic priests.
Another interesting aspect of the matter is that Witnesses were told by persons in a position to know that there had been a meeting of many of the clergy, both Catholic and Protestant, at the home of a government official, and that they had rejoiced over a plot to ban religious freedom for these Christian witnesses. One minister in the government who spoke against the Witnesses is a Protestant pastor. And one prominent political leader is a Catholic priest.
The Witnesses in Gabon knew that charges were being fabricated, and that, whether they were being inspired to some extent by religious clergymen or not, the truth should be stated. So the very next morning after the ban was announced, two missionary representatives of the Witnesses and a native Gabonese Witness went to see the Minister of the Interior. They discussed the matter for about forty-five minutes. They asked him on what grounds their Christian activity was banned. He told them that their religion was banned because of some members of their religion in the interior of the country. And how did he back this charge up? With four handwritten letters from towns in the interior of Gabon​—where there are no Witnesses! He said that the work of the Witnesses had been investigated and that these letters came from their agents as a result.
Later the authorities accused the Witnesses of not respecting the flag, not paying taxes, teaching people not to vote and causing disorder among the population.
THE CHARGES UNFOUNDED
The Witnesses answered these government charges by explaining that as Christians they respect the government and show it obedience, as the Bible teaches. (Rom. 13:1) They pointed out that none of the Witnesses in Gabon were ever arrested or put in prison because they had stolen anything, killed anyone or fought against the law or the government. Why, world wide Jehovah’s witnesses are known as peaceful, law-abiding citizens. They show respect for the flag, knowing that it represents the government, and any Witness in Gabon who was present at a ceremony in which the flag was saluted was standing quietly and respectfully.
As to the accusation of not paying taxes, any informed person knows that this is not true. The Witnesses have always paid their taxes because that is what God’s Word instructs them to do, and they live by the Bible. Even the instruction book for baptized Witnesses, “Your Word Is a Lamp to My Foot,” says on page 38:“Must a Christian pay all the taxes demanded by law?” Reply is given by quoting the Bible: “Render to all their dues, to him who calls for the tax, the tax; to him who calls for the tribute, the tribute.”​—Rom. 13:7.
As for politics, Jehovah’s witnesses maintain a neutral stand. Nobody was brought forth by the Gabonese government as proof that the Witnesses had taught him not to vote. Incidentally, the vote in Gabon is secret, so it should not be possible to tell who did and who did not vote. Then, too, for three years prior to this ban there were no elections, and for four years thereafter none are to be held. So is this matter of voting a problem that Gabon has suddenly been faced with? Hardly.
How about the charge of causing disorder among the people? The Witnesses preach the good news of God’s kingdom. They never force others to accept their message and become Witnesses. They follow the counsel of Jesus, who said: “When you are entering into the house, greet the household; and if the house is deserving, let the peace you wish it come upon it; but if it is not deserving, let the peace from you return upon you. Wherever anyone does not take you in or listen to your words, on going out of that house or that city shake the dust off your feet.”​—Matt. 10:12-14.
Since 1958 Jehovah’s witnesses have been preaching publicly and freely in Gabon. Why, after twelve years, does the government suddenly accuse them of causing disorder?
To show that the charges are unfounded, the Witnesses sent a four-page letter of defense covering the foregoing points to the government. With what result? A brief reply said that their legal corporation had been “dissolved.” It added that once the government has made a decision it is “sovereign and can never be changed.”
But since the charges are false and since freedom of worship is involved, ought there not to be a change? Definitely so!
The Witnesses tried by different channels of approach to see the president of Gabon to explain their position and to answer the false charges made against them. However, the requests were ignored. The government did not give an opportunity for the Witnesses to explain their position to the high officials responsible for the ban.
YOU CAN HELP
Although the government has refused to accept an explanation from the Witnesses, you can help. If you are not in agreement with such denial of freedom of worship, confiscation of Bibles, and other unfriendly acts toward peaceful Christians, why not write to one or more of the government officials listed here and express your views? Urge them to show respect for their own Constitution and for people who seek to do the will of God.
If you do, it might cause the government of Gabon to reconsider the matter and to endeavor, by a change in their course of action, to show that Gabon is “the country of friendship” that they claim it to be.
[Box on page 253]
OFFICIALS OF GABON
His Excellency
President Albert B. Bongo,
BP 546
Libreville, Gabon
The Honorable Leon Mebiame,
Vice-president
BP 547
Libreville, Gabon
Mr. Jean-Stanislas Migolet,
Minister of State
BP 549
Libreville, Gabon
Mr. Jean Remy Ayoune,
Minister in Charge of Foreign Affairs
BP 389
Libreville, Gabon
Mr. Raphael Mamiaka,
Minister of the Interior
BP 1110
Libreville, Gabon
His Excellency
Gaston-Robert Boukat-Bou-Nziegui,  Ambassador E. and P.
Embassy of the Republic of Gabon
4900 16th St. NW
Washington, D.C. 20011
His Excellency
Jean Davin,  Ambassador E. and P.
Mission of the Republic of Gabon  to the United Nations
866 United Nations Plaza
New York, N.Y. 10017

