Kingdom Proclaimers Report
“You’ve Dialed the Wrong Number”
IN Johannesburg, South Africa, Leslie and Caroline were taking turns in witnessing by telephone to people living in a retirement village that had controlled access. They found few at home and little interest in their Christian message, so Caroline was encouraged when a lady answered.
“Is that Mrs. B—?” asked Caroline.
“Oh, no,” said a friendly voice, “I’m Mrs. G—. You’ve dialed the wrong number.”
Noting the warmth in her voice, Caroline said: “Well, let me explain what I wanted to tell Mrs. B—.” She then proceeded to talk about the blessings of God’s incoming Kingdom. After arrangements had been made to drop off the brochure What Does God Require of Us?, Mrs. G— asked: “By the way, what religion are you?”
“We’re Jehovah’s Witnesses,” Caroline answered.
“Oh, no, not that religion! I don’t think I want to see you.”
“But Mrs. G—,” appealed Caroline, “for the past 20 minutes, I have shared the most wonderful hope with you, pointing out from the Bible what God’s Kingdom will shortly do for mankind. You were so happy to hear these things—even excited—and wanted to learn more. What do you really know about Jehovah’s Witnesses? If you were sick, would you go to a mechanic? Why not let me tell you what Jehovah’s Witnesses believe?”
After a moment of silence came the response: “I suppose you’re right. You’d better come. But mind you, you will never convert me!”
“Mrs. G—, I could never convert you even if I wanted to,” Caroline replied. “Only Jehovah can do that.”
The visit to deliver the brochure went well, and Mrs. G— (Betty) agreed to another call. When Caroline returned, Betty said that she had told the ladies at her table that she was having discussions with Jehovah’s Witnesses. “How could you?” they had asked, throwing their hands in the air. “Those people don’t even believe in Jesus!”
Caroline immediately reminded Betty of a main point from their last discussion about God’s Kingdom.
“Who will be the King?” Caroline asked.
“Why, Jesus,” answered Betty.
“Of course,” said Caroline. She then went on to explain that Jehovah’s Witnesses believe that Jesus is God’s Son, but he is not equal to God as part of a Trinity.—Mark 13:32; Luke 22:42; John 14:28.
After a few more visits, it became obvious that although she had a positive, happy spirit, Betty was suffering from poor health. In fact, she had cancer and was afraid of dying. “I wish I had heard these things years ago and had your faith,” she confessed. Caroline comforted her by showing her scriptures describing death as a deep sleep from which one could rise in the resurrection. (John 11:11, 25) This meant much to Betty, who now enjoys a regular Bible study. Only her deteriorating health has prevented her from attending meetings at the Kingdom Hall.
Observes Caroline: “It’s obvious to me that the angels are directing this work. Betty was a ‘wrong number,’ and just think, she’s 89 years old!”—Revelation 14:6.

