An “Eight-Month Miracle” in Peru
THE crowd of 34,238 was exuberant. They had come from all over Peru, in fact, from many parts of the world, to attend the dedication of the beautiful new branch office of the Watch Tower Society in Lima. Their hearts were filled with excitement as they listened to the program detailing the construction, done in eight action-packed months​—something quite unheard of in Peru for a project of this size.
Preliminary Preparations
The rapid expansion of true worship in Peru had resulted in the need for larger branch headquarters. A 1.8 hectare (4.4 a.) piece of property was bought in 1980. At first the land was used to grow fruits and vegetables for the branch workers.
Meanwhile, in view of the rapidly rising inflation rate, the Witnesses decided to start buying and storing up building materials, such as bricks, steel rods, fixtures, and tiles. A good supply of water was another essential. So why not dig a well? A crew of Witnesses started the job and dug by hand to a depth of 75 meters (246 ft). Then outside help was engaged to continue the project until water was struck 96 meters (315 ft) down.
Then early in February of 1984, three Witnesses in the United States provided a “fast-paced” plan. The proposed two-story building​—including offices, 22 bedrooms, family room, dining room, laundry, and Kingdom Hall—​could be put up in eight months they said. For Peru, that would amount to a modern-day miracle!
A Ready Organization
On March 25 a special kickoff meeting was held at the Society-owned assembly site at Campoy to inform the local Witnesses of what was going to take place. Even though there were only 19,000 Kingdom publishers in all of Peru at the time, 26,500 people came to that meeting. The enthusiasm they then showed never waned throughout the project.
The work force was organized. Over 200 workers were drawn from the ranks of regular and special pioneers, and brothers with experience in convention organization were put in key positions. The congregations were assigned specific weekends to come and help.
To accommodate the full-time workers, the warehouse was converted into a huge dormitory. Mattresses were placed on top of cardboard cartons of literature. Showers and toilets were installed along the outside walls. Since this was the beginning of the winter season in Peru, the brothers learned to do a lively quickstep when taking their cold showers early in the morning. An excellent cafeteria was set up, with breakfast for all at 7:00 before work at 7:30. A half-hour’s drive away at the Campoy assembly grounds, sisters took care of the laundry. A shoe-repair shop was also opened, as work shoes wore out quickly.
Help From Afar
A total of 145 brothers from North America came at various stages of the construction. Many of them had participated in Kingdom Hall building projects. As the work progressed and the need arose, concrete men, bricklayers, plumbers, and electricians arrived to do their part, completing it in two or three weeks and then returning to their home congregations. But a few stayed for the entire eight months.
These brothers came with their own tools and supplies to work alongside others whose language they could little understand. But sign language, facial expressions, and mispronounced words, along with the willingness to work together, got the points across and the job done.
Many Peruvian brothers lovingly opened their homes to accommodate these visitors. At 6:00 a.m. every working day, a 15-seat “gringo bus,” as it affectionately came to be called, made the rounds to collect the guests and get them to the breakfast table at the work site. Members of the Peru Bethel family took part in this truly enjoyable work.
To care for spiritual needs, an English-language congregation was organized. A number of the visitors also did fine work in the field ministry, starting home Bible studies that continued after they left.
Public Interest Aroused
Hundreds of local brothers and sisters, young and old, came to the construction site on weekends to share in the work. It was encouraging to see sisters and small children having a share according to their ability. All this activity, of course, did not go unnoticed.
An engineer from a large construction company stopped by. Seeing the way the work was done, he asked, “How much do you have to pay them to get them to work like that?” Another observer inquired: “What makes your workers so cheerful?” A crew from a television station in Lima spent one whole afternoon filming and interviewing the different workers.
A Job Well Done
Was the building really completed in eight months? Yes, but never did the brothers feel they were being pressured into completing it in exactly that time. From the start, it was impressed upon all that what was desired was a well-built, sturdy structure that would truly represent Jehovah’s people in a dignified way. If nine or ten months were needed to do such a job, then so be it.
With the willing local volunteers and experienced help from overseas, the work was finished right on target. On December 3, 1984, eight months and one week from the start, the Bethel family moved in.
The Big Day Arrived
January 27, 1985, was the eagerly awaited dedication day for the new branch building. M. G. Henschel, a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, came from Brooklyn, New York, to serve as the principal speaker. Visitors from other lands and those who had worked full time on the building​—about 500 in all—​packed out the new Kingdom Hall and dining room. The Campoy assembly grounds were tied in by telephone wire.
In the morning, Brother Henschel delivered the dedication address in Spanish. The afternoon commenced with a special program at the Campoy assembly grounds. Then the entire crowd of 34,238 was invited to tour the new facilities. They rejoiced to see the “eight-month miracle,” the physical evidence of Jehovah’s blessing.
The building project has brought many blessings. Besides providing an up-to-date facility, working together for eight months proved to be invaluable. Christian unity was enhanced. Spiritual maturity was cultivated. The fine association at the meetings, at the meal tables, and especially at morning worship strengthened the bond of love among fellow Christians. Those who came from North America felt that the little bit of a “foreign assignment” did them a lot of good. Yes, the eight months of happy association and vigorous activity will long be remembered by all who had a share in the “miracle.”​—Compare Haggai 1:7, 8.
[Picture on page 28]
Young and old shared in the work

