Persecuted for Telling the Truth
JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES do not support the beliefs and practices of Kimbilikiti, for these run counter to Scriptural principles. The Witnesses have been set free by the truth found in God’s Word the Bible. (John 8:31, 32) Hence, they refuse to allow their sons to be circumcised according to the initiation rites of Kimbilikiti. The Witnesses also refuse to give food, money, or goods demanded during initiation periods, and their women do not participate in compulsory fishing sessions organized for the same purpose.
Interestingly, in connection with the slaughter of the Witnesses mentioned earlier, the state prosecuting attorney said this in his recommendation to the court: ‘Certain Warenga who in the past participated in the rites of Kimbilikiti and know the secrets are now associated with Jehovah’s Witnesses. They have revealed the secrets, particularly those that concern the nonexistence of the spirit called Kimbilikiti. Consequently, they have exposed the falsity of the offerings demanded by the said spirit who, according to Jehovah’s Witnesses, is a vast deception organized by the old men that direct the ceremonies.’
As individuals of the Rega tribe accept genuine Bible teachings, superstition and fear of death are replaced by truth and the resurrection hope. (John 5:28, 29) Insults to mothers, wives, and sisters yield to respect for women.​—Ephesians 5:21–6:4; 1 Timothy 5:1, 2.
In striking contrast, the many churches and missions of Christendom allow their members to practice tribal religion under a thin veneer of so-called Christianity. In fact, many priests and high priests of Kimbilikiti are considered loyal, respected members of the various churches. How unlike the attitude of the apostle Paul! He wrote: “Do not become unevenly yoked with unbelievers. For what fellowship do righteousness and lawlessness have? Or what sharing does light have with darkness? . . . And what agreement does God’s temple have with idols?”​—2 Corinthians 6:14-16.
Very often, those with strong ties to both Kimbilikiti and the orthodox churches have stirred up trouble for Jehovah’s Witnesses. These opposers have been much like the idol makers of ancient Ephesus. They saw their trade jeopardized by Paul, who proved that ‘the ones made by hands are not gods.’ (Acts 19:23-28) The same principle applies to the truth that the spirit Kimbilikiti does not exist.
Jehovah’s Witnesses feel an obligation to make known such truths as these. Of course, because of speaking the truth, they have sometimes suffered persecution. But what can be learned from their faithful endurance?

