Kingdom Proclaimers Report
The Many Islands Rejoice
JESUS’ declaration to his disciples was: “You will be witnesses of me . . . to the most distant part of the earth.” (Acts 1:8) That commission would eventually take in the vast expanse of the Western Pacific, where the Kingdom work in all Micronesia is now under the supervision of the Guam branch of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. Many of the inhabitants of these beautiful islands rejoice today. Why? Psalm 97:1 gives the reason: “Jehovah himself has become king! Let the earth be joyful. Let the many islands rejoice.”
Many languages are spoken on the different islands in this part of the world, and this is a major problem in spreading the good news that “Jehovah himself has become king.” Hence, one highlight of this service year was receiving the monthly edition of The Watchtower in five of the major languages, as well as My Book of Bible Stories and the brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever in a number of Micronesian languages. Having literature in the local languages for these isolated people is a real blessing and fulfills a great need. The local populace responds well, especially since the religions of Christendom as a rule do not bother to translate literature into their languages.
□ For example, on the lovely island of Moen in Truk the missionaries reported that My Book of Bible Stories in Trukese caused quite a stir as householders received it and showed it to their friends and relatives. People stopped missionaries on the streets asking for the book, and some even went to the missionary home before 6:30 a.m. asking for it. Still others went to the Department of Education to get copies from one of Jehovah’s Witnesses who works there.
One educator asked how it is that Jehovah’s Witnesses can produce such a book in Trukese when the Catholics and the Protestants have been there for ages and produced nothing like it. Even some former opposers wanted the book.
□ One experience from the Marshall Islands shows how Bible truth can bring unity and happiness to a home. The husband was a drunkard and a heavy smoker, as well as a zealous, practicing Catholic. Two young Witnesses called on him at his home and, over the objection of his wife, he accepted a Bible study. The wife opposed him for the next three years. But on observing how the truth changed him as he stopped smoking, no longer got drunk, and began doing things with his family, she finally listened to the good news and shared what she learned with others. The couple legalized their marriage and symbolized their dedication to Jehovah by baptism. The man now serves as an elder in the congregation, while his wife is looking forward to the pioneer service.
Happiness and peace have come to this home as they have to many such homes in the islands that the psalmist said would rejoice because Jehovah has become King.​—Psalm 144:15.
[Maps on page 11]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Belau
Yap
Rota
Guam
Saipan
Truk
Ponape
Kosrae
Nauru
Marshall Islands
Kiribati
Midway Islands
Pacific Ocean

