Announcements
ENGAGE IN PASTORAL WORK WITH THE SHEPHERD-PRINCE
All men are like sheep from many standpoints. Like sheep they have been prone to follow a leader en masse. Ambitious men have assumed to be shepherds of humanity, only to take advantage of these “sheep” and serve themselves. Mankind has gone astray from God and has been subjected to all kinds of hardships. But the end of such things is near, for Jehovah God, the Great Shepherd, is directing a marvelous pastoral work world-wide to gather honest-hearted men to his fold before the rapidly approaching storm of Armageddon strikes. (Ezek. 34:23, 24) He knows those who belong to him and will lead sheeplike ones who listen to his voice to fountains of living waters. Have you been assisted to a clearer understanding of the Bible by studying the Watchtower magazine? Just as it has assisted you, it will assist others. Engage in pastoral work during April with the Shepherd-Prince, Christ Jesus, by presenting a year’s subscription for The Watchtower, and three booklets, for $1.
HAVE YOU?
When reading the Bible have you, along with many others, thought or said: “How nice it would be to have the Bible in modern English. I am sure that I would then understand more of what I read”? Yes, undoubtedly you would; and you can, for an authentic modern-English translation is now available to you. The New World Translation of the Hebrew Scriptures, containing the first eight Bible books, Genesis to Ruth, and the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures are translations you will enjoy reading. They will enable you to read with understanding what the prophets and the apostles wrote. The two volumes may be had for $3.00, or separately at $1.50 each. Should you desire a deluxe edition of either volume, bound by hand in a green morocco leather cover and with gilt edge, such are available for $6.50 each. Have you obtained your copy of these modern English translations? If not, do so right away.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of May 2: The Royal Priesthood.
Week of May 9: The “Likeness of Melchizedek.”

