Why Do Things Wear Out
A PRINCIPLE called “entropy” operates throughout the universe. Entropy is defined as “the ultimate state reached in the degradation of the matter and energy of the universe.” It is the principle we sometimes complain about as our house deteriorates and needs repair, our clothing wears out and things rust away. The physical and chemical action of weather, and friction from usage, gradually tear them down. All material things are indeed corruptible. Left to themselves, they tend toward decay and disintegration, necessitating constant work and expense of repairs, as well as causing problems of garbage disposal. There is a continual running down of things, like a clock that needs rewinding periodically.
This scientific fact, observed every day, is a direct contradiction and refutation of the evolution theory. Evolutionists claim that order came from chaos or disorder and that dead, inanimate matter somehow became more complex and more highly organized, in effect, ‘raising itself up by its own bootstraps.’ But all evidence is to the contrary.
Entropy a Blessing
Aside from demonstrating that there had to be an original source of energy, and an intelligence to set in order the universe with its extreme complexity, the fact of entropy is a blessing. Jehovah God the Creator, who is “from time indefinite to time indefinite,” the incorruptible One who does not tire out, made the material, physical universe so that it undergoes constant change as a result of deterioration. Why?​—Ps. 90:2; Isa. 40:28; 1 Tim. 1:17.
For the answer, think what the situation would be if nothing could deteriorate. This would mean that no chemical action could affect anything. Nor could friction wear it down. As a consequence, nothing could be cut or sawed; nothing could be changed. It would be a sterile world. There would be no work for anyone to do. In fact, life on earth would be impossible, for, since no chemical action could occur, no food could be either grown or eaten and digested.
Another feature of entropy that many of us appreciate is that the wearing out of some things, such as clothing, enables us to enjoy variety, an occasional change in colors, patterns, and so forth.
On the other hand, man has worked hard to make materials that are as nearly indestructible as possible. Of course, entropy still operates in these materials, but at a slow rate. While, there have been some advantages, some of these things have also created a serious problem. Certain plastics have been synthesized that are called nonbiodegradable, that is, bacterial action has little or no effect on them. It is extremely difficult to dispose of them, and if they are disposed of by a process such as burning, they produce poisonous gases that endanger life.
Renewal and Refreshment from the Creator
For these reasons we can thank the Creator for making things as he did. He tells us in his Word the Bible that, under the rule of his Messianic kingdom, mankind will be enabled to learn the right way of life on earth. Jehovah is the Great Architect; he knows how he wants man to use the things he has created to beautify and “subdue” the earth. Under the direction of his kingdom, even though material things will be subject to his established law of entropy and will continue the same process of deterioration, they will not get out of control and make the earth a tremendous garbage dump, as it is now rapidly becoming under man’s rule. For God has declared that it is his purpose to make the entire earth a Paradise.​—Gen. 1:26-28; Ps. 119:105; Prov. 20:24.
But what about man himself, his own organism? In man’s present sinful, imperfect state, his body repairs itself as cells wear out. However, in old age, a point seems to be reached where the speed of deterioration exceeds the repair capabilities of the body. But God’s Word informs us that under His Kingdom rule by Christ this will be corrected. Entropy will still operate in human bodies (for bodies of blood and flesh are corruptible), but humankind can then count on fresh renewal of energy from the Creator. Man’s body, capable of self-repair, will be healed and made perfect. How? By the application of Christ’s ransom benefits. And just as a clock keeps running as rewound by its owner, earth’s inhabitants will continue to receive from God the sustaining “water of life” that will keep them living forever.​—Rev. 22:1, 2; Ps. 103:3; 1 Cor. 15:50.
Christ Jesus himself spoke of “the regeneration,” when his Kingdom rule will be in complete control of the earth. (Matt. 19:28, ftn., NW, 1950 ed.; see also Kingdom Interlinear Translation.) He also said: “Man must live, not on bread alone, but on every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth.” Here Jesus quoted the words of his Father, who demonstrated his ability and willingness to supply life’s necessities to his people when he provided manna for the Israelites in the wilderness for forty years. Clearly, God, who put into operation the principle known as entropy, can guarantee that it will work for the good of his servants, and not to counteract his purpose to bless them with eternal life.​—Matt. 4:4; Deut. 8:3, 4; 29:5, 6.
So, when we have to repair things occasionally, or buy new clothing, let us be reminded that God wisely made things this way with the welfare of all mankind in view.​—Rom. 11:33-36.

