VOL. XXVIII DECEMBER 1 No. 23 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 355 

Getting Ready for Federation 355 

The Time of Trouble Approaching 356 

French Priests as Tent-Makers 356 

The Mission Field 357 

New Watch Tower Bibles 358 

Glasgow Convention Report 358 

Berean Bible Study in "Tabernacle Shadows" 359 

Honoring or Dishonoring the Head 360 

"The Prayer of Faith Shall Save" 361 

Birth of the "Man Christ Jesus" 362 

No Debate in Paragould, Arkansas 365 

"Give Us Today Our Daily Bread" 366 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 367 

page 354 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



COLPORTEURS, PLEASE NOTICE 



Please do not order DAWNS or STUDIES or MANNAS outside 
of the territory assigned to YOU. 

If people decline to purchase because of fear of hard times, 
etc., say, "These books show the present financial conditions 
outlined in prophecy and their relationship to the introduction 
of the Millennium. You need mental food and rest fully 
as much as other food for your body." 

WHEN SELECTING CHRISTMAS GIFTS 



Remember the new MANNA Birthday Books, 35c each in 
cloth; $1.00 each in fine Morocco, postpaid. 

Remember the DAWNS and STUDIES in cloth or leather- 
their low cost and great value. 

Remember the Diaglott and other study helps. 

Remember the handsome Motto and Text Cards which we 
supply at cost for home embellishment. We have these in 
assorted $1 packets (postpaid)— from different assortments, 
some new and some choice old designs. One of the new 
1908 mottoes will be included in each $1 packet. 

VOLUNTEER TRACTS FOR I907.-Our temporary shortage 
is over. We have a large quantity again on hand and shall 
be pleased to ship promptly to all desiring to make use of 
these opportunities of proclaiming the harvest message. Order 
such quantities as you can use judiciously in house-to-house 
distribution. These tracts are FREE and sent postpaid. 



R4094 : page 355 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
GETTING READY FOR FEDERATION 



UNQUESTIONABLY the splitting of Christendom 

into numerous denominations since the Reformation 

has been productive of a spirit of 

moderation in sharp contrast with the period in which 

many were racked, maimed, burned at the stake, etc., 

as "heretics." When we have pointed out that the proposed 

Federation of Religions would again put great 

power into the hands of a united majority and possibly 

revive the persecutions of the past, we have been 



laughed at. We are told that the world has so changed 
that persecution for religious belief would be 
unthinkable. 

Within a month we have heard of two professed 
"ministers of the Gospel" whose remarks imply that 
nothing is lacking but the favorable opportunity for 
them to light the fires of persecution. Besides the 
most refined modes of persecution, by slander and ostracism, 
there may yet be opportunities for as barbaric 
martyrdoms for the Truth's sake as were practised in 
our Lord's day. 

REV. DR. PATTERSON'S CHRISTIAN LOVE 

"There was an exciting episode at the Monday 
meeting of the Philadelphia ministers, and the Rev. 
Dr. R. M. Patterson, pastor emeritus, was the centre 
of it. His assignment was a discourse on John Calvin. 
He gave the ministers a surprise by advocating capital 
punishment for other felonies than murder— and for 
flagrant heresy. According to one reporter, he said: 
'Those who spread blasphemous and immoral doctrines 
should also be put to death.' According to another reporter, 
he added that burning at the stake was too 
good for them." 

The editor of the Philadelphia Inquirer, in answer 
to a query as to the very words of the reverend gentleman, 
replied (Oct. 18):- 

"We are sorry that you should ask us to print the 
very words used by Rev. Dr. R. M. Patterson in his 
recent outburst. They were reported as follows: "If I 
had my way about it I would have an executioner called 
in to deal with all heretics and blasphemers. Burning 
at the stake would be too good for those who revile 
religion and take the Lord's name in vain. The growth 
of heresy is such today that nothing but measures such 
as this can stop it." 

Not all Presbyterians, however, feel so bitterly 
toward the non-elect heretics; for we read further:— 

"The Rev. Dr. Henry C. McCook, replied to the 
Rev. Dr. Patterson. 'My blood boils,' he said, 'at 
what I have just heard, and it astonishes me to think 
that a Presbyterian minister should utter such 
sentiments.'" 

THE SPIRIT IS WILLING 

Evidently, some of the "doctors of the law" in our 
day are as willing to do violence as were those who 
stoned Stephen. Their spirit is willing but their flesh 
is weak— because public sentiment would not stand for 
it. But we expect to see public sentiment grow in the 
same direction under the stimulus of the Federation of 
the Churches. 

Recently the Editor preached at Morgantown, 
W.Va., to a large audience, which gave close attention 



for more than two hours. Shortly after a man who was 
present met one of the ministers of that city who asked 
him if he had heard the discourse. He replied, "Yes! 
and I enjoyed it very much. Did you attend?" "No," 
replied the minister, "I would sooner have joined in 
stoning him out of town!" 

It is presumable that only lack of courage held 
back this Reverend Doctor of the Law of Love from 
enjoying himself at our expense. Poor blind leaders 
of the blind! We are so glad for them that God has a 
glorious plan in which they may yet share— when "all 
the blind eyes shall be opened and all the deaf ears 
shall be unstopped." Verily it is written, "They that 
hated you, that cast you out [rejected you] said, Let 
the Lord be glorified! [We do it for the good of 
Churchianity!] But he [Christ] shall appear to your 
joy and they shall be ashamed."— Isaiah 66:5. 

R4095 : page 356 

METHODIST RE-UNION IN ENGLAND 



By means of re-union a new church was created 
in Great Britain on September 17. This event, says 
Dr. Robertson Nicoll in The British Weekly (London), 
"was a historic day of the twentieth century and marked 
an epoch in the Christian Church." Three Methodist 
denominations, known as the Methodist New 
Connection, the Bible Christians, and the United 
Methodist Free Church, merged their separate life in 
one organism to be known as the United Methodist 
Church. From the beginning, the above writer also 
states, "this Church takes its place with the best equipped 
and most powerful denominations in the kingdom." 

The historic uniting conference took place in John 
Wesley's chapel, City road, London, and was composed 
of seven hundred delegates. The controversies which 
from time to time caused the formation of these divisions 
have long passed into history, and the only differences 
that have marked them in recent years have been 
those of polity and not doctrine. Legal questions 
were, therefore, the main questions requiring settlement. 
Some account of these old denominations is 
given in The Daily News (London). We read: 

"The Methodist New Connection is the eldest of 
the three contracting parties, and has been in existence 
for one hundred and ten years. It represents the 
first division that took place in Methodism after the death 
of John Wesley. The question at issue, as in almost all 
the subsequent divisions of Methodism, was practically 
the right of the people to a place in the government of 
the Church. The leader of the agitation was Mr. 
Alexander Kilham, who contended for the right of the 
Methodist people to order their own form and fix their 



own time for religious worship, the right of Methodist 
preachers as apart from clergymen of the Established 
Church to administer the sacraments, and the right of 
the people to make and administer the laws of Methodism. 
The first two reforms were granted by the conference 
under what is known in Methodist history as 
'The Plan of Pacification,' passed in 1795, but the third 
reform was refused, and for advocating this reform in 
a pamphlet Mr. Kilham was expelled from the conference 
in 1796, and in the following year, after a deputation 
to the conference had failed to obtain redress, the 
Methodist New Connection was formed. 

"The second of the uniting churches is the Bible 
Christian denomination, which has behind it an unbroken 
and successful history of eighty-nine years of fervent 
evangelism. It originated through the remarkably 
successful lay ministry of Mr. William O'Bryan, who 
refused to confine his labors within the narrow bounds 
of a circuit. Though he was acting in the spirit of 
John Wesley, who said, 'The world is my parish,' 
and though he invariably chose as the sphere of his 
labors those parts of Devonshire and Cornwall where 
Methodism was unrepresented, he was deemed by the 
Wesleyan courts to be acting irregularly. Because he 
would not limit his labors to the circuit-preachers' 
plan, he was expelled in the chapel at Gunwen, in 1810, 
'a chapel,' says the Rev. G. Eayrs, in his excellent little 
handbook, 'the erection of which he had superintended, 
of which he had given half the cost, and for 
which he had given the freehold, with more land for a 
burial ground.' 

"The third Church, the United Methodist Free 
Church, is itself a union of denominations, each of 
which had unsuccessfully striven for certain reforms 
in the Wesleyan Church, and, in consequence of their 
failure, had formed themselves into separate denominations. 
The Protestant Methodists, formed in 1827, 
stood for simplicity of worship and impartial observance 
of Connectional regulations. The Wesleyan 
Association arose in 1835 out of controversies respecting 
ministerial education, and the claim of the local 
churches for self-government. The Wesleyan reform 
movement, in the controversy that ended so disastrously 
for the Wesleyan Church, and which cost that denomination 
100,000 members, was a protest against 
the arbitrary rule of the conference and a demand 
for the cooperation of laymen with the ministers in 
legislation and administration in Wesleyan Methodism. 
The expulsion of Messrs. Everitt, Dunn and 
Griffiths, and the formation of the Reform Church, 
were the outcome of this controversy. Ultimately these 
three denominations united in 1857 under the name of 
the United Methodist Free Churches, and for fifty years 
this denomination has been regarded as the most democratic 
of the Methodist churches."— Literary Digest. 



THE TIME OF TROUBLE APPROACHING 



The present financial flurry is doubtless another of 
the spasms of "travail" referred to in DAWN I., p. 334. 
The primary cause is a shortage of money, due to a demonetization 
of silver. Secondly, Italians, Poles, etc., 
to the number of 5,000,000, have come here lately, and, 
earning good wages, do not trust banks, but carry their 
money or bury it. At but $200 each this would be an 
immense drain on our currency— $1,000,000,000. Thirdly, 
the depreciation in stocks started many to hoarding 
money in safe deposit vaults. However, as the country 
is very prosperous it is to be expected that confidence 
will soon return. It is seven years yet before the 
time for the great financial and social collapse which 
we find so clearly depicted in the prophecies. But 
meantime the spirit of unrest must be expected to prevail 
increasingly. 

FRENCH PRIESTS AS TENT -MAKERS 



The Hamburger Nachrichten in the following report 
does not intimate that these priests still serve the Lord 
and the people:— 

"An unforeseen result of the separation of Church 
and State in France has been to make the Church of 
France more apostolic than it has ever been before. 
Peter was a fisherman; Paul a tentmaker. Thus a 
great number of the French priests are looking round 
for opportunities of earning their daily bread by the 
labor of their hands. Several of them are keeping bees 
and living on the sale of the honey. Others have large 
poultry-yards and live by selling eggs and fowls for the 
table. The breeding of blooded dogs, such as poodles, 
makes a profitable occupation for many of them. The 
cure of Labourgabe has a profitable trade in the fruits 
he preserves and has become quite famous for the 
geese he rears. 

"Many of the clergy show a preference for handicraft. 
The cure of La Pannonie has set up a lathe and 
become a turner. Wheelmaking suits the priest of 
Averdon, who has accordingly become a wheelwright 
and carriage-builder, while as a side-issue he undertakes 
the repair of sewing-machines and bicycles. The 

R4095 : page 357 

cure of Maurages has turned locksmith. But the favorite 
trade of these spiritual men is that of watchmaking, 
in which seven noted cures are known to be engaged. 
Humbler vocations are also selected. The cure of La 
Tadiere has taken to tailoring, the ex -pastor of Negron 



weaves rugs, while about ten of his confreres do knitting, 
producing stockings and underwear. Among the 
most respected and honored of French village clergymen 
is the cure of Hericourt, who now applies himself 
to the stationery business, the printing of visiting 
cards, etc. Others are bookbinders, photographers, 
artists, sculptors." 

Such conditions in France should be very favorable 
to the Truth. We will be glad to further assist 
French brethren in making use of present opportunities 
for "harvest work" there. 

TO REVIVE "PASTORAL OVERSIGHT" 



When a pastor meets a member of his congregation, 
should he talk of politics and the weather, or bring the 
conversation to bear upon the member's spiritual condition? 
This spiritual pastoral oversight, which 
formed an important element in the vocation of a minister 
of a past generation, is practically laid aside by 
many clergymen nowadays without a substitute. The 
spiritual loss occasioned thereby is frequently lamented 
by religious journals; but the remedy is not easy to 
find, since, it is alleged, "the younger lay element in 
the Church" prefer the minister to "be a man among 
men," a "hail fellow, well met." "Real pastoral oversight," 
declares The Lutheran (Philadelphia), "is not 
desired as a rule, and, when offered, it seems almost 
like an intrusion, if not an impertinence." Whatever 
the cause, the fact remains, so The Lutheran asserts, 
that "in this age of ecclesiastical secularization, the 
pastoral office is not exercised as it should be." We 
read further:— 

"That a similar state of affairs exists in communions 
where considerable emphasis of a certain kind is 
placed on conscious spiritual experience is made evident 
from an editorial on 'The Care of Souls' that appeared 
in a recent issue of The Congregationalist (Boston). 
It reports a business man as saying: I can't 
see that ministers as a class in private conversation 
with laymen discuss to any degree the subjects peculiar 
to their profession. When my pastor meets me, 
for example, it's "How are you?" and then some comment 
on the news of the neighborhood or in the morning 
paper. He never ventures an inquiry or remark 
that has any bearing upon my personal religious 
condition.'" 

The man in question is not regarded as a "complainer, 
or demonstrative in his emphasis of a peculiar 
kind of spirituality, but one who, immersed in business 
cares, probably feels the need of spiritual direction." 
The Congregationalist goes on: 

"We wonder if this desire is not more widely spread 
on the part of the laity than many ministers realize! 



They have become of late years men among men. 
They play golf and mingle with their parishioners 
freely in clubs and social circles. That indefinable 
but real sense of separateness from common men which 
attached to the old-time ministry has gone. On the 
whole this is well, but the gains do not outweigh the 
loss if the average minister today is less eager and 
less competent to understand and satisfy the demands 
of the personal religious life. He is still or ought to 
be the spiritual specialist of the community. His 
supreme interest still is not in men in the mass, but in 
this and that and the other individual— how he or she 
can be brought under the compulsions of religion and 
then grow daily in grace and in knowledge." 

The Lutheran recommends for its own communion 
a return to the practice of setting aside a day in the 

R4096 : page 357 

week when pastors would be free to confer with souls 
who feel the need of spiritual counsel. "What but this 
individual-contact method of dealing with souls have 
we to take the place of the Roman confessional?" it 
asks. It even conceives a way of adapting that confessional 
to Protestant uses, speaking in these words: 

"We need not wonder that the Reformers were 
loath to part with this individual method of dealing 
with souls and that they purified it and retained it. 
The inquiry room or sick-bed visitation is a very poor 
substitute for the confessional in its purged Protestant 
sense. What a new significance the celebration of the 
Lord's Supper would have could there be instituted in 
every congregation an individual preparatory service 
such as is in vogue here and there in Germany and 
Scandinavia! Besides, much of the reverence and 
respect once accorded by the laity to the clergy would 
be regained if the pastor might be known among them 
more preeminently than is the case at present as one 
who is in travail for their souls' sake. No ministry is 
likely to strike a powerful spiritual note until it has 
become intertwined with the deepest longings and 
spiritual needs of a congregation."— Literary Digest. 

THE MISSION FIELD 



William T. Ellis has made a journey to Heathendom 
with a view to studying out a better mission 
policy. He has returned wiser as respects true conditions 
there and, while admitting that he was greatly 
disappointed at what he saw, because he had accepted 
too fully the mission reports, he nevertheless is hopeful 
that if new "business" methods were adopted much 
might soon be accomplished. Alas! thus others have 
hoped against hope, only to find that there are twice 



as many heathen today (1,200,000,000) as there were a 
century ago (600,000,000). He says:- 

"Up to the present, foreign mission work has been a 
mere reconnaissance in force, and not a war. One of 
the hurtful delusions of the home churches concerning 
foreign missions (a delusion sometimes fostered by 
ill-balanced reports from the field) is that the whole 
heathen world is on the verge of conversion to Christianity. 
One of the commonest figures of missionary 
oratory represents the nations as crowding into the 
Church. Now, the unwelcome fact is that heathendom, 
as a whole, has scarcely been budged by missions. 
Great as have been the missionary triumphs in spots, 
the whole mass has hardly been touched by the Christian 
teachings. Even enlightened Japan, which many 
persons believe to have become almost Christianized, 
is still rankly heathen, except for a small percentage of 
the population which only the mind of faith can invest 

R4096 : page 358 

with conquering power. The overwhelming and, at first 
sight, immovable and impregnable heathenism of mission 
lands is a challenge to the churches." 

How much more reasonable the Bible hope: that 
when God's due time shall come, the glorified Christ 
(Head and Body) will inaugurate the Millennial Kingdom, 
under whose wise and loving and powerful rule 
Satan will be bound, sin estopped, ignorance and superstition 
banished, and the knowledge of the Lord be 
caused to fill the whole earth— causing every knee to 
bow and every tongue to confess. 

Let all of our readers understand, therefore, that 
our present effort to send the true Gospel into Africa 
and Japan and China is not at all with a view to converting 
those peoples, but to do a harvest work among 
them— to seek for some of the Elect Church amongst 
them,— "not many." 

PROHIBITION SENTIMENT GROWING 



"The movement against the use and abuse of strong 
drink has grown and is still growing. It has already 
assumed the proportions of a veritable crusade. It is, 
too, a crusade of the strongest and most effective kind 
—a crusade of the people. The growth of this sentiment 
is found most vigorous in places where, but a 
short time ago, to have hinted of such a thing would 
have been considered absurd. Throughout almost the 
entire South, where the very term hospitality has so 
long been synonymous with strong drink that it was a 
fixed tradition that all southerners drank, and no southern 
man would think of welcoming another to his home 
without offering him the cup that cheers temporarily, 



this sentiment against general drinking has grown 
wonderfully, and is gaining strength with every day 
that passes. Georgia has passed a strong prohibition 
law that becomes effective at the beginning of the coming 
year. Local option is coming to be the rule in 
another southern State, Kentucky, where tradition says 
every native is trained from his cradle up to 'turn his 
back when he passes the bottle,' that he may not be 
guilty of taking note of the size of the drink taken. In 
Tennessee saloons have been practically driven out of 
the State by the declaration of sentiment against them 
under the local option law. In Missouri fifty-three 
counties have already declared in favor of local option, 
putting the saloon under the ban, and the work appears 
to have only begun. These are only some of the more 
notable instances of the growth of this sentiment. 
Equally good work is being done in many other States. 
—National Daily. 



R4096 : page 358 

NEW WATCH TOWER BIBLES 

THE first edition (5000) of the new WATCH TOWER 
BIBLES is about exhausted. We however, purpose 
another (5,000) edition, which we hope 
will be ready by May, 1908. Meantime Brother C. J. 
Woodworth is at work on the Commentary again, and 
promises that soon he will have it include all TOWER 
comments that are not found in the DAWNS. This 
addition will make unnecessary "Part V., Index to 
Scriptures treated at length in Zion's Watch Tower." 
Nevertheless it will add over 200 pages to the "Helps," 
making them in all about 500 pages. This will add 
the price a little, too— 15 cents each. Do not order 
until we announce that these are ready. 

Of the present edition we still have some of all 
styles with the patent index, which adds 25c each to 
the price. We also have a few of No. W138, price with 
postage $1.48. 

THE HELPS SEPARATE SOON 

To issue all of these "Helps" as a separate volume, 
in India paper, bound in cheap leather, would make the 
books cost as much as the cheapest of these Bibles; hence 
would be undesirable, for surely it is a great item to have 
such helps bound in with the Bible. However, we well 
know that some of our dear readers who get the TOWER 
free, as "the Lord's poor," cannot afford another Bible, 
however desirable and cheap. 

We therefore are preparing all the helps, except 
the Commentary, on India paper, 64 pages, which we 
can supply at 10c each, including postage— and our 



"Lord's poor" will be welcome to one each free. Others 
may find these convenient for use with other Bibles. 
They are thin, so they can be carried under your Bible 
cover. Orders may be sent in any time. We expect to 
be able to make deliveries Dec. 1. 



R4096 : page 358 

GLASGOW CONVENTION REPORT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The Glasgow Convention, just passed, was one of 
the many seasons of sweet and blessed refreshment 
with which we are now being favored by our present 
Lord. It was indeed good to be there. As for myself 
I could not but continually thank the loving Giver of 
every good and perfect gift for the love which was so 
clearly discernible in the brethren gathered there. I 
suppose that one's impression of the Convention is 
sure to incline to the writer's mind or feelings, so I 
perhaps speak more for myself when I say that I 
thought the brethren seemed to have a quieter and 
more assured bearing. There was the feeling of work 
to be done, and that the time for its doing is rapidly 
shortening. The joy of the Truth is widening out into 
a realization of the need of witnessing to the many who 
have not yet heard of the "loving kindness of our God," 
and that "the time is at hand" for the establishment of 
the Kingdom. Brother Edgar early reminded us that 
we are now entering into the last week of the "Gentile 
Times," and that the probability is there are very few 
General Conventions for any of us. May we all be 

R4096 : page 359 

ready for the Great Convention where our Lord and all 
his faithful will be. 

The two thoughts which were chief amongst those 
introduced by the brethren who addressed the meetings 
were, as might be expected, "The hope set before 
us" and "Our privilege of being sharers in the 'ministration 
of righteousness.'" After a word of welcome 
from Brother Johnston, representing the Glasgow 
brethren, and from Brother Hemery, representing the 
W.T.B.& T. Society, Brother Guard gave us a helpful 
talk on "The great and precious promises." Later Bro. 
Hemery spoke about "The disciple's race" (Heb. 12:1), 
of the difficulties and testings of the way we run in laying 
hold of the hope. On Sunday Brother Crawford 
talked on "The hope set before us," and many helpful 
hints were given. One of the pleasant features of the 
Convention was an address by Brother Edgar on "A 
tree planted by the rivers of water." It was a very 
interesting comparison of the natural growth of a tree 



and the developments of the Christian in his growth 
from faith to love (2 Pet. 1:5-8), and the lessons driven 

R4097 : page 359 

home made it an effective help to growth. 

On the Monday 62 brothers and sisters symbolized 
their consecration by immersion. We rejoice in their 
faith and hope, and trust that they and all will grow 
unto the likeness of the Lord. There were other addresses 
and other meetings intended to help us all to 
do with our might the work before us. Quite a good 
number promised to help as much as possible in the 
Colporteur service, and I believe both that department 
and the general work have got a stimulus. The farewell 
meeting was a happy time, even though it was 
tinged with the sadness of saying good-bye for a time, 
for there was the possibility of speaking with each one 
and thus of sharing in our pilgrim fellowship. 

Our parting message was a word from Brother 
Hemery, who used the parable of the sower as the basis 
of a short exhortation to have the heart ready for this 
"word of the Kingdom" which is now so abundant, that 
we may be neither of the wayside class, nor of those 
who receive the Truth into stony hearts, nor of those 
who allow thorns to hinder development. We trust we 
all may be of those whose hearts are of good ground, 
and who shall give back to the Lord some thirty-fold, 
some sixty-fold, some an hundred. And we parted, 
thanking the Lord for the privilege of the Convention. 

Your letter came a day too late to enable me to 
make an announcement to the Convention of the proposed 
dates of your visit next year, but the news has 
got around pretty well by this time. Before I left Glasgow 
the brethren there had entered upon a scheme 
which included colporteuring the city again before 
your coming in the spring. The brethren in other 
parts are also preparing themselves— and the people, 
too— so we are looking forward to a good time. The 
Lord give you strength for all your many labors. 

With much love, I am your brother in his grace, 
J. HEMERY. 



page 359 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY IN TABERNACLE SHADOWS 

OTHER SIGNIFICANT TYPES 

JANUARY 5 

1 . Is it in their own merit as individuals or only as under 
priests in the merit of their Head, the High 
Priest, that the prayers of the consecrated believers 



are acceptable to God at the Golden Altar of 
incense? T. 120, par. 1. 

2. If they "ask amiss" is it because the New Creature 
does not offer the prayer, or has neglected to seek 
and obtain first the mind of the Head on the subject, 
and because the Head will not present the 
petition? T.120, par. 1. 

3. Is it merely the prayers of the priests that were typified 
by the incense offered on the Golden Altar? 

T.56, par. 2 and 120, par. 2. 

4. Would the incense representing the Church's obedience 
to God be acceptable unless supplemented by 

their Lord's imputed merit? With his merit 
would theirs be acceptable to God? Rom. 12:1. 

5. What constituted the only article of furniture beyond 
the Vail— in the Most Holy? and what did it 
represent? T.121, par. 1. A. chap. 5. 

6. What did the Ark of the Covenant contain? Please 
read the Scriptures which explain this. T.121, 

par. 2. 

JANUARY 12 

7. What did the two tables of the Law there signify? 
and why were there two? T.121, par. 2. 

8. Since the Lord's followers, even with the best intentions, 
are still actually more or less imperfect, 

how can it be that they could be represented by 
God as fulfilling his perfect Law? T.121, par. 3. 

9. By what means can God maintain the justice and 
dignity of his own laws and yet overlook our 
blemishes? Romans 3:26; T.121, par. 3. 

10. In what sense is "the righteousness of the Law fulfilled 
in us" now, before we have actually reached 

the end of the way? T.122, par. 1. 

1 1 . Relate the narrative of the budding of Aaron's rod. 
Num. 17. 

12. What did that budded rod, when placed in the 
Ark of the Covenant, signify or typify? T. 122, par. 2. 

JANUARY 19 

13. What was the peculiarity of the almond tree which 
constituted it a suitable type, marking the Royal 
Priesthood? T.122, par. 2. 

14. How could a rod which marked the acceptance of 
Aaron and his sons represent Christ and his followers 
of the Royal Priesthood, since these were 

not Aaron's sons nor of his tribe— Levi? 
Heb. 5:1-5. 

15. If Aaron and his sons under the Law typically represented 
only the sacrificing work of Christ, is 

there any other type which represents his great 
future work as a Priest-King— a Royal Priest? 
Heb. 5:6-10. 

16. Was the Manna, hidden in the Ark of the Covenant 



page 360 

by Moses, referred to seventeen centuries later by 
our Lord? Read Rev. 2:17. 

17. What does Gold represent in the divine symbolisms 
and why? 

18. Did Israel's supply of Manna keep indefinitely or 
was it very perishable? Read the record in 

Exodus 16:18-20,23-25,32-34. 

JANUARY 26 

19. Was there any typical significance in the fact that 
no manna fell on the seventh day? Would it not 
represent that the bread of Truth on which the 

Lord will feed the world during the Millennium 
will be exactly the same as he has now provided 
and that came from heaven, during the sixth day 
of the world's history? 

20. Since Christ is the antitypical Manna must all, to 
have eternal life, "eat the flesh of the Son of 

Man?" Read John 6:48-51,58. 

21. What is meant by eating Christ's flesh? F.696. 

22. If the Manna is for all could it represent eternal life 
to some eaters and immortality to others? 2 Tim. 1:10. 
T.123,par. 1,2. 



R4097 : page 360 

HONORING OR DISHONORING THE HEAD 

"I would have you know that the head of every man is Christ; 

that the head of the woman is the man; that the head 

of Christ is God. Every man praying or prophesying 

with his head covered dishonoreth his head. But every 

woman praying or prophesying with her head 

uncovered dishonoreth her head: for that is one and 

the same thing as though she were shaven. 

For if a woman be not covered let her also be 

shorn: but if it be a shame for a woman 

to be shorn or shaven, let her be covered. 

-I Cor. 11:3-6. 

THERE is something about the above Scripture that 
seems to wound or hurt some of the Lord's dear 
flock. We greatly regret this, but the fact does 
not authorize us to change or modify the Scriptures. 
On the contrary, it implies to us that where there is a 
soreness of the heart against some regulation which 
the Lord has placed in his Word, some false ideas upon 
the subject resulting from wrong views and wrong 
practices of ourselves or others, there has been produced 
a condition of mind which, because of this very 



soreness, is indicated to be diseased. We have even 

known a few to be so sensitive, so tender, upon this 

subject that they felt embittered toward the author of 

DAWN STUDIES, Vol. VI., because he therein called attention 

to this Scripture and its evident meaning. 

If we find any Scripture which touches us to the 
quick our attitude should be, not that of opposition to 
the Scripture nor of opposition to the one who drew it 
to our attention, but on the contrary we should be 
grateful that a weakness and sore spot of ours had 
been brought to our attention, thus enabling us to apply 
the correct remedies, which would salve the sores 
and make the Lord's yoke easy and his burdens light. 
It will not do to say that these were not the words of 
our Lord, but only those of his Apostle Saint Paul; 
for the Lord honored the twelve and their words and 
prayed a blessing upon us all through them— upon "all 
who would believe on him through their word." (John 17:20.) 
He declared furthermore that whatsoever they 
would bind on earth would be bound in heaven, and 
whatsoever they would loose on earth would be loosed 
in heaven— thus giving us to understand that their 
words would be guided with particularity, so that what 
they would enjoin we might understand would be a 
divine injunction, and what they would tell us respecting 
our liberties in Christ we might understand to be a 
divine message also. Furthermore we are to remember 
how greatly the Lord used those channels of blessing 
for the comfort and edification of his Church. We are 
to remember how they were specially given to him of 
the Father as he declares, "Thine they were and thou 
hast given them unto me, and I have lost none save 
the son of perdition"— Judas. We see that the Apostle 
Paul was the divine selection to fill the place vacated 
by Judas' deflection, and we see that in the Lord's 
providence through him God has sent to the Church 
the larger proportion of the New Testament message— 
the explanation of the divine plan as a whole. True, 
the words of our Lord and the words of the other apostles 
have brought blessing to the Church, but in number 
and in explicitness the words of St. Paul outrank 
all others. As we have seen, this is true of our Lord's 
words, because his preaching was before the descent 
of the holy Spirit, and hence was to those who were not 
Spirit-begotten and who were unable consequently to 
appreciate and understand spiritual things. Hence 
many of our Lord's deeper teachings were given in 
parables and dark sayings, and these evidently were 
but partly understood even by the twelve until after 
Pentecost. 

We call attention to this subject afresh, not by reason 
of any desire to make it more prominent than it 
already is— not because we wish to force the Apostle's 
words upon any, not because we wish to condemn any, 
but because we want to have the responsibility for 
these thoughts placed where it belongs, upon the Apostle 



and upon the holy Spirit back of him, and not upon 
the author of SCRIPTURE STUDIES. Whoever quarrels 
with the subject let him know with whom he is quarreling 
and be on his guard proportionately. No one 
ever quarrels with the Lord to his advantage. On the 
contrary, those who with meekness receive the engrafted 
word which is able to make them wise— these have 
the greater blessing. The self-sufficient, and all who 
think themselves wise above what is written, are in a 
dangerous place. They should understand that now is 
the trial time, and that humility is one of the tests 
which the Lord is applying to all of us. They should 

R4097 : page 361 

remember that our tests are not all the same, but that 

it is the Lord who by the various testimonies of his 

Word tries and proves those who have made a consecration 

to him— not with a view to their stumbling, 

but to their testing, and if rightly exercised to their 

greater blessing and advancement in the divine favor. 

Let any who are disposed to dispute this Scripture 
read the entire context down to and including the 16th verse, 
in which the Apostle declares, "But if any man 
seemeth to be contentious we have no such custom, 
neither the churches of God." This is the Apostle's 
final word on the subject— the Lord's final word through 
the Apostle. In substance it means this: "I have set 
before you the truth on this subject, through obedience 
to which you will have a larger measure of the blessing 
of God not only in your families and in the assemblages 
of the Church but also in your own hearts and experiences. 
By following this course you will make better 
progress and be the surer of winning the great reward 
and hearing the Master's 'Well done.' Nevertheless, 
do not consider what I have said as a law; I am not 
giving it in that sense. I am giving it as an admonition, 
as something that will be for your benefit individually 
and collectively. If anyone is disposed to resent 
my presentation and to argue the question and to 
contend about the matter it would better be dropped. 
Let those who appreciate my advice follow it and reap 
the blessings; let those who do not appreciate it follow 
their own course in this matter— to themselves 
will be the disadvantage from which I fain would shield 
them. They will lose the blessing which I fain they 
would receive by following this advice." 

The Apostle's advice respecting the covering and 
the uncovering of the head is a part of his general 
teaching respecting the relationship of the husband 
and the wife in the affairs of the home and of the 
Church. The man who covers his head in his devotions 
dishonors his head by showing that he does not 
appreciate the divine word on this matter. In the 
home in which the husband does not occupy the place 
of the head of the family, he is covering his headship; 



in the home where the woman does not recognize the 
headship of her husband she is dishonoring him and 
dishonoring herself in that she thus confesses that she 
has unwisely married a man whom she cannot esteem 
as she should— as the head of the home. If men and 
women professing godliness recognized this principle 
which the Apostle here enunciates it would, we believe, 
mean the solving of many domestic infelicities and 
difficulties; for the wife looking to her husband would 
thus throw upon him the greater weight of responsibility 
in the affairs of the home, and as soon as she got 
accustomed to this she would find a great relief to her 

R4098 : page 361 

own mind— a lessening of the nervous tension which is 
so wearing, especially upon women. The husband, 
realizing his situation and his responsibility as the 
head, should and we believe would generally be more 
careful than ever to look out for the interests of his 
wife, his children and all that come properly under his 
supervision— to not only provide for their temporal 
necessities, but also to realize an increasing measure 
of responsibility as respects their higher interests, mental, 
moral, spiritual. But let us remember that the 
Apostle has placed the responsibility of this question 
with each man and each woman in the Church of 
Christ, and has not made it a matter in which Brother 
A may criticize Brother B or Sister B, nor vice versa. 
To his own master each one of us stands or falls on 
this and on other similar questions. The more obedient 
we are the greater our blessing, the less obedient 
the slower our progress, seems to be the divine rule, 
and it is increasingly important to us to know this as 
we are approaching the consummation of this age and 
finishing our course. 



R4099 : page 361 

"THE PRAYER OF FAITH SHALL SAVE" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

A few weeks ago, while reading the Diaglott, I noticed 
that the word translated sick in James 5:14 was 
astheneo, a word derived from a-sthenes, meaning without 
strength (a, without; sthenos, strength). From 
this is derived asthenia, a word much used in medicine. 
From my knowledge of medicine I knew that a person 
might be asthenic without being diseased or sick, so I 
looked up the word rendered sick in the 15th verse, 
and this I found to be kamno, a word which occurs only 
three times, and means, "to labor, suffer from fatigue." 
The two other passages are Heb. 12:3 and Rev. 2:3, 
which Young's translation renders as follows: "For 



consider him who endured such gainsaying from the 
sinners to himself, that ye may not be wearied (kamno) 
in your souls— being faint." (Heb. 12:3.) "And thou 
didst bear and hast endurance and because of my name 
hast toiled and not been weary (kamno)." (Rev. 2:3.) 
These passages would indicate that it was the weary 
and weak in faith who was told to call for the elders, 
and not the one suffering from disease. There are 
other words which mean sick, such as nosos, meaning 
sickness, unsoundness, disease; echo kakos, meaning 
to be ill. 

These two words are never used to denote moral or 
spiritual sickness, while asthenos in its various forms is 
so used, and while it is frequently rendered sick in the 
common version, it is never rendered sick in Young's 
translation, and the revised version has the number of 
times reduced. 

I also looked up the word healed, and found that 
there are three words rendered healed, viz., (1) therapeuo, 
meaning to attend to, to heal, cure; sozo, to make 
sound or whole; iaomai, meaning to heal. This last 
word is the one used by James, and it has also the significance 
of saved, as the following passage will show: 
Matt. 13:15, "For this people's heart is waxed gross, 
and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they 

R4099 : page 362 

have closed, lest at any time they should see with their 
eyes and hear with their ears and should understand 
with their heart and should be converted and I should 
heal [iaomai] them." (See also Acts 28:27,28; Luke 4:18.) 
"The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he 
hath anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor; he 
hath sent me to heal [iaomai] the broken-hearted, to 
preach deliverance to the captives, recovering of sight 
to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised." 
Jno. 12:40, "He has blinded their eyes and hardened 
their heart, that they should not see with their eyes 
nor understand with their heart, and be converted and 
should heal [iaomai] them." 

Acts 10:38, "How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth 
with the Holy Ghost and with power, who went about 
doing good and healing [iaomai] all that were oppressed 
of the devil." I Pet. 2:24, "Who his own self 
bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being 
dead to sins should live unto righteousness: by 
whose stripes ye were healed [iaomai]." 

These passages can be applied only in a moral or 
spiritual sense, while therapeuo is never applied in such 
a sense but always relates to a cure of a physical 
disease. 

As examples of the use of astheneo, I quote the following: 
Matt. 8:17, "That it might be fulfilled which 
was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, Himself 
took our infirmities [astheneia] and bare our sicknesses 



[nosos]." Matt. 26:41, "Watch and pray that ye enter 

not into temptation; the spirit indeed is willing but 

the flesh is weak [astheneia]." Rom. 4:19, "And being 

not weak [astheneo] in faith, he considered not his own 

body now dead, when he was about an hundred years 

old, neither yet the deadness of Sarah's womb." Rom. 5:6, 

"For when we were yet without strength [asthenes] 

in due time Christ died for the ungodly." Rom. 6:19, 

"I speak after the manner of men, because of the infirmity 

[astheneia] of your flesh: for as ye have yielded 

your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity 

unto iniquity; even so now yield your members servants 

to righteousness unto holiness." Rom. 8:3, "For 

what the law could not do in that it was weak [astheneo] 

through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness 

of sinful flesh and for sin condemned sin in the 

flesh." Rom. 8:26, "Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our 

infirmities [astheneia], for we know not what we should 

pray for as we ought; but the Spirit itself maketh intercession 

for us with groanings which cannot be uttered." 

Rom. 14:1,2, "Him that is weak [astheneo] in 

faith receive ye, but not to doubtful disputations. For 

one believeth that he may eat all things; another who 

is weak [astheneo] eateth herbs." I Cor. 8:11,12, "And 

through thy knowledge shall the weak [astheneo] brother 

perish for whom Christ died? But when ye sin so 

against the brethren and wound their weak [asthenes] 

conscience ye sin against Christ." Heb. 4:15, "For we 

have not an high priest which cannot be touched with 

a feeling of our infirmities [astheneia], but was in all 

points tempted like as we are, yet without sin." 

R4100 : page 362 

Nosos is the word most commonly used to denote 
sickness or disease and occurs in the same verse in 
contrast to astheneia, viz., Matt. 8:17, "That it might 
be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias, the prophet, 
Himself took our infirmities [astheneia] and bare our 
sicknesses [nosos]." 

From the foregoing I would conclude that James 
referred to Christians who had become weak in faith, 
or, to use a common expression, had "backslidden." 
This is indicated in verse 16, the word "faults" being 
translated from paraptoma, meaning a falling away. 

I hope I have made myself clear, and I very much 
desire your comments. The following is a more literal 
translation of Jas. 5:14-16: "Is any weak among you, 
let him call for the elders of the Church; and let them 
pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the 
Lord: and the prayer of faith shall save the wearied one. 
And the Lord shall raise him up, and though he have 
committed sins they shall be forgiven him. Confess 
your fallings away one to another, and pray one for 
another, that ye may be healed. The effectual fervent 
prayer of a righteous man availeth much." 



Yours in our dear Redeemer, 

J. E. TAYLOR, M.D. 



Evidently the weakness and faintness are spiritual, 
and the restoration and healing also spiritual. In 
accord with this is the exhortation that we "Consider 
him who endured such contradiction of sinners against 
himself, lest we become weary or faint in our minds," 
as respects the Lord and his promises, and thus become 
unfaithful, covenant-breakers, alienated from 
God. Any in such a condition will find it difficult to 
return to rest in the Lord and should follow St. James' 
prescription. 



R4098 : page 362 

BIRTH OF "THE MAN CHRIST JESUS" 

--MATTHEW 2:1-12.-DECEMBER 22.- 

"And the angel said unto them, Fear not, for, behold, I 
bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be unto 
all people."— Luke 2:10. 

OUR subject does not take us back to the beginning 
of God's creation when Christ as a spirit 
being became "the first born of every creature;" 
the Word that was with God in the beginning of creation, 
and by whom all things were made, and without 
whom not one thing was made. (John 1:1-3,10.) Our 
Master at that time was "the beginning and the ending, 
the first and the last," of Jehovah's direct creation: all 
subsequent creations being by and through him as 
Jehovah's honored agent. (Rev. 1:11; 3:14; Col. 1:15; 
John 1:1-3.) We come to the time when he who was 
rich and for our sakes became poor (2 Cor. 8:9) and 

R4098 : page 363 

left the glory which he had with the Father "before the 
world was." (John 17:5.) Then, without dying, our 
Master underwent a change of nature and "humbled 
himself," "was made flesh" (Phil. 2:8; John 1:14), "took 
upon himself the form of a servant" and was "found in 
fashion as a man;" "a little lower than the angels;" 
and then still further he humbled himself even unto 
death, and yet more even unto the shameful death of the 
cross— as a culprit, as a sinner. (Heb. 2:9,16; Phil. 2:6-9.) 
This lesson, appropriate to the season, calls our 
attention to the birth of "the man Christ Jesus." 

In the divine predictions of a coming Savior attention 
is largely called to the fact that he is to be a King, 



a Deliverer, a Savior. This point is made prominent 

because God appealed to mankind along the line of 

their necessities and hopes. The sacrificial feature of 

the Lord's ministry was made less prominent than his 

power and majesty and glory, because the sacrifice related 

specially to God and was to meet the demands of 

the divine law against the sinner-race. The question 

of how God would settle the matter consistently with 

his own sentence of death, resting upon the race, would 

to the average human mind be much less important 

than the statement of the resultant glories, restitution 

and blessings. Hence, we find the references to the sacrificial 

features of our Lord's ministry largely presented 

under types and symbols intended to be comprehended 

only by those who, as sons of God, would be 

guided into the truth by the Spirit of God. 

It is not surprising that the angels who announced 
our Lord's birth mentioned only the glories to follow 
and not his sufferings which would intervene. It is not 
surprising that they did not weep for the sufferings 
and humiliation, but sang, "Glory to God in the highest, 
on earth peace, good will toward men;" grasping 
merely the culmination of the great divine plan which 
had its beginning in the birth of Jesus. 

(1,2) Whether or not the "wise men" of the East 
were Hebrews we are not informed; but since divine 
favor was for the time confined to Israel, and since 
that favor did not depart until they had rejected the 
Messiah, we consider it highly probable that these wise 
men from the East were part of "the twelve tribes scattered 
abroad," who, "instantly serving God," were 
hoping for and "waiting for the consolation of Israel" 
through the long-promised Messiah. (Acts 26:7; Luke 2:25.) 
We do know that hundreds of thousands if not 
several millions of Israelites were carried captive to 
this very East country— Babylon, Medo-Persia; and we 
know also that less than 55,000 availed themselves of 
the decree of Cyrus permitting their return to Palestine. 
The great bulk of the people of Israel, therefore, 
at that time (as now) resided in foreign lands. And it 
would appear that their foreign captivity was helpful 
to their religious interests, and that the Israelites in 
general had more faith in the Lord and more strong interest 
in prophecies respecting Messiah after the captivity 
in Babylon than for several hundred years previous, 
when they were continually beset with idolatry. 

The promise of God to Abraham of a great "Seed," 
a great king and ruler who should bless the world with 
a righteous reign, it would appear, was carried by the 
Israelites into all the then civilized world. Leading some 
to expect a Jewish Messiah, it led others through a feeling 
of pride to declare that they were as able as the 
Jews to produce the desirable government and ruler 
for the world. Hence, we find that the idea of universal 
dominion began to prevail. It is claimed by some that 
Zoroaster, the great Persian religious teacher, was a 



disciple of the Prophet Jeremiah, and the memoir of 
Mrs. Grant, missionary to Persia, says:— 

"Zoroaster taught the Persians concerning Christ. 
He declared that in the latter days a pure virgin should 
conceive, and that as soon as the child was born a star 
would appear, even at noonday, with undiminished 
luster. 'You, my son,' exclaimed the venerable seer, 
'will perceive its rising before any other nation. As 
soon as you see the star follow it wherever it leads you, 
and adore the mysterious child, offering your gifts to 
him with the profoundest humility. He is the almighty 
Word which created the heavens.'" 

Although this is only a legend, it is interesting to 
know that there was such a legend amongst the people 
of the East. And respecting Zoroaster it may be said 
that his teachings were of a higher character than those 
of other heathen teachers. 

(3-6) Expecting a king, the wise men naturally 
came to the palace of Herod, who, although called the 
King of the Jews, was the representative of their conquerors, 
the Romans. Herod was the founder of the 
House of Herod and naturally had great expectations, 
not only with reference to the duration of his own dominion, 
but also with a view to the establishment of 
his posterity in the power and office which he enjoyed. 
No wonder, then, that he was "troubled." The prospect 
of a rival either in the power or in the esteem of the 
people was not to his liking. "And all Jerusalem [was 
troubled] with him." Political influence takes in a wide 
circle. There were connected with Herod's government 
or benefited by it, directly or indirectly, many whose 
plans, hopes, etc., might be very much disarranged by 
any change of the government. Herod evidently knew 
of the Jewish tradition respecting Messiah, for he at 
once sent for those who were learned in the Scriptures 
to demand of them where the prophets indicated that 
Messiah should be born. The scribes and Pharisees 
were evidently quite familiar with the subject, had 
looked it up, and apparently without hesitation gave 
the name of Messiah's birthplace as Bethlehem, and 
quoted from the prophet in support of it. 

(7-12) The cunning art of Herod, by which he 
hoped to learn who was this divinely designated Prince 
and heir to his throne, is appreciated only when we remember 
the sequel to this narrative: how, when he 
found that the wise men did not return to give him the 
information and permit the destruction of the child 
Jesus, he determined to kill all the children of the city 
of Bethlehem of two years old and under; thus he 

R4098 : page 364 

might be sure, he thought, that he had outwitted the 
divine plan and protected his own power. 

The star which seemingly had led these wise men 
toward Jerusalem, and which then apparently had vanished, 



and left the searchers to arouse the curiosity 

and interest of the people of Jerusalem, again became 

their guide as they left the city, leading them to Bethlehem, 

which is only a short distance, and the star 

appears to have indicated even the very house in which 

they found the new-born King. According to the custom 

of the time they presented costly treasures as well 

as their homage. 

Although the King came, his own received him not; 
and like the "young nobleman" of his own parable he 
went "into a far country," even heaven itself, there to 
be invested with power by the King of kings, and to 
postpone the establishment of his Kingdom until his 
Church, his Bride, his joint-heirs, should be selected 
and prepared to share the Kingdom with him. 

Meantime, the world still needs a King as much as 
ever. All nations are learning more and more their 
need of a wise, a just, a powerful, a loving, a merciful 

R4099 : page 364 

ruler. They need this very one, and are gradually 
learning that none of the fallen race can be trusted 
with much power, honor and glory; that all are weak 
through the fall, and that a superior king and a superior 
government are essential to their highest blessing. 
The masses are beginning to feel this need more keenly; 
and it is remarkable to what extent various advocates 
of Socialism recognize and quote with commendation 
the teachings of this very King— even though it may 
be said that they wish others to be governed by the 
Golden Rule, while they themselves fail to walk by it. 

The world is beginning to realize that the King is 
at the door: the Herods of today and with them all those 
of influence and power, political and financial, are 
"troubled" at a prospect of a change of government, 
which their own "wise men" announce as imminent. 
We need not expect that the princes of this world will 
welcome him; rather they will fear a disruption of 
present institutions; fear that under his government 
they would not have so favorable opportunities for 
prosperity; and that in the general leveling, which the 
prophets declare will accompany his reign, some that 
are high shall be abased, and some that are low shall 
be exalted. As a consequence, Messiah's Kingdom, 
although a Kingdom of peace and righteousness, must 
be introduced by a "time of trouble, such as was not 
since there was a nation." Yet we rejoice in the promise 
that "when the judgments of the Lord are abroad in 
the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness, 
and that eventually his Kingdom shall come 
to be the "desire of all nations." 

Thus far the Gospel of the Kingdom has been received 
by only a few; and the special blessings have 
been with the few who have acknowledged the King, 
and who are being prepared to be joint-heirs in his 



Kingdom. But let us not forget the gracious results 
that are to follow the establishment of that Kingdom, 
when, as declared in the Golden Text, the good tidings 
and the great joy "shall be to all people." 



"OUR SUFFICIENCY IS OF CHRIST" 

Where's the day I'll call dreary, 
While his favor shines so bright? 

Where's the time in which I'll weary 
Of his loving words of light? 

Where's the test of faith that's greater 
Than the measure of his grace? 

Where's the loss of goods more precious 
Than what's given in its place? 

Where's the stone on which I'll stumble 
While I trust to him my hand? 

Where's the fear to make me tremble 
When his words the winds command? 

Where's the cross that is too heavy 
When his strength doth lend me aid? 

Where's the crowned head I'd envy 
Since he's having my crown made? 

Where's the home that we could long for 

Like his palace up above? 
Where's a way more fit to get there 

Than his narrow way of love? 

--B. H. Barton. 



R4100 : page 364 

"THOU CROWNEST THE YEAR WITH THY GOODNESS" 

--PSALM 65:11. -DECEMBER 29.-REVIEW.- 

DMTERESTING as it is to review the lessons of the 
year, reaching from the Creation to the boyhood 
of Samuel and the beginning of the epoch of the 
kings of Israel, we leave that to individual effort and 
consider here the beautiful golden text of the International 
lesson. 

When we remember Father Adam's disobedience 
and that he justly came under the sentence of death 
therefor, and that in consequence ourselves and all of 
his posterity share his imperfections and dying conditions 
as we share the blessings of life through him, we 
have cause for gratitude toward God for endurable conditions 
of whatever kind he may be pleased to permit 



us to experience. From this standpoint every blessing 
is an unmerited favor, whether small or great, for we 
deserve nothing, all of our rights having been forfeited. 
Hence, as members of the world we should feel ourselves 
at the close of the year impelled to look up to 
the Creator and to confess that we have received at his 
hands numberless mercies and blessings which we 
could not claim by right or desert. For not only are 
we under condemnation through heredity, but we realize 
that individually we are unworthy of divine 
favor, for, as our Episcopal friends express it, "We 
have all done those things which we ought not to have 
done and have left undone those things which we ought 

R4100 : page 365 

to have done, and there is no health in us." It is appropriate, 

therefore, that the world, which the Apostle 

speaks of as the "groaning creation," should be exceedingly 

thankful to God for the blessings they enjoy, even 

though these have not been unmixed with bitter disappointments 

and sorrows and tears. 

But if the natural man has cause for gratitude to 
God, much more have we, the children of God through 
the adoption which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Do 
we not enjoy all the blessings which the world enjoys? 
and have we not the same call as they to thankfulness? 
And, in addition, is it not true that God has done for 
us exceeding abundantly more than we could have asked 
or thought according to the riches of his grace? (Eph. 3:20.) 
How profitable it is for us to turn our minds 
backward and note the steps by which divine grace 
has led us to our present station, in which we rejoice 
in the hope of the glory of God. When we were without 
strength and without merit Christ died for the ungodly, 
including us. We are amongst the favored ones 
who heard of the grace of God; we are amongst the 
comparatively few whose ears and eyes of understanding 
were opened to a realization of the Lord's grace 
and truth; we are amongst the still fewer number who, 
having heard, were enabled to rejoice with joy unspeakable 
and who appropriate the blessing to ourselves. 
We are amongst the still fewer number who 
received not the grace of God in vain, but under the 
guidance of the Word and Spirit of the Lord presented 
their bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to 
God, their reasonable service. 

"Oh, happy day, that fixed my choice 

On thee, my Savior and my God! 
Well may this glowing heart rejoice 
And tell its raptures all abroad." 

The Apostle says of himself, "If others have somewhat 
whereof to boast, I more." And so we see in general 
that if the world has something to boast of in respect 
to God's gifts and blessings, and something for 
which they may be thankful, we more— we who are in 



Christ Jesus, who have tasted of the good Word of 
God and the powers of the age to come, and been made 
partakers of the holy Spirit, we may rejoice abundantly. 
We may be glad even in the house of our pilgrimage 
—even though here we have no continuing city, no 
abiding place, no security, but are buffeted by the 
world, the flesh and the Adversary continually. The 
Lord, our great Deliverer, is on our part; his promises, 
exceeding great and precious, are our support and 
consolation. We have laid hold upon one who is mighty 
to save; yea, more, he has laid hold upon us, or, as the 
Apostle expresses it, "we have been apprehended of 
Christ Jesus." (Phil. 3:12.) Neither will he let us go so 
long as our hearts are loyal to him. Only the wilfulness 
which would take our interests out of the divine keeping 
could in any sense of the word separate us from 
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus. 

Let all of this class review the year, especially from 
the spiritual standpoint, to note what progress each of 
us has made in spiritual growth, in grace, in knowledge, 
in love— the fruits and graces of the holy Spirit. 
In proportion as these are large let us rejoice; in 
proportion as they are small let us lament the fact, yet 
not to the degree of discouragement or surrender to 
the enemy. Let us hear the Master's voice saying, 
"Fear not, I have overcome the world," "My grace is 
sufficient for thee; my strength is made perfect in your 
weakness."— John 16:33; 2 Cor. 12:9. 

Reviewing the year in its temporal blessings and 
mercies and privileges and favors, and in its spiritual 
opportunities and strength and knowledge and development 
in character-likeness of our dear Redeemer— while 
rejoicing in all these, let us say to ourselves in the 
words of our text that the crowning of the year with 
blessings is in the divine goodness. The Lord would 
not have us understand that he does everything for us 
so that we have nothing to do for ourselves, but he does 
give us clearly to understand that all of our doings 
would accomplish nothing without his aid— that our 
efforts and strivings are profitable in their results only 
as they have the divine favor and blessing. God's 
goodness is the crowning of the year for us. We are 
glad at its close to remember how good he is, how generous, 
how sympathetic, how compassionate, how loving 
and kind— especially to the household of faith. To 
these alone he has exhibited or sent messages of his 
grace and peace as yet, but we are glad to see in his 
Word that soon the New Covenant will be inaugurated 
and its message of forgiveness will go forth in trumpet 
tones, a Jubilee message to the world of mankind that 
they have been ransomed by the precious blood which 
seals the New Covenant and which makes possible to 
them the "times of restitution of all things which God 
hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since 
the world began." (Acts 3:21.) We rejoice, then, not 
only in our own favor and blessing, but also in the 



coming blessings, all of which we recognize to be of, by 
and through divine goodness. Our Lord Jesus 
was the great channel of this divine goodness, through 
whom it reaches us who are his followers, the adopted 
members of his Body. We are thus permitted to 
come into relationship with him, so that we also shall 
become channels for the dispensing of the divine goodness 
ultimately to natural Israel and to all the families 
of the earth. 



R4101 : page 365 

NO DEBATE IN PARAGOULD, ARKANSAS 

SOME months ago the Editor received a challenge for 
a debate from the Baptist minister at Paragould. 
We declined personally, but assured the gentleman 
that one of our "Pilgrim" brothers would serve in a Christian 
manner for the edification of the Truth. The following 
is the outcome: 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 
I have no doubt but what the Lord had some good 

R4101 : page 366 

purpose in permitting me to come to Paragould, but it evidently 
was along different lines from what we had anticipated. 
The challenger is a little country preacher, one of apparently 
little ability, and if we had known the man it would have 
been better to ignore his suggestions. However, the Lord 
knows best, and by his grace I shall make the best use of the 
occasion. If the Baptists fail us we will explain matters in 
papers and advertise fact that we will take both sides, showing 
what Baptists believe and why, and why we know that 
they are wrong, and what is right. If they will not show 
their weakness we will have to do it for them. 

LATER.— The challenger had tried to engage a man who possessed 
great eloquence and no spirituality— much fighting ability 

but little Scriptural knowledge of a desirable sort— Rev. , 

one of the last men in the world anyone would want to talk 
Scripture with. He told me himself that it would depend 
on the deacons of the Baptist Church as to whether he would 
debate at this time or not; but I suppose they would not 
agree to pay him enough, for he decided not to take part. 
However, before he left he asked me to sign some propositions 
which accompanied a resolution regarding a debate in 
December, and of course I refused. This was merely a ruse 
to enable them to circulate a report that the debate was not 
held because I would not sign the propositions. 

Not content with that they had us locked out of the 
school house, in which we purposed to hold other meetings. 
The school house has been open for religious services of 
every kind, but we were obliged to secure an unoccupied 
house for our meeting place. The first night our audience had 



to sit on the floor. What a miserable substitute for Christianity 
these people have! 

The experience has confirmed my old idea that it is 
not the representative religious people of each denomination 
that are asking for debates, but rather the little country 
preachers, who owing to lack of better ways of using their 
time are anxious to stir up a fight and have some excitement 
and have their people attend, not to learn, but to applaud 
their preacher. 

There are only six or seven believers here and I trust 
our visit may prove to be a blessing to them and to a few 
others who are willing to hear. The Baptists may write 
about a debate later, but I told them that if you had known 
the real condition of things you would not have noticed 
their request and that future communications would be 
ignored. 

However, there is a blessing for me in this experience 
and I am trying to get all the good I can out of it. Am 
giving discourses on the various propositions, and hope to 
tract the town before leaving. With much Christian love, 
BENJ. H. BARTON,-Pilgrim. 



R4101 : page 366 

"GIVE US TODAY OUR DAILY BREAD" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Should you think well to make use of this in the TOWER 
please do not use my name. It is a copy of a letter I sent to 
a brother, a stranger, who twice addressed me requesting 
charity. Yours in the Lord, C . 



MY DEAR BROTHER:- 

Your letter of some weeks ago and also your later one 
came duly to hand, and though I feel I did quite right in 
making no reply to your first letter, yet now that you have 
taken the trouble to address me twice on the same subject I 
will give you my understanding of the Lord's will in regard 
to the matter discussed. 

First let me say that I take no exceptions to the style 
or composition of your letters. On the contrary they disclose 
a very unusual talent for writing, and my only regret 
is that this talent should have found expression in a way 
that is so little calculated to glorify the Lord or his cause, 
or to really benefit you or anybody else. I remind you that 
all our talents belong to him if we are truly his, and 
that these talents ought never to be exercised in any 
manner which would reflect upon his ability to care for his 
own, but on the contrary should be directed into channels 
such as would provide an honest livelihood for ourselves and 
our families and additionally enable us to give something 
toward the spread of the Lord's Truth and the blessing of 



his people. It is not yet too late for you to make a proper 
use of the talent you possess in letter-writing, nor for the 
Lord to aid you in making it a source of honorable income 
if devoted to worthy ends. 

I trust you are not mistaken, dear brother, in your confidence 
that if any man goes to the Kingdom he will be sure 
to meet you there; but I remind you that the Scriptures are 
very explicit on the point that the only ones who will ever 
get there will be the ones who DO the will of our heavenly 
Father as expressed in his Word, and that many, very many, 
who now have unbounded confidence that they will be accepted 
of the Lord are sure to hear the words, "Depart from 
me, ye that work iniquity, I never approved of you." The 
fact that one has been fed on the loaves and fishes broken 
by the Lord's hands is no guarantee whatever that he will 
be accounted worthy to be the Lord's joint-heir in his 
Kingdom. 

These matters are stated thus plainly to you, dear 
brother, because as a diligent student of the Word you must 
be very familiar with the Scriptures, which declare that "I 
have been young, and now I am old, and yet have I never 
seen the righteous forsaken nor his seed begging bread"; 
"No good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly"; 
"All things work together for good to them that 
love God"; "His bread and water shall be sure"; "Your 
Father knoweth that ye have need of these things"; "Trust 
in the Lord and do good, and verily thou shalt be fed", and 
a host of others of like import. 

And it ought not to be necessary additionally for me to 
call your attention to the fact that there is not one solitary 
passage in the Lord's Word that would justify you or any 
other brother in Christ in asking alms of anybody except the 
great Dispenser of all blessings upon whose never-failing 
bounty we all subsist. To whom did the Lord Jesus instruct 
us that we should raise the petition, "Give us this day our 
daily bread"? Of whom is it said that if we lack we may 
ask and he "Giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not"? 

Furthermore, it would be quite as improper for me to 
respond to your appeal for alms as it was for you to make 

R4101 : page 367 

the appeal. Why? Because the statement is clear from the 
Scriptures that we should be on the lookout for wolves, 
swine and dogs, and the predominant characteristic of all 
these creatures is hunger, selfish rapacity, which would 
greedily devour not only the food of the Lord's true sheep 
but the very sheep themselves, if given the opportunity; and 
the Lord has instructed his people not to be led about by 
every suggestion that may come to them (for the devil is 
just as busy in making suggestions as he ever was) but to 
be "Wise as serpents and harmless as doves," testing every 
question— even this question of alms to the needy— by the 
Scriptures and by them alone. 

It is not for me to say why the Lord has permitted poverty 
to come to you, dear brother. I have never seen you, 



and have no knowledge of you whatever beyond what is 
contained in your letters, but it is barely possible that the 
chief reason for your poverty is that instead of "Working 
with your hands the things which are good, that you may 
have to give to him that needeth," you have been of the 
class that are mentioned by the Apostle as content to live 
on the bounty of others, "Working not at all." I hope this 
is not the case, but there is nothing in your letters to indicate 
that such may not be true. 
Your brother in Christ, C . 



page 367 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In addition to my report I wish to tell you how 
much I enjoyed the Niagara Convention. It was my 
first General Convention and it was far beyond my 
highest expectations. I appreciated it all very much, 
especially your kind words of encouragement and advice 
to the colporteurs. 

I am so thankful to our dear heavenly Father that 
the way was opened up for us to go out in the harvest 
work and attend to our parental obligations by having 
our little one with us. I consider this a great privilege, 
and oh, the blessed experiences which we have in the 
work! I will mention some since we have been here. 
One forenoon I had secured 33 orders in the neighborhood 
of the U.B. minister's home. Half an hour after 
meeting him, the minister was around, calling where I 
had taken orders and advising the people not to take 
the books. At one place where they had ordered them, 
before I left some one came with D. M. Panton's tract 
on the "Deadly errors of MILLENNIAL DAWN revealed." 
But, thank the Lord, neither the minister's warnings 
nor the warning of the tract influenced the people so as 
to have them cancel their orders. Those very people 
have more of a determination to read the books than if 
the preacher had remained at home. We know they 
cannot overthrow the Lord's work. "Praise the Lord, 
oh, my soul, for his mercy endureth forever." 

We realize the Father's leading more and more 
each day; and know it is only with his strength and 
grace that we are able to do anything at all. We do 
appreciate all the favors which we receive, the promptness 
in which the orders are filled, the TOWERS, sermons, 
etc.— they are all so good! 

May our heavenly Father richly bless you, dear 
brother, as you dispense the meat in due season to the 
household of faith. With much Christian love to yourself 
and all the Bible House staff, 

Yours in his service, 

(MRS.) B. VANHYNING,-Colporteur. 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

Enclosed find my Pilgrim report for this month 
and money order for balance due the Society. 

I returned to Atlanta Sept. 9 very much reduced in 
physical health and strength. It was with great difficulty 
that I finished my route; but the good Lord gave 
just enough strength to complete it. It does not seem 
as though I could have filled another appointment, 
but am better now. The last week of rest and quiet has 
been a great help, and today for the first I feel quite 
like myself. 

I rejoice as I think that if we only keep the sacrifice 
bound to the altar it will not be long before it will 
all be consumed. Sister Henika and I are thankful 
that we made the sacrifice of not attending the Niagara 
Convention so I could take the Pilgrim trip, for the 
friends in the extreme South, where there is not so 
much Pilgrim service as in some other parts of the 
country, were very glad to get the service of even this 
frail earthen vessel, so we feel that your decision of 
the matter was approved of the Lord, and each has received 
a blessing in making the sacrifice. 

As this is the fourth season that I have spent in 
the southern Pilgrim work you may want to know what 
I find of the spread of the Truth in the extreme South. 
While you will see by my reports that the interest and 
numbers are a little on the increase the opposition to 
the "Present Truth" in the South is very great; but 
there is one thing that is breaking it down, and that is 
that the friends are showing their faith by their works. 
I find that where there has been an increase of interest, 
or even a more favorable disposition to the Truth, it is 
the result of consistent living on the part of those who 
have made the covenant to sacrifice. (I Pet. 2:12.) And 
so their neighbors are beginning to come and see what 
it is that is lifting the daily walk and lives of those in 
"Present Truth" above that of the nominal Church 
people. It is a mystery to them how the Truth people 
live the high standard of life that they do and do not 
believe in eternal torment. How much we have to be 
thankful for that we have the "eyesalve" which enables 
us to see the "mystery hid for ages." 

The Church in Atlanta send Christian love and 
greeting to the TOWER office and to Brother Russell. 

Your brother in Christ, 

J. H. HENIKA. 



page 369 

SEMI-MONTHLY 