
Be More Than a Silent Partner




 1. How may we imitate the apostle Paul’s attitude when we are working with others in the ministry?
1 The apostle Paul viewed the time he spent with fellow believers as opportunities for “an interchange of encouragement.” (Rom. 1:12) When you work with another publisher in the ministry, do you take advantage of this time to encourage and assist him? Instead of being a silent partner, why not share what helps you to be an effective publisher?
 2. What can we do to bolster the confidence of our field service partner, and why is this important?
2 Instill Confidence: Some publishers lack confidence, which may be reflected in their facial expressions or tone of voice. We can bolster their confidence by giving them sincere commendation. What are some other ways to instill confidence? One traveling overseer freely tells his partner about his own fears and how he prays often for help to overcome such feelings. Another brother noted this regarding what helps him reflect confidence: “It starts with a smile. Sometimes I have to pray for help to make that simple expression.” Has something helped you to be more confident in the ministry? Share it with your field service partner.
 3. What can we share with our partner that may help him become more effective in his ministry?
3 Share Methods: Have you found a simple opening statement or question, perhaps something about a local event, to be effective in starting a conversation? Have you experienced good results from adding a personal touch to a sample presentation? Tell your partner. (Prov. 27:17) While traveling to a return visit, you can relate your objective for the visit and how you plan to achieve it. After a Bible study, you could explain why you chose a certain point, scripture, or teaching method to address the student’s needs.
 4. Why should we be interested in helping fellow evangelizers?
4 First-century evangelizers were not just interested in helping unbelievers. They also saw the value of encouraging and strengthening one another. (Acts 11:23; 15:32) The apostle Paul trained young Timothy and then encouraged him to share what he had learned with others. (2 Tim. 2:2) When we do not forget to do good to fellow Christians while in the ministry, we not only increase their joy and effectiveness but we also please our heavenly Father.—Heb. 13:15, 16.




