
Magazine Routes—Useful for Starting Bible Studies




 1. Why has Jehovah’s organization long encouraged publishers to develop a magazine route?
1 Many people are not inclined to study the Bible with us, but they enjoy reading our magazines. Therefore, Jehovah’s organization has long encouraged publishers to develop a magazine route. As people regularly read our magazines, they often form a longing for God’s Word. (1 Pet. 2:2) Eventually, something they read could strike a responsive chord, causing them to accept a Bible study.
 2. How may we cultivate the interest of those on our route?
2 ‘Water’ Seeds of Truth: Rather than simply dropping the magazines off, engage the householder in conversation and try to build a rapport with him. This will help you to learn his circumstances, interests, and beliefs, which will enable you to speak with insight. (Prov. 16:23) Prepare for each visit. If possible, briefly highlight a point and related scripture from the magazines, watering any seeds of truth in his heart. (1 Cor. 3:6) Make a record of the date of each visit, the literature that was left, and the subjects and scriptures that were discussed.
 3. How often should we return to visit those on our magazine route?
3 Return How Often? You should return once a month to bring the latest magazines to those on your route. However, depending on your circumstances and the interest of the individual, you may choose to visit more often. For example, a week or two after leaving the magazines, you could return and say, “I stopped by briefly to point out something from the magazines I left you.” This will whet the person’s appetite to read a particular article. If he has already read it, you could ask him what he thought about the article and discuss it briefly. Or if the individual enjoys reading our literature, you might return and offer him the tract, brochure, or book that we are featuring that month.
 4. From time to time, what can we do to determine if those on our route might be willing to study the Bible?
4 Do not wait for the householder to ask you for a study. Take the initiative. Even if he has refused a Bible study in the past, from time to time you can feature “Bible Questions Answered” from The Watchtower and see if he is willing to discuss it with you. Perhaps you can start a doorstep study. However, if you are unable to start a study, you can continue bringing him the magazines to cultivate his interest.




