
Take as a Pattern the Prophets—Micah




 1. What question may Micah have pondered, but why was his preaching not in vain?
1 ‘When will the end of this corrupt system of things finally come?’ The prophet Micah may have pondered a similar question as he proclaimed Jehovah’s judgment messages against the kingdoms of Israel and Judah. Yet, his preaching was not in vain. In 740 B.C.E., during Micah’s lifetime, Jehovah’s words against Samaria were fulfilled. (Mic. 1:6, 7) Later, Jerusalem was destroyed in the year 607 B.C.E. (Mic. 3:12) How can we imitate Micah as we await the execution of Jehovah’s judgments in our day?
 2. How and why do we show patience as we await Jehovah’s day?
2 Be Patient: Micah wrote: “As for me, I will keep on the lookout for Jehovah. I will show a waiting attitude for the God of my salvation.” (Mic. 7:7) Of course, Micah did not idly wait for the end to come. He remained busy as Jehovah’s prophet. As we await Jehovah’s day, we should also be engaged in “holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion.” (2 Pet. 3:11, 12) Jehovah’s patience allows individuals time to repent. (2 Pet. 3:9) Therefore, we take to heart the divine admonition to imitate the prophets in exercising patience.—Jas. 5:10.
 3. Why should we petition Jehovah for his holy spirit?
3 Rely on Jehovah’s Strength: Although Micah had a challenging assignment, he looked to Jehovah for the strength to carry it out. (Mic. 3:8) It is no coincidence that Jehovah’s Word urges us to rely on God for strength. He generously gives power to the tired ones so that they can fulfill their theocratic responsibilities. (Ps. 84:5, 7; Isa. 40:28-31) Have you personally experienced this in your life of sacred service? Do you regularly petition Jehovah for the help of his powerful holy spirit?—Luke 11:13.
 4. Micah’s life course provides what excellent example for us today?
4 Throughout his life, Micah made the doing of God’s will his priority. He was determined to remain faithful although surrounded by moral corruption. Similarly, our integrity is tested on a daily basis. Let us therefore strengthen our resolve to “walk in the name of Jehovah our God forever and ever.”—Mic. 4:5.




