Kingdom Proclaimers Report
“Shining as Illuminators in the World”
JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES stand out as unique and often receive bad publicity because of their not accepting blood transfusions. This position, however, is solidly based on the Bible. It shows that God condemns the misuse of blood, since blood is precious in his eyes. (Genesis 9:3, 4; Leviticus 17:14) As a result of examining the Scriptures on this subject, Jehovah’s Witnesses conclude that the Bible’s directive to ‘abstain from blood’ would clearly include the modern practice of transfusing blood.—Acts 15:19, 20, 28, 29.
In recent years members of the medical community, as well as the courts in some countries, have come to support Jehovah’s Witnesses on this issue. For example, in Denmark a young mother who was acquainted with the Bible’s view of blood died as a result of an automobile accident. Because of her refusal to accept a blood transfusion, her doctors fueled a month-long campaign of hostility by the media against Jehovah’s Witnesses.
The young woman’s parents requested an inquiry, and in April 1994 a decision was announced by Denmark’s Commission of Patients’ Complaints. It stated that the patient died, not because she refused blood, but because of medical malpractice. The decision was based on investigations by the Board of Forensic Medicine and the health authorities. In a circular to all health-care facilities in Denmark, the National Board of Health stated that doctors have an obligation to give Jehovah’s Witnesses the best available alternative treatment, taking into consideration their refusal to accept blood.
Another case involved Dan, a 15-year-old Witness who died of leukemia. In this case doctors respected Dan’s brave decision to reject a blood transfusion. This resulted in a widespread press campaign in which the media blamed the doctors for Dan’s death. Many, however, did not agree with the negative propaganda.
For example, the headmaster at the school that Dan had attended was present at the Kingdom Hall for the funeral. He expressed shock over the unfair news coverage of Dan’s death. After approaching a Witness coworker with several questions about Jehovah’s Witnesses, he accepted a copy of the video Jehovah’s Witnesses—The Organization Behind the Name. The video so impressed him that he arranged for all the teachers in the school to view it. Later, the video was shown to all the students, one class at a time.
Denmark’s minister of health also disagreed with the bad publicity Dan’s doctors received. He stated that the doctors had done the right thing in respecting Dan’s mature decision and well-founded faith.
There are millions of Kingdom proclaimers who render obedience to God’s laws. Because of their obedience, they stand out, “shining as illuminators in the world.”—Philippians 2:12, 15.

