A Christian Use of Material Wealth
A CROSS the wide surface of this pleasant earth which our Creator has provided in his love for the blessed home of men, the knowledge of his Word, the Bible, is at this time being carried by persons dedicated to the service of the Most High. Their calling to ‘preach the Word’ is an honorable commission and a sacred trust, with which nothing else on earth compares. That which they make known is the glory of Jehovah, the true God, whose servants they are.
These words you are now reading may find you located in one of the more highly developed nations of the world. If so, you know that to the people of such land Jehovah’s witnesses are bringing Bible information, light which comes, not from men, but from the Lord Jehovah, who has risen upon his servants. (Isa. 60:1, 2) You realize that this they do for other than financial gain, because they spend, not collect, of their time and every resource, material and spiritual. It may be that you join them in this glorious ministry, and, if so, you know that there is no lack or shortage in their lives which are filled to abundance with the spiritual wealth of the truths of the kingdom of heaven.
On the other hand, this may come to you in a part of the earth not developed according to man’s proud “civilization”. Yet in all such places Jehovah’s witnesses preach the same Word of God. Think of the variety of persons and localities in this great ‘field which is the world’! There is wide contrast: every climate, all customs, varying standards, practices and viewpoints. Everywhere, however rich, poor, this color or that complexion, whatever language, in mansion or very humble dwelling, everywhere there are people, and people are what interests Jehovah’s witnesses.
The various nations now possess some wealth, great in many respects, but all really belonging to Jehovah the Creator. Persons loving God turn such of this material wealth as they can to the Lord’s praise by using it to advance the Kingdom proclamation. However, many people of the nations, the men, women and children who love righteousness, are of real spiritual value, and they truly ‘herald Jehovah’s praise’ by worshiping him. These persons are precious to Jehovah God and to his servants, who love them.
After all, what is it that really makes a man? The cloth with which he drapes his form? The color of his skin? The locality of his mother’s residence at his birth? His size, features, inherited imperfection of body, the customs of his ancestors? Surely, none of these things! A handsome, learned person, possessing modern contrivances and elegant clothing, might be cruel and selfish, or he might not. A poor, uneducated person, to some strange in appearance and speech, might love righteousness, respect his fellow man, be of good-will toward God, or his heart might be the reverse of these good qualities. So, isn’t it that which is inside that makes the man, and moves him in his response to the truth of God’s Word? We do not refer to that fictitious religious invention, the “immortal soul”, but to that which God can and does see, the heart. (1 Sam. 16:7) All persons have minds and hearts, setting their affections on unrighteous, old world things or on righteous principles in harmony with new world principles as revealed in the Scriptures.
We feel that you would like to consider this matter from this viewpoint. Such helps us to appreciate the necessity for the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society to continually and consistently urge the preaching of the gospel to every person, everywhere. It is an encouragement to you if you are participating in this Bible educational work. When we realize that whoever or wherever a person is he can respond in one way or another to God’s Word, we comprehend why Jehovah’s witnesses are sent to all areas to preach to the people. When you read in this magazine or other of the Watch Tower Society’s publications, such as the 1950 Yearbook, of the work earth-wide, you know the motive that gives this work life and force: love for God and man, and Jehovah’s spirit of blessing on his unselfish servants.
The money which is contributed by persons who accept the printed Bible-study helps from Jehovah’s witnesses aids quite a bit in keeping the work going. The greater part of the financial assistance, however, comes from other voluntary contributions made by Jehovah’s witnesses, by others associating with them, and by any persons who desire to support the work in this manner. It is a joy and an assurance to us, and we believe it will be to you also, for us to again confirm the fact that never in its history has the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, nor its representatives, solicited any funds, nor “taken up a collection”, or levied tithes. Christians ‘covet no man’s gold’. (Acts 20:33) In following such Scriptural rule Jehovah’s blessing has been upon his organization.
The miracle of the expansion of Jehovah’s worship is taking place in this day by the Lord’s rich blessing and direction. A man is following a wise course in using of his money and other material blessings to support this work. Now, as at all times, the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society follows the Scripturally approved policy of accepting unforced, unsolicited, free-will donations of money. See Luke 16:9; 21:1-4; 1 Corinthians 16:2; 2 Corinthians 9:7.
This principle has always operated among God’s servants on earth at all times. The same privilege is here today. Such donations build and operate headquarters and Branch offices and facilities in 65 countries, including missionary homes (107 of these now), promote the work in every land (104 at the present writing), school missionaries and transport them to their foreign assignments, pay for local, national and international conventions of gospel ministers, publish Bibles and study aids, and ship and distribute these. And the work is increasing.
Yearly we discuss this matter in The Watchtower for the information of all, thus answering the questions relative thereto for our many new readers, outlining the “Good Hopes” donation arrangement. Soliciting money? Absolutely not! To consider the Lord’s work and plan in advance to further it is a blessed and wonderful privilege in this day. The Society plans in advance, and so do many individuals. Planning in advance what we can arrange to give is in harmony with the advice regarding donations at 1 Corinthians 16:2. So it is suggested that, upon receiving this issue of The Watchtower, you address a postcard or letter to the Society and keep a copy as a reminder to yourself concerning the amount you hope to contribute. All you need to write is, in substance:
“By God’s grace I hope to be able to contribute to the work of announcing the kingdom of Jehovah during the ensuing year the amount of $ ____, which I will remit in such amounts and at such time as I can find it convenient, as I am prospered.
[Signed] ______.
Address your card or letter to
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society
Treasurer’s Office
124 Columbia Heights
Brooklyn 2, New York
Those residing outside of the United States, and who desire to contribute in the above way to the coming year’s expense, please address letters or cards to the Society’s office in the respective country in which you live. (See page 130 for a list.)
Some persons may not care to undertake any such voluntary arrangement as that above, feeling they are obligating themselves. They prefer to send in their contributions to the Society at any time, according to their prosperity or ability to do so. In such cases they should send all these contributions to the Society at the above Brooklyn address, even if they have not notified the Brooklyn office in advance.
Your desire and ours is that God’s will may be accomplished through his organization. And so, in prayer, present to Him our need for His guidance, that all money contributions we receive may be used to the best advantage to announce the Kingdom, until the end comes and the new world enters.—Matt. 24:14.

