Announcements
“LIVING UP TO THE NAME” TESTIMONY PERIOD
Do you profess or would you like to be one of Jehovah’s witnesses? Then you sincerely want to walk worthy of the name. You will appreciate, too, the intent of the June Testimony Period, entitled “Living Up to the Name”. We are sure you will be with us in carrying out the program of activity for that month. Toward delivering the witness in harmony with our God-given name, we shall be offering the three bound books “Let God Be True”, “The Kingdom Is at Hand” and “The Truth Shall Make You Free”, on the nominal contribution of one dollar for all three books. It is mutually strengthening to have your cooperation in this testimony, and our joined efforts work together to give a more impressive witness and to prove that the Most High God has a people on earth who uphold the honor of his name. He knows all the efforts you put forth, not for praise from man but from him. Nevertheless, we should appreciate your making out a report of the month’s work and results, on our form therefor, that we may compile a combined report.
WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of June 4: “Whatever Else You Get, Get Understanding,” ¶1-25 inclusive, The Watchtower May 1, 1950.
Week of June 11: “Whatever Else You Get, Get Understanding,” ¶26-35 inclusive, also “The Way to Gain Understanding”, ¶1-12 inclusive, The Watchtower May 1, 1950.
“THE WATCHTOWER”
The Watchtower is a magazine without equal in the earth, and is conceded this rank by all that have been faithful readers thereof during its more than seventy years of publication. The Watchtower has increased in importance with the progress of the years, and never has it been more valuable than today, at this world crisis, when the destiny of each intelligent human creature is being decided. The getting of correct information and instruction, just such as required for the times, to decide your course wisely to a happy destiny, was never more vital than now, for “where there is no vision, the people perish”. Informed persons well acquainted with the consistent contents of The Watchtower agree that those who want to gain life in peace and happiness without end should read and study it together with the Bible and in company with other readers. This is not giving any credit to the magazine’s publishers, but is due to the great author of the Bible with its truths and prophecies, and who now interprets its prophecies. He it is that makes possible the material that is published in the columns of this magazine and who gives promise that it shall continue to publish the advancing truths as long as it continues to exist for the service of the interests of his Theocratic Government. Carefully and prayerfully read this issue of The Watchtower. Then do not delay to mail in your subscription, that you may receive it regularly, twice a month, twenty-four copies the year. Subscription rates are shown above.

