“Whatever Else You Get, Get Understanding”
“Above all things get wisdom; whatever else you get, get understanding.”—Prov. 4:7, An Amer. Trans.
 1. Why is knowledge of the Holy One important? It means what?
JEHOVAH, the great Theocrat, understands all things and gives understanding to his faithful servants as they need it. Such understanding is one of the chief requisites to proper Theocratic service. It is the thing that marks a mature servant from a novice. The wisest man of ancient times said: “The knowledge of the Holy One is understanding.” (Prov. 9:10, An Amer. Trans.) The One wiser than that ancient sage said to that Holy One: “This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent.” This knowledge of the Holy One means much more than just a mental idea of his existence. It means a proved knowledge of Jehovah and of his purposes which resists any and all efforts to upset it. It means an understanding of him and an appreciation of why he does the things that he does.
 2. What recommendation in favor of understanding are we given?
2 This proved, tried and unupsettable knowledge is something to be striven for. It is something we cannot get along without, if we hope to enjoy life eternal blessed by God’s kingdom. Keep this fact in mind, and a better appreciation of the force and meaning of the inspired words at Proverbs 4:7, used as our title, results. If we understand that God is our Father, then we will pay attention to what he teaches us, and this will increase our understanding of him and of our relationship to him. “Hear, my son, a father’s instruction, and attend, that you may gain understanding; because I give you sound learning, forsake not my teaching! Above all things get wisdom; whatever else you get, get understanding.” (An Amer. Trans.) In addition to the exhortation of a father, we have also the counsel of his wise and faithful son, who himself profited by his father’s directions: “For I was a son unto my father, tender and only beloved in the sight of my mother. And he taught me, and said unto me: Let thy heart retain my words; keep my commandments, and live.”—Prov. 4:1-4, 7, Am. Stan. Ver.
 3. Why is understanding necessary in addition to wisdom?
3 In this process of getting understanding we recognize that one might have considerable knowledge and still not have understanding. Understanding not only deals with the fact, but also with the why and the wherefore of things. It embodies the application or use of that knowledge for the highest good. Therefore, without understanding knowledge is of very little value. That is particularly true when it comes to applying the knowledge we have of God, his kingdom and his law. The above scriptures also indicate that it is possible to have wisdom and still not have understanding. We might decide upon a proper course to follow. We may have consecrated ourselves to serve the Lord, all of which is a wise procedure; but, in addition, we must get understanding. The apostle says that the difference between a son and a servant is that to the sons the Lord Jesus makes known what his Father does. (John 15:15) He reveals to us the why and the wherefore of the things we need to know. This understanding is within the reach of each child of God, but he must go and get it. Without it he cannot make a success of his Christian calling.
 4. Who thus really counsel us? What is it our part to do?
4 This counsel from a father to a son is primarily from Jehovah to his only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and also embraces the members of the body of Christ. But in principle it applies to every human creature who will ever attain to life in or under Jehovah’s kingdom. This exhortation from the two greatest counselors in the universe, Jehovah God and his Son, Christ Jesus, to give attention to the Word of God, to get understanding of that Word, that we might fully appreciate our relationship to our God and his organization, is therefore something to be greatly appreciated and taken very seriously. “My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the teaching of thy mother.” (Prov. 1:8, Am. Stan. Ver., margin) We on our part must do something. We must get understanding of Jehovah’s purposes and learn how they apply to us individually, and collectively. If we refuse or neglect to get this understanding we endanger our future existence in any part of God’s realm.
 5. What choice of young King Solomon did the Lord God commend?
5 In times past the Lord commended King Solomon very highly for desiring an understanding heart above everything else. A consideration of Solomon’s course and the Lord’s pleasure in it will be profitable here. “In Gibeon the LORD appeared to Solomon in a dream by night: and God said, Ask what I shall give thee.” Solomon replied: “Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who is able to judge this thy so great a people?” “And the speech pleased the LORD, that Solomon had asked this thing. And God said unto him, Because thou hast asked this thing, and hast not asked for thyself long life; neither hast asked riches for thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies; but hast asked for thyself understanding to discern judgment; behold, I have done according to thy words: lo, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart; so that there was none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee. And I have also given thee that which thou hast not asked, both riches, and honour: so that there shall not be any among the kings like unto thee all thy days.”—1 Ki. 3:5, 9-13.
 6. Why did his choice please Jehovah? What did it foreshadow?
6 Solomon’s choice pleased Jehovah God because it acknowledged Him as supreme. It showed that Jehovah is the only proper source of understanding and that Solomon was a servant who wanted to serve him faithfully and that the people who were to be judged were Jehovah’s people. This wise choice sets the right course for all of God’s servants to follow, and it foreshadowed the correct course that their Leader, the faithful and true servant of Jehovah, would take. Moses the prophet also manifested exemplary meekness and looked to Jehovah for understanding and direction, and for this the Lord God used Moses mightily.—Num. 12:3.
 7. Who is our greatest example of seeking understanding? Why?
7 However, the greatest example we have in seeking understanding and in applying it is, of course, Jesus of Nazareth, for he said: “I can of mine own self do nothing: . . . I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me.” (John 5:30) By not seeking his own will he did not mar his wisdom and understanding. ‘This Jesus is, due to God, made unto us wisdom.’ (1 Cor. 1:17-19, 30) We do well, therefore, to give particular attention to the example he has set for us. Before doing so, however, let us consider another side of the matter.
 8. Can understanding be lost? Whose example proves your answer?
8 The fact that one has understanding up till now is no assurance that this understanding will be his for all time. To be retained, this understanding must be cherished, preserved and striven for. No issue pertaining to Jehovah’s kingdom by Christ should be let arise without getting a proper understanding and view of it. What is God’s purpose concerning it? What is my Theocratic responsibility toward it? No price is too great to pay for understanding. Solomon, the highly praised servant of Jehovah, lost his understanding, which at one time was so precious and important to him. He set his affections on other things than the Lord. He gratified the desires of his human heart, which is “deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked”. (Jer. 17:9) This leaning to his own will corrupted his understanding and he died condemned of God. (1 Ki. 11:1-11) This teaches that no other creature be that one as near and as dear as a wife, can be permitted to come between the servant and his God. Solomon was properly warned of the consequence of his course but chose to ignore it; which was a serious step and denoted corrupted understanding had set in.
“WITH ALL THY GETTING GET UNDERSTANDING”
 9. How did Moses on a trying occasion illustrate this sad fact?
9 Similarly Moses, who was known as the meekest man in all the earth, manifested great discernment and understanding of the will and purposes of Jehovah concerning himself and the people of God whom he was privileged to serve. But he became so carried away with his own importance and disturbed by the repeated transgression of the Israelites that he refused to properly honor Jehovah before them. Note the words of the once meek and humble Moses. “And Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the rock, and he said unto them, Hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch you water out of this rock? . . . And the LORD spoke unto Moses and Aaron, Because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which I have given them.” (Num. 20:10, 12) Moses’ understanding became corrupted, he thought himself equal with God in providing blessings upon Israel.
10. What is the greatest enemy of understanding? Why?
10 The greatest enemy of understanding is self in any form, self-importance, self-pity or self-indulgence. Self always beclouds the issue and obscures the vision. Therefore, if we would retain understanding we must continually keep self in subjection and our eye single to the Lord’s glory, study his Word and meditate upon and follow closely the examples the Lord sets forth in the Scriptures for our guidance. Now let us consider Jesus, who was made unto us wisdom and an example of getting and retaining proper understanding.
11. How did Jesus get understanding? How do we get it?
11 Jesus had knowledge, wisdom and perfect understanding of the divine purposes. This perfect knowledge, wisdom and understanding did not come automatically to him; he had to get it by study, meditation and prayer, even as we. (Deut. 17:18-20) His faithful course in this respect is set forth as an example for us to follow. (1 Pet. 2:21) His reasonings and conclusions are based upon a perfect understanding of the divine will. These reasonings and conclusions are entirely foreign to human methods of reasoning, and most of his conclusions are entirely different from ours, because of our imperfections and human inclinations which are after the flesh. (Isa. 55:8, 9) The course of action he advocates for his followers is the right one, regardless of how much it may conflict with our own, and must be given precedence over our own or any other creature’s conclusions. We must be transformed by a renewing of our mind to conform to God’s mind as expressed in his Word, before we can have real knowledge, wisdom and understanding.
12, 13. What principle toward God governed him? What tests prove it?
12 Jesus’ position regarding his and our relationship to Jehovah God is set forth at Matthew 22:37: “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.” He was always governed by this principle himself and advocated it for everyone else. When the Devil misquoted scriptures and suggested their misapplication to his personal needs Jesus on all occasions honored the name and the word of Jehovah and displayed his understanding by properly applying the scriptures.
13 “Then was Jesus led up of the spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he afterward hungered. And the tempter came and said unto him, If thou art the Son of God, command that these stones become bread. But he answered and said, It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. Then the devil taketh him into the holy city; and he set him on the pinnacle of the temple, and saith unto him, If thou art the Son of God, cast thyself down: for it is written, He shall give his angels charge concerning thee: and, On their hands they shall bear thee up, Lest haply thou dash thy foot against a stone. Jesus said unto him, Again it is written, Thou shalt not make trial of the Lord thy God. Again, the devil taketh him unto an exceeding high mountain, and showeth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them; and he said unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me. Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. Then the devil leaveth him; and behold, angels came and ministered unto him.” (Matt. 4:1-11, Am. Stan. Ver.) Jehovah in turn vindicated Jesus’ faith and faithfulness by having his angels come and minister to him after the test was past. Jesus, however, had to endure the test and show his faith first.
14, 15. What marks of understanding do we note in Jesus’ example?
14 The humble servant of Jehovah who is anxious to get understanding will meditate on this example. First, he will note that Jesus did not choose his own course to follow, or select his own territory. ‘He was led of the spirit.’ His own preferences and ideas of what should be done were not the important thing. The same attitude is in evidence as he met each issue. The big question was not that of supplying his own bodily needs, no matter how legitimate those needs might seem to be, or following a seemingly easier and more desirable way of doing his Father’s business. He had understanding. He knew his Father’s purposes. That understanding plus the spirit of Jehovah enabled him to properly understand and apply these scriptures that Satan had misapplied and to counter with scriptures properly applied according to his Father’s purposes.
15 Jesus well knew that to use his power to turn the stones into bread would be leaving an example of selfishness for his disciples to follow. He would be using his God-given power for his own comfort rather than for his Father’s glory. This would be a stumblingblock to his followers rather than a proper example. He had faith that his God would supply his needs when the time came; and He did so. Jesus’ understanding told him that if he jumped off the pinnacle of the temple and should be preserved he might develop a following, but such followers would not be accepting him because of the eternal principles of his God, which he had covenanted to hold forth, but because of the spectacular deed which he performed. Jehovah would not be glorified, nor the people benefited, by such a course. Similarly, by bowing down and worshiping Satan, even if such a scheme could be successful, what would be the advantage? If he obtained the kingdoms of this world he would simply have a mass of vessels prepared for inevitable and ultimate destruction. The Devil’s schemes are never an outlet through which to make known the riches of God’s glory on the vessels of mercy which He has prepared for His glory. (Romans 9:21-23) Jesus’ understanding enabled him to clearly appreciate that the Lord’s way of inviting men of good-will to submit themselves to the principles of Jehovah as revealed in Christ Jesus for their own transformation, and for thus having His law written in their hearts, was the best and only proper way.
16. So what does it take for us to resist the tests by the Devil?
16 This series of examples set forth by Jesus for our edification covers the various ways in which the Devil approaches the servants of the Lord, through the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, in an effort to turn them aside from faithfully serving Jehovah. (1 John 2:16, 17) It takes understanding to resist them. Study them carefully, meditate upon them, and with all your getting get understanding. The Devil had and used knowledge. Jesus had and used understanding. There is a big difference.
17, 18. What does understanding create? What does this help us do?
17 Regarding Jesus, it is written of him that he “for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God”. (Heb. 12:2) The Scriptures indicate that Jesus had a personal joy in fulfilling the purposes of his Father and receiving the promised reward. They indicate a personal objective, a reward that would be all his own, all in harmony with and pleasing to his heavenly Father, who set this joy before him.
18 A part of this great joy was that of being King in God’s glorious kingdom, the joy that he might, if faithful, be the instrument used by his heavenly Father to direct the Kingdom activities which would vindicate Jehovah’s name and bestow untold blessings upon faithful creatures throughout the universe. This joy that was set before Jesus, and which he desired so greatly, is pictured in the Scriptures as a treasure hid in the field; he was required to sell all that he had in order to obtain this field. The members of the body of Christ, who are heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ, are called upon and required to follow in his footsteps. They too are required to sell all that they have in order to be with him in the Kingdom. The same consuming joy is set before them and it must inspire them with the same unalterable determination that no sacrifice is too great, or obstruction too difficult, for them to overcome in order to have a part in this glorious reward to which Jehovah invited them.—Matt. 13:44.
19. Does this have any point for Jonadabs? If so, how?
19 Similarly the Jonadabs or “other sheep”, who will be greatly blessed and honored under that glorious kingdom and be recipients of its blessings, are also required to consider this privilege of inestimable value and are required to follow a course of faithfulness similar to that of Jesus and his body members in order to qualify for its blessings. Therefore the ‘selling of all that he had’, this giving up everything in order to obtain that “pearl of great price”, is of vital concern to all the members of the body of Christ and to their faithful Jonadab associates. Our appreciation of this is enhanced by proper understanding. Get understanding!—Matt. 13:45, 46.
20. How did Jesus approach this undertaking without encumbrances?
20 The attitude of Jesus and his method of approach to this great undertaking is recorded at Matthew 8:20-22: “Foxes have holes and wild birds have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head!” (An Amer. Trans.) His big objective was to serve his God and trust Him for everything else. He was not interested in accumulating personal earthly treasure. He had no desire to acquire the wealth of this world, nor land, nor even a home. He did not even try to have the ordinary things that other creatures felt necessary to their existence. He was concerned with one thing, the acquiring of that field containing the hid treasure. All other earthly acquisitions would have been burdensome and would have interfered with his plans; therefore he joyfully relinquished them rather than have them in any way interfere with his one great objective.
21. How did he start out on his course of action?
21 Jesus started out by officially undertaking the obligations connected with the work. He presented himself to his Father saying (as expressed by the psalmist), “Lo, I come . . . to do thy will, O my God.” After his forty days in the wilderness, where he undoubtedly studied, meditated and carefully planned his future course, and after being tempted by the Devil, he came forth with that positive determination to get this “field” and obtain that treasure of great price at any cost. He did not stop and say, ‘Do I have enough money in the bank in order to care for me if this thing should collapse or if things do not work out?’ Nor did he demand a trailer or insist on some other provisions in order to provide for his comfort during this undertaking. No, he came right out of the wilderness and went right to work serving the purposes of the Almighty God according to his covenant. Publishing this gospel of the Kingdom and inviting followers to join him in it, he understood what he was doing.
SHOWING UNDERSTANDING LIKE JESUS’
22. What attitude did those invited to join him as disciples take?
22 He invited Andrew, Peter, James and John, among others, to join him in the work of becoming fishers of men. These immediately left their fishing business. They, like Jesus, did not stop indefinitely to consider, ‘What is this going to cost me?’ or, ‘Do I have sufficient money to care for my needs in this work?’ nor say, ‘If it fails all my customers will be gone, and what will become of me?’ No, they immediately left their fishing business and went on and followed Jesus. As time went on, other disciples, similarly disposed, joined them and the nucleus of quite an organization was developed.
23, 24. Whom, and with what instructions, did he send out first?
23 The time finally came to send these disciples forth on their mission as fishers of men. He selected the most advanced, mature and Theocratic to make up this first pioneer group and sent them out in the service as representatives of the Kingdom. There were just twelve of them.
24 The Lord’s instructions to them were pointed and explicit. Matthew 10:5-10 (An Amer. Trans.) reads: “Jesus sent these twelve out, after giving them these directions: ‘Do not go among the heathen, or to any Samaritan town, but proceed instead to the lost sheep of Israel’s house. And as you go about, preach and say, “The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand!” Cure the sick, raise the dead, heal lepers, drive out demons. Give without payment, just as you received without payment. Do not accept gold or silver or copper money to put in your pockets, and do not take a bag for your journey, nor two shirts, nor shoes, nor a staff, for the workman deserves his food!’” The similarity between this commission and Jesus’ own course of ministry is very striking.
25. Why did Jesus send them forth unencumbered?
25 This method of doing the work must have sounded strange to the disciples, it being so entirely contrary to human reasoning that one might think the disciples would not understand; but they were willing. We cannot get away from the fact that this is the procedure Jesus himself followed, and it is the course of action he advocated his followers to take. The question naturally arises, Why did Jesus advocate a course like this for himself and his followers? Jesus knew that any earthly accumulations other than what was absolutely necessary for them to get along with would be simply extra burdens upon them and would interfere with the commission they had received from Jehovah. Such accumulations would retard the progress of the work they were setting out to do. Consequently from the beginning he advocated that they were not to burden themselves with such things. Their commission had come from Jehovah. He had assigned them a very important work; all unnecessary weights that would interfere with its accomplishment must be given up. These things would be simply something to worry about, to divide their attention between their accumulation and their commission from the Lord. Jesus wanted, above everything else, that their minds should be free and devoted entirely to this commission in order to insure its success. Jesus had understanding and helped the disciples understand.
WHAT COMES FROM LACKING IT
26. How was that entirely different from the human way of acting?
26 This way is entirely different from the human way. Today, even among those who profess to be Christians, it is safe to say that almost everyone, when he considers full-time service, the first thing that he thinks of is: ‘What have I in the way of earthly resources, something to fall back on? I may become sick or maybe this thing will not work out satisfactorily; then what will I do, if I do not have a home or other provisions to turn to?’ This is the natural functioning of the human mind; it puts ourselves first and God and his requirement second. This is not reasoning according to the understanding of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is therefore sensual, earthly, demonic. The question everyone who professes to be a Christian is faced with in such an issue is, Who is right, Jesus Christ our Lord and Head or I? All will agree the Lord is right. Well, then, do I have faith enough in Almighty God to accept the direction of our Lord Jesus Christ and follow the course of action that he outlined for all his faithful followers and which course his faithful disciples maintained when he was with them at his first advent? Boiled right down, the question is, Am I prepared to sell all that I have for a part in God’s kingdom?
27, 28. Why should we accumulate understanding, not burdens? Illustrate.
27 Knowing our limitations, and the power of our earthly cravings, and the Devil’s alertness to help us gratify them, the Lord has emphasized this matter of getting understanding in the Scriptures. He indicated that it is very necessary to get understanding first; and when we have attained to that, we shall be able to appreciate that it would be very foolish indeed to try to make the Kingdom with a lot of unnecessary accumulated burdens that are bound to obstruct our progress and corrupt our affections.
28 As an illustration: Today a man having property valued at one hundred thousand dollars is required to pay approximately four thousand dollars a year in taxes, or more than three hundred dollars every month. He can’t take his property to heaven with him if he is a member of the body of Christ. What is he going to do with it? Even if he is a Jonadab, it is questionable that he would be able to preserve it through Armageddon. Therefore, why spend all this time, energy and money trying to preserve something that he cannot take into the kingdom of God? That time and energy and mammon could be used in the Kingdom service and be converted into treasures in heaven for that property owner. Otherwise, he is wasting that much effort. Along this same line, it is told of a man who had great wealth, a fine man as far as worldly principles were concerned, that he attained wealth beyond his fondest expectation. He had a home in the city, in the country and by the seashore; and in one of these many lodges, all alone, death came upon him. All his wealth could not help him; no servant nor other human creature was near; he died in distress with no one to comfort him; his great accumulations were of no help to him. Had that man made true friends with Jehovah God and His King Christ Jesus by spending his energy in the Kingdom service, giving up all that he had in order to get that “pearl of great price”, be would have had treasures in heaven which moth or rust could not hurt nor thieves break through and steal. And when the end came, he would have had peace, contentment and happiness, which comes from association with those great friends, Jehovah God and Jesus Christ our Lord.
29, 30. Why was the course Jesus’ disciples chose the wise one?
29 The great mass of so-called “Christians” follow the course of action that this wealthy man followed through lack of understanding. They are blinded to the true facts of life by Satan the Devil, who uses as willing instruments unfaithful preachers, unprincipled politicians and greedy profiteers. They perish from lack of understanding. This understanding has to cut through every human tradition and base, lustful craving that the human creature has been cultivating for the past 6,000 years. It has to enlighten us to the fact that there can be no security or preservation apart from Jehovah God and his King Christ Jesus.
30 When we do get that understanding we fully appreciate that the disciples of Jesus chose the wise course. They accepted their commission with gladness. They realized that the Lord alone could direct their steps. And they were willing to accept that direction and not lean upon their own understanding.—Prov. 3:5, 6.
FOR WHOM WE ARE WORKING
31. For whom were they working? And with what provisions?
31 Now consider the Lord’s conclusion to his counsel: “The workman deserves his food.” Whom were these disciples working for? Were they working for some human leader, even the great Jesus of Nazareth? Were they working for the people of good-will upon whom they called and to whom they ministered? No. They were servants of the Almighty God, their Father in heaven. And He was the one who had guaranteed them food. Therefore all earthly accumulations would indicate lack of faith sufficient to trust Jehovah to the very end. The disciples were not thus handicapped; they trusted Jehovah. They had faith based upon understanding and they acted upon it and were rewarded. They, like David, testified by their life’s course: “I have been young, and now am old; yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.”—Ps. 37:25.
32. What faith did they need? Who else must have it?
32 In the case of Jesus and his disciples it was not a matter of being unable to obtain these earthly advantages. Jesus could have had all of them; he possessed abilities such as no other man who walked this earth. But that was not what his joy was in. He had faith based on understanding that when he went out in the Lord’s service his Father would see to it that he had enough to eat, that he obtained the necessary sleep he required and had sufficient clothing. The same is true of his disciples. There was no possibility of failure, because the Almighty God of the universe was the One guaranteeing these things. This was no isolated instance, or something that applied only to that one particular time. It was a definite policy which the Lord set for himself and his disciples to follow now as well as then, if they would attain to the Kingdom. Later, when he sent out the seventy, similar instructions were given to them: “After this the Master appointed [seventy] others, and sent them on before him, two by two, to every town or place to which he intended to come. And he said to them, ‘The harvest is abundant enough, but the reapers are few. So pray to the owner of the harvest to send reapers to gather it. Now go. Here I send you out like lambs among wolves. Carry no purse nor wallet nor shoes, and do not stop to exchange civilities with anyone on the way.’” (Luke 10:1-4, An Amer. Trans.) The very same principle was adhered to here that he set before the preceding twelve, and the same principle must apply today to the faithful followers of the Lord Jesus Christ.
33. Why must we “let the dead bury their dead”?
33 An illustration of how literally this policy applied is given us at Luke 9:59, 60. One of Jesus’ disciples came to him and said: ‘Let me first go and bury my father.’ (An Amer. Trans.) Jesus’ counsel was, ‘No, you come on and follow me. Let the dead bury the dead; that is their business. That is where their interest is placed. But you have taken up new interests and you cannot be burdened with those things. You are called to a higher calling to serve God now and have a part in his kingdom throughout eternity.’
34, 35. How, then, do we properly “prove” Jehovah God?
34 If we could only keep these points before us continually it would be of inestimable value to us. Understanding that our God will supply all our needs through Christ Jesus our Lord, understanding that we can depend upon him in every emergency, would enable us to realize the fullness of Christian living.
35 In order to help us to get this understanding, Jehovah through his prophet invites us: “Prove me now herewith, saith Jehovah of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it.” (Mal. 3:10, Am. Stan. Ver.) How are we going to prove Jehovah unless we step out upon his promises? unless we bring all our tithes into the storehouse and trust him? By so doing the Lord will prove himself and enable us to appreciate with understanding how real are his promises and how wise is his counsel.

