The Bible’s Viewpoint
Does God Approve of Warfare?
HOW often rulers, generals, and even clergy have declared or endorsed war in the name of God! In 1095, with the blessing of Pope Urban II, the First Crusade set out to retake the “Holy City” Jerusalem for Christendom. But before reaching their goal, one band of Crusaders was annihilated by Turks, whose zeal for Allah matched the Crusaders’ faith in the Trinity.
In August 1914, a young German wrote from his World War I encampment: “If there is justice and divine guidance in history—and of that I am absolutely certain—then victory must be ours.” In that same month, Czar Nicholas II launched Russia’s armies against Germany, while proclaiming: “I send my soul’s greeting to my valiant troops and my noble allies. God is with us!”
Thus emboldened, millions of soldiers have gone to the front, fully believing that God was on their side. Many people feel that God allows such fighting as the price of freedom, and they point to the wars in the Hebrew Scriptures (commonly called the Old Testament) as support. Is their interpretation of God’s Word correct?
The Wars of Ancient Israel
Jehovah God decreed that Israel should make war to rid the Promised Land of the depraved Canaanites. (Leviticus 18:1, 24-28; Deuteronomy 20:16-18) Just as God had punished evildoers by means of a deluge in Noah’s day and fire in the case of Sodom and Gomorrah, so he wielded the nation of Israel as his sword of execution.—Genesis 6:12, 17; 19:13, 24, 25.
According to the Bible, Israel fought other battles under God’s direction, usually to repel unprovoked enemy threats. When the nation obeyed Jehovah, the wars it fought ended favorably. (Exodus 34:24; 2 Samuel 5:17-25) But disaster usually resulted when Israel dared to do battle contrary to divine counsel. Consider the case of King Jeroboam. Ignoring a direct prophetic warning, he dispatched his huge army in civil war against Judah. When the mayhem finally ended, 500,000 of Jeroboam’s soldiers were dead. (2 Chronicles 13:12-18) Even faithful King Josiah once picked a battle that was not his. The rash decision cost him his life.—2 Chronicles 35:20-24.
What do these events show? That in ancient Israel, the decision to make war rested with God. (Deuteronomy 32:35, 43) He had his people fight for specific purposes. However, these purposes were long ago accomplished. Furthermore, Jehovah foretold that those who serve him “in the final part of the days” would “beat their swords into plowshares” and not “learn war anymore.” (Isaiah 2:2-4) Clearly, Biblical wars do not justify modern-day conflicts, none of which are fought under God’s direction or at his command.
The Effect of Christ’s Teaching
While on earth, Jesus demonstrated how to replace hatred with unselfish love, commanding: “Love one another, just as I have loved you.” (John 15:12) He also said: “Happy are the peaceable.” (Matthew 5:9) Here the Greek word for “peaceable” means more than enjoying a state of tranquillity. It really entails cultivating peace, actively working to promote goodwill.
When Jesus was being arrested, the apostle Peter tried to defend him with a lethal weapon. But the Son of God reprimanded him, saying: “Return your sword to its place, for all those who take the sword will perish by the sword.” (Matthew 26:52) How did first-century Christians apply those words? Note the following quotations.
“A careful review of all the information available [shows] that, until the time of Marcus Aurelius [121-180 C.E.], no Christian became a soldier; and no soldier, after becoming a Christian, remained in military service.”—The Rise of Christianity.
“The behavior of the [early] Christians was very different from that of the Romans. . . . Since Christ had preached peace, they refused to become soldiers.”—Our World Through the Ages.
Because Christ’s disciples refused to serve in the emperor’s legions, the Romans put many of them to death. Why did Christians maintain such an unpopular stand? Because Jesus taught them to be peacemakers.
Modern Warfare
Imagine the dreadful situation if Christ’s followers were to fight in opposing armies, trying to kill one another. Such a scenario would be contrary to Christian principles. Really, those who obey the God of the Bible would not harm anyone—not even their enemies.a—Matthew 5:43-45.
Clearly, God does not put his blessing on modern carnal warfare between humans. Being peaceable, true Christians advocate the peace that will be established worldwide under God’s Kingdom.
[Footnote]
The Bible mentions “Har–Magedon,” also called “the war of the great day of God the Almighty.” This refers, not to human warfare, but to God’s selective destruction of evildoers. Hence, Har–Magedon cannot be used to justify modern-day human conflicts or to assume that God is blessing them.—Revelation 16:14, 16; 21:8.
[Picture on page 20]
General Francisco Franco of Spain, posing with several Catholic clergymen
[Credit Line]
U.S. National Archives photo
[Picture on page 21]
Soldiers being blessed by Greek Orthodox priests before taking off for Kosovo, June 11, 1999
[Credit Line]
AP Photo/Giorgos Nissiotis

