World Peace Is Not Just a Dream!
IF Alfred Nobel could look back upon the past century, would he feel optimistic about prospects for world peace? No doubt, he would be glad to know that many have put forth sincere efforts to end war. Nevertheless, he would be faced with a harsh reality. Professor Hugh Thomas sums it up well: “The twentieth century—although generally one of social improvement and heightened governmental concern for the lives of the poor—has been dominated by the machine gun, the tank, the B-52, the nuclear bomb and, finally, the missile. It has been marked by wars more bloody and destructive than those of any other age.” Thomas adds that “it is, therefore, a matter of opinion as to whether the era can really be characterized as progressive or not.”
Do the prospects for world peace seem greater now that we have entered the 21st century? Hardly! Alluding to the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in New York City and in Washington, D.C., Newsweek magazine states: “In a world where 767s can turn into guided missiles, nothing seems impossible, ludicrous—or, worst of all, even preventable.”
Some say that for world peace to become a reality, two things must occur: First, radical changes need to take place in the outlook and behavior of humans; and second, all nations must unite under a single government. The Bible foretells a time when peace will be achieved—but not through the efforts of mankind. Psalm 46:9 says regarding the Creator, Jehovah God: “He is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth.” How will God accomplish this? By means of his Kingdom, for which many sincere people have repeatedly prayed. That Kingdom is, not an elusive condition of the heart, but a real government through which God will establish peace from one end of the earth to the other. The inspired prophet Isaiah foretold that subjects of that government will not “learn war anymore.” (Isaiah 2:4) By means of a worldwide educational program, people will learn to live in peace and thus “beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears.”
Even now, Jehovah’s Witnesses are doing this. They refuse to take up arms against their fellowman, although they belong to many different ethnic groups and are living in over 200 different lands. Their neutral position in the midst of a war-ravaged world proves that peace is not a Utopian dream but a realistic possibility.
Would you like to learn more about this Bible-based hope for genuine peace? Please write to the publishers of this magazine, using the address listed on page 5 that is nearest you, or contact Jehovah’s Witnesses in your area.

