From Our Readers
Evolution or Creation
I truly enjoy reading “Awake!” But some of the information you recently printed about evolution is quite wrong! They no longer use the methods of determining age that you claim they do. They are now using an almost foolproof and close to 100 percent accurate method called racemization on bones and shifting atom dating for stone, which depends on thermoluminescence. The earliest bones of man have been correctly dated to around 10 million years ago. This was a human and not an ape.
C. A., Tennessee
On thermoluminescence dating “The Encyclopædia Britannica” (1976 edition) says, Volume 5, page 509: “Hope rather than accomplishment mainly characterizes the status of thermoluminescence dating at the present time.” It does not even mention racemization. The official magazine of the American Association for the Advancement of Science did, however. An article in the August 28, 1981, issue of “Science” discussed a skull shown to be 48,000 years old by the amino-acid method (racemization), but only 11,000 by the scientifically accepted radioactive dating. “The rate of amino acid racemization is strongly dependent on temperature,” the article explained. But even temperature change could not account for the following, the article said: A skeleton showing an age of 70,000 years by amino acid racemization gave only 8,000 or 9,000 years by radioactive dating. Racemization is not considered reliable.​—ED.
I have enjoyed reading “Awake!” for many years, but this issue on evolution is so misleading as not to warrant any serious discussion by anyone with a broad outlook. For example, you say on page 9: “There is no fossil evidence of the stages through which the remarkable change from reptile to bird was achieved.” This statement is quite untrue. In the 1930’s a fossil was discovered, which has become known as “Archaeopteryx” and which represents the exact halfway stage between reptile and bird.
P. E. R., England
Archaeopteryx was not any “halfway” stage. It had fully developed wings perfectly feathered (not scales half developed into feathers), and had special feet equipped for perching. The relative proportions of the head and brain case are those of a bird and quite different from those of reptiles.​—ED.
I have just finished devouring the special issue on the subject of Evolution or Creation. Those 25 pages covered the topic more effectively than a shelf full of the woolly books that debate or address it. And “Awake!” steered away from elusive talk. Thank you for your conciseness and clarity. Though representing a particular side, you never fail to report facts and viewpoints fully and accurately. “Awake!” doesn’t resort to sneering; it rests on truths.
S. E., Illinois
I have just read your interesting issue on the Evolution-Creation controversy. I think your articles explain very well the creationist position and would like to request additional copies for my use in a class where my students and I are examining this issue.
R. H., Professor of Biology, California

