Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should recognize these important points. Check yourself.
● Why is it not safe for Christians to follow men?
Because men are imperfect, make mistakes and at times prove unfaithful. However, so long as they are of “those who through faith and patience inherited the promises” they may be imitated.—P. 535.a
● What light do the Psalms throw on life’s roadway?
They contain accurate history, inspired prophecy, sound doctrine and admonition to right conduct.—Pp. 550, 551.
● Why cannot 1 John 5:7 be used to prove the trinity teaching?
Because it is spurious, not genuine; it being added later.—P. 556.
● Did the apostle John borrow from Plato his teaching regarding Jesus’ being the Word?
No, he did not. He termed Jesus the Word because the Bible shows that the prehuman Jesus was God’s spokesman.—Pp. 602, 603.
● Is extrasensory perception for Christians?
No; for its manifestations, such as clairvoyance, telepathy, visions, object readings and prediction indicate spiritism.—Pp. 647, 648.
● What is relative subjection?
It is a subjection related to something else; specifically, a subjection limited or qualified by God’s will.—P. 651.
● Who is the “king” mentioned at 1 Peter 2:17, for whom Christians are to have honor?
Any king or any political ruler having governors under him.—Pp. 659, 660.
● What is the “human creation” to which Christians are to subject themselves?
A ruling office created by humans of this world or the one occupying such an office.—P. 660.
● To whom is “relative subjection” due?
It is due to husbands, parents, masters of slaves and political governments.—Pp. 665, 666.
● Who are the “superior authorities” to whom Christians are to be in subjection?
The duly constituted political governments of this world.—Pp. 684, 685.
● In what way are the “superior authorities” God’s ministers?
In that they punish wrongdoers.—P. 712.
● For what compelling reason should Christians be in subjection to the “superior authorities”?
For conscience’ sake.—Pp. 714, 715.
● Why is faith termed “the evident demonstration of realities though not beheld”?
Because it makes evident what has not been discerned before and at the same time refutes what appears to be the case but is not.—P. 751.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1962.

