VOL. XXXIV MAY 15 No. 10 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

A Convincing Proof of the Resurrection 147 

Our Lord's Change of Nature 148 

Resurrection Much Misunderstood 148 

The Manner of Mother Eve's Temptation 149 

Deception Through Mental Suggestion 149 

Degradation of the Serpent Not an 
Injustice 150 

Storms on the Sea of Life 150 

Legal and Actual Cancellation of Sin 151 

Responsibility According to Ability 152 

All Things Work for Good to Them 152 

Spiritual Israel's Experiences 153 

Joys of the Life to Come 154 



Reports of Memorial Celebrations 154 

Woes Ancient and Modern 155 

The Victories of Faith 156 

Faith Is Not Credulity 156 

The Faith Before and Since Christ Came 157 

The Mystery-Christ in You 158 

Interesting Questions 158 

page 146 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



RE DEFECTIVE BOOKS 

Colporteurs and others who may receive books from us 
that are seriously defective will confer a favor by reporting 
the fact at once. Give particulars re time received. We want 
all our books to be right. 

LARGE MOTTOES FOR MOUNTING 

We have secured some new large mottoes, size 15 x 20 
inches. They are of four designs of beautiful flowers, and 
still greater variety of texts. We have put these up in tubes 
for safety— four for $ 1 ; postage prepaid. 

RECEIPTS FOR WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 

Regular subscribers for THE WATCH TOWER receive a receipt 



on the wrapper— showing how far their subscription is 

paid. Thus, if you had been paid up to January, 1913, and 

sent in a dollar, renewing until January, 1914, we would 

merely add the figure 4. Such a figure 4, under such circumstances, 

would stand for the year 1914. 

THINGS YOU OUGHT TO KNOW 

Our new edition of DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA in purple 
cloth has gilt edges. The price remains the same, 35c. postpaid. 
Every reader of THE WATCH TOWER should have a 
copy of the Manna and should use it daily, for his spiritual 
nourishment. 

The same in De Luxe, purple leather binding, gold edges, 
$1.10 postpaid. 



R5236 : page 147 

A CONVINCING PROOF OF THE RESURRECTION 

"Be not faithless, but believing."— John 20:27. 

PREVIOUS to the occasion of the words of 

our text, St. Thomas, the Apostle, had not 

been present at any of the manifestations 

of Jesus after His resurrection. He seems 

to have been of a rather skeptical turn of 

mind. He heard the other Apostles telling 

about what they had seen, about the manifestations 

that had taken place, and he felt 

that on such evidence he could not believe 

in the resurrection of Jesus. He thought 

that his brethren had been too easily deceived. 

St. Thomas did not accredit his fellow disciples with 
an attempt at deceiving him; but as he declared, he would 
not believe on any such testimony as he had received. 
He said, "Unless I see the spear mark, unless I shall see 
in His hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into 
the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into His side, I 
will not believe." You cannot convince me that He is 
not dead. You cannot convince me that a person put to 
death after that manner is again alive. I cannot say 
where the deception came from, but you brethren are too 
easily deceived. 

A week later, Jesus appeared in the "upper room" a 
second time. After saluting the company, He said to St. 

R5237 : page 147 

Thomas, "Reach hither thy finger and behold My hands; 
and reach hither thy hand and thrust it into My side; and 
be not faithless, but believing." Again, He said, "A 
spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see Me have." The 
disciples did not see, evidently, the spirit being. They saw 



merely a materialization— actual flesh and bones. St. 
Thomas did as the Lord had requested. Then he said, 
"My Lord and my God!" He acknowledged that Jesus 
was the Lord. It was not an apparition. The brethren 
had not been deceived. He was the one who had come 
very near being deceived by his own lack of faith. 

We cannot doubt that in this incident the Lord has 
given to all of His followers a very helpful lesson. Had 
none of the Apostles even seemed to doubt the Lord's 
resurrection, they might have failed to bring out convincing 
proof of the fact. They might afterward have 
thought to themselves, "Why did we not make further 
investigation?" But here we have evidence of the 
investigation. 

There are some people who are naturally very cautious. 
St. Thomas seems to have been one of these. We cannot 
think that the Lord is displeased with such characters. 
From our standpoint, indeed, the person who is inclined 
to be somewhat critical is rather to be approved. We 
would naturally incline to disapprove those who are too 
easily credulous, too easily persuaded. We are even to 
think highly of those who are of the mental attitude of 
St. Thomas. We are glad that there was one such hard 
thinker as this Apostle. 

The Lord said in this connection, "Because thou hast 
seen, thou hast believed. Blessed are those who have not 
seen, and yet have believed." There might be a question 
as to what the Lord meant by these words. He may have 
meant, Do not congratulate yourself that you were not 
easy to convince; or He may have meant, There is a 
special blessing for those who have faith— who believe 
without seeing. 

There were above five hundred brethren amongst the 
disciples at the time of our Lord's crucifixion. The 
Apostle says that He was seen of these at one time. 
(I Corinthians 15:6.) But afterwards the brethren were 
obliged to believe without seeing, merely on the testimony 
of others. We are in this category ourselves. All the 
Christian Church throughout the Gospel Age have believed 
without seeing the outward demonstration. Whether on 
this account the Lord would be specially pleased with us, 
we know not. But we think not. Whether we believe on 
slight evidence or on greater evidence is dependent upon 
the structure of the brain. God seems to have made provision 
that all those called of Him may have a sufficiency 
of evidence. And He gives us the additional evidence 
from the days of the Apostles to help to sustain our faith. 
We have the benefit of the doubts of St. Thomas and of 
our Lord's demonstration of His change of nature. 

FAITH THE CENTER OF CHRISTIAN PROGRESS 

The question might be asked, Why did Jesus lay stress 
upon the importance of faith? Why did He imply that 
St. Thomas could not be His disciple at all without believing? 
There are many who tell us that they cannot 



see that faith has any province, that they see no reason 
why God should bless faith, that in their opinion God 
should reward us for the doing. They say, "We are 
doing all the good works that we can." The Bible always 
sustains the thought that any one who does not do to the 
best of his ability shall receive stripes. But the Bible also 
holds out the other thought— that God purposes to reward 
His people according to their faith; that whoever cannot 
exercise perfect faith cannot be His disciple; that if one 
has not faith, it is impossible for him to get into the 
Kingdom. 

In God's arrangement, faith has been made the very 
center of Christian progress— faith in the things He has 
done, faith in the things He has promised to do. Faith is 
the thing which, by God's grace, enables us to avail ourselves 

R5237 : page 148 

of the wonderful opportunities of this present time. 
"Without faith it is impossible to please God." But this 
does not mean that conditions will always be as now, or 
that God will forever reject those who, on account of 
their mental make-up, cannot now exercise faith, but it 
means that at the present time He will save no others 
than the faithful. 

The Scriptures very clearly indicate, however, that 
after the selection of the Church, and the reward of their 
faith, the Lord will then deal with the world through the 
class which exercise faith now— through Christ and the 
Church— for the blessing of all mankind. In the next 
Age less faith will be required than now. Messiah's 
Kingdom established, will be openly manifested. Then 
mankind will not be obliged to walk by faith. They will 
walk by sight, whereas now we must walk by faith and 
not by sight. 

From the natural standpoint it looks as though God 
were not ruling the world at all, but that the world were 
being ruled by chance or by Satan himself— so different 
are conditions from what we would expect if God were 
recognized as the great King. Consequently we must 
exercise faith, if we are to receive the blessing at this 
time. By and by, during the Messianic rule, when everything 
contrary to righteousness will be punished, and 
everything in harmony with righteousness will be rewarded, 
then all opposers of righteousness will be cast 
down, and all lovers of righteousness will be prosperous. 
That will be the time of walking by sight. 

In the present time we must walk by faith because ours 
is a special salvation. The "high calling" is a peculiar 
privilege, for a special class. In the next Age, however, 
mankind's unbalance of mind through the fall will be 
compensated for. Those who need much demonstration 
will have much; those who need less will have less. The 
matter will be made so clear that there will be no excuse 
for any one not to attain to full obedience of works, and 
these works will gradually lead them up to full human 



perfection. God has made nothing unreasonable in His 
laws and requirements, His every demand is reasonable 
and essential. 

OUR LORD'S CHANGE OF NATURE 

Putting ourselves into the position of the disciples 
during the forty days after Jesus had arisen from the 
dead, we can readily imagine that they were considerably 
confused. One and another of them had been witnesses 
of strange things— they could not explain what, but they 
had seen what purported to be Jesus— on one occasion the 
appearance was as the gardener, on another occasion as 
a stranger, etc. They saw no mark of identity, and did 
not really know whether they had seen Him at all. On 
another occasion, looking very much like His former self, 
He appeared in their midst, the doors being shut. They 
could not imagine how a human being could have come in 
while the doors were shut. Therefore there was considerable 
perplexity. 

The Scriptures give us to understand that the reason 
why our Lord thus manifested Himself in various forms 
was that God raised Jesus from the dead to a different 
plane of existence— as a spirit being. The Scriptures 
declare, "Now the Lord is that Spirit." (2 Corinthians 3:17.) 
The Second Adam is the Heavenly Lord. He is 
not the earthly man Jesus. This explanation we can appreciate 
because we are living since Pentecost. We can 
see and understand that Jesus had become a spirit being, 
and that like the angels he could, where it was necessary, 
appear like a human being. We would not question at all 
that if Jesus had any reason for showing the identical 
body that had been crucified He could have appeared in 
it, could have opened the door and the Apostles could 
have been blinded, so that they could not see the door 
opening and shutting, as He entered. But the account 
contradicts such supposition and is very explicit in the 
statement that "the doors were shut," not that the Apostles 
did not see them open, but that they did not open at all. 
In the second statement— when St. Thomas was present— 
our Lord appeared in the same manner, "The doors being 
shut."-John 20:19,26. 

While Jesus could have brought the body, and could 
have maintained Himself inside of it as a spirit being, He 
did not do so. If He had done this they would have been 
deceived, supposing that He had arisen in His body of 
flesh in which He had been crucified. Therefore He 
appeared in different bodies of flesh, but under conditions 
that left no doubt as to His identity. He knew that after 
the disciples had received the Holy Spirit all would be 
plain to them. So He made no attempt to explain to them 
at that time, but merely kept them in touch with Himself 
until after the Pentecostal blessings had come, when they 
were able to understand from the true viewpoint. 

Our thought, therefore, would be that the body in 
which our Lord appeared was materialized. This was not 



a deception. It was intended, on the contrary, to keep the 
disciples from being deceived. Being natural men, they 
could not appreciate a change from human nature to spirit 
nature. Therefore this appearance was to help them over 
a difficulty— to keep them from saying "He is not risen." 

RESURRECTION MUCH MISUNDERSTOOD 

The disciples could see that our Lord had a different 
power altogether from what He had before He died. 
Thus He appeared time and again during the forty days 
—a few minutes at a time. This very evidently was to 
accomplish the purpose of demonstrating to them that He 
was a spirit being, that He had power to come and go 
like the wind, that He could appear in the flesh when 
necessary, and then vanish at will, and that He could 
come in one form and another form. This was the great 
lesson by which He purposed to keep them from being 
in any way deceived. 

We cannot imagine how Jesus could have substantiated 
His resurrection and confirmed the faith of His disciples 
in any better way. If He had remained with them as a 
man, they would have felt bound to believe that the same 

R5238 : page 148 

personality, the same flesh, was His still, and they would 
have been unable to understand His words, "Lo, I am with 
you alway, even unto the end of the Age." But now 
they could understand that as He had appeared and 
vanished from sight, although really present with them 
throughout the forty days, He could also in a different 
sense, be with them all through the Gospel Age, and return 
in person when necessary, in the end of the Age. 

We see no deception in this, but an avoidance of 
deception. We are to remember that it took several of 
these manifestations to attest the fact that He was a 
changed being. If the disciples had thought of Him as 
a Man in Heaven, it would have led them into serious 
difficulty, just as we see is now the case with our friends 
in the nominal Churches, who think Jesus arose in the 
same flesh, and that He retains that flesh in Heaven. As 
the hymn says, 

"Five bleeding wounds He bears, 

Received on Calvary; 
They pour effectual prayers, 
They strongly plead for me." 

Our friends believe this. We ask them if they think 
that as Jesus bears the marks, the scars, of His wounded 
flesh, that all of His followers will likewise bear theirs. 

R5238 : page 149 

They answer, Yes. Then we remind them that some of 
them were most horribly maltreated, often mutilated, before 
they died. Think of those who were beheaded; and 



those who met with accidents and wounds! If they are 
to bear those marks and bruises in Heaven, or be headless, 
they will be a disfigured set. 

We show them that those who hold this view do not 
believe at all in the Redemption— the Redemption of which 
the Bible treats. We quote to our friends, "He poured 
out His soul unto death;" He made "His soul an offering 
for sin." Yes, they answer, we believe that His fleshly 
body was sacrificed. We reply, His fleshly body will only 
redeem the fleshly body of Adam. But Adam had more 
than the fleshly body. It was the soul of Adam that sinned 
—and Jesus must have given a soul in order to redeem 
Adam. -Isaiah 53:10,12. 

If the body never was a part of Jesus, then it was not 
Jesus that died, but His body; it was not He that was 
humiliated, but His body; it was not He who left His 
glory that was sacrificed, but His body. Now, if the body 
never was Jesus, then He deceived mankind into thinking 
that He was a man; and He deceived the Apostle into 
saying that "He who was rich, for our sakes became 
poor." (2 Corinthians 8:9.) Then to speak of His being 
tempted, as the Apostle Paul spoke of Him, was wrong, 
for He could not be tempted like us, if He were altogether 
of a different nature. So we see that the Truth, as the 
Bible teaches it, is harmonious. 

THE RESURRECTION OF THE WORLD 

The First Resurrection, Christ's Resurrection, began 
with the glorious change of our Lord, more than eighteen 
centuries ago, and as His Resurrection, it will be completed 
when the last member of His Body shall have experienced 
the change from earthly to Heavenly, Divine 
nature. The world's resurrection cannot take place before 
that of the Church, but must follow it. The Ancient 
Worthies will be the first of the earthly class to be resurrected 
to human nature. But their resurrection will not 
be at the same time as that of the Church, but later— as 
the Apostle says, "They, without us, shall not be made 
perfect."— Hebrews 11:39,40. 

The awakening of the world will probably not begin 
for fifty or a hundred years after the Kingdom has been 
established. During that time, however, the resurrection 
process— the raising up gradually— will be in operation 
amongst the nations then living. As gradually nations, 
peoples, kindreds and tongues are awakened, they must 
be brought to a knowledge of the Truth, and must give 
the assent of their wills, before any resurrection processes 
begin to operate in them. This work will continue all 
down through the thousand years of Messiah's Reign. 

The world's resurrection will not be fully completed 
until the end of the thousand years, while the Church's 
resurrection will be completed at the beginning of the 
thousand years. For this reason it would be improper to 
say that the resurrections of the just and of the unjust 
take place at the same time. Indeed, the world will not 



be raised up fully until, at the close of the thousand years, 
they shall be turned over to God, even the Father; for one 
result of the fall was the loss of the Heavenly Father's 
favor and fellowship. Mankind will not be delivered out 
of that feature of the fall until the Mediator shall have 
accomplished His work in them. 



R5238 : page 149 

THE MANNER OF MOTHER EVE'S TEMPTATION 

"Now the serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field 
which the Lord God had made. And he said unto the woman, 
Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of 
every tree in the garden?"— Genesis 3:1. 

THE SCRIPTURAL teaching that God knows 
no sin, signifies that He practises no sin. 
He commits no sin, connives at no sin. He 
is not an assistant to sin. He cannot look 
upon sin with any degree of allowance. He 
shows no favor, no light of His countenance, 
no light of His eye, on anything that is sinful. 
On the contrary, He would turn His 
back upon these things. He would not have 
the slightest sympathy with anything sinful. 

If, therefore, man were sinful in the largest possible 
degree, God would have no sympathy with him. The 
Scriptures present the thought that man is not thus sinful 
in the highest degree, but that he is sinful on account of 
weaknesses; that these weaknesses had their start, or 
beginning, away back in the disobedience of Father Adam; 
and that Father Adam's death penalty came upon him as 
the result of his disobedience, as recorded in Genesis. Because 
man is thus a sinner by nature rather than by will, 
therefore God has purposed to redeem him from the curse 
and to give him full reconciliation with Himself by the 
Restitution to be accomplished by our Lord Jesus under 
the Messianic Kingdom. 

Such as will not conform to the laws and regulations 
of that Kingdom will be accounted as wilful sinners. God 
will not look upon them with any degree of allowance. 
He will take from them every right and privilege. They 
will be destroyed. As it is written, "All the wicked will 
He [God] destroy," in the Second Death.— Psalms 145:20. 

DECEPTION THROUGH MENTAL SUGGESTION 

There is intelligent sin. Those who know right and do 
wrong are wilful sinners. The great wilful sinner, according 
to the Scriptures, is Satan. He was a murderer 
from the beginning, we read, and abode not in the Truth. 
(John 8:44.) He murdered our race by his deception. He 
did not tell the truth, but he misrepresented it. He told 



Mother Eve that she would not die, if she ate of the forbidden 
fruit; and that she would have wisdom and knowledge 
such as she craved. We are not to understand that 
Satan did this in a direct way, but through the serpent. 

According to the Scriptures, the serpent at that time 
did not creep, but was next in intelligence to our first 
parents. Satan used this serpent to counsel Eve to disobey 
the Creator. Eve should have said, "Who is this 
that teaches me to disobey the Great Creator who made 
man?" The temptation came, however, in a very deceptive 
manner. The serpent spake not by words, but, apparently, 
by actions. It went continually to the tree of whose fruit 
Adam and Eve were forbidden to eat, and ate of the fruit. 

Mother Eve saw that the serpent ate of the fruit and 
that it was the wisest of all cattle. Then the thought occurred 
to her that the reason why the serpent was the 
wisest of all cattle was because it ate of the tree, the 
forbidden fruit. Next the thought came that the reason 
why they were not to eat of the fruit of the tree was 
that they might be kept from being as intelligent as they 
might otherwise be. Lastly, the thought was suggested, 
If you eat of the fruit of that tree, the influence of that 
fruit upon you will make you as God Himself. You will 
know everything. So it was this indirect teaching under 
the obsession of the serpent by Satan that constituted the 
serious deception which came to Eve. 

R5238 : page 150 

DEGRADATION OF THE SERPENT NOT AN INJUSTICE 

It might be argued that Mother Eve did not sin. She 
did sin. She knew that she had no right to violate the 
command which she had received. Every one who does 
wrong knowingly commits sin. We might just as well 
excuse the man who steals a thousand dollars. He knows 
at the time that he is stealing a thousand dollars. Whether 
he is ever caught or not, the wrong has been committed. 

In other words, the wrong starts with the heart, with 
a willingness or intention to do wrong. Such a one is a 
sinner— a transgressor of the Law. So Mother Eve was 
a transgressor of the Law, and in that sense she was 
amenable to the penalty. The serpent was not, however, 
a moral being, that he should receive a special punishment 
as a criminal. The criminal was Satan, who will one day 
be destroyed, as will also all those who have his spirit, 
his disposition. 

There was a certain penalty, however, meted out upon 
the serpent— not for its punishment, for it had done nothing 
contrary to its nature, but to make the serpent a 
synonym of Sin, because it was the tool of Sin. The 
serpent became the symbol of Satan and of Sin. When 

R5239 : page 150 

the children of Israel were disobedient in the wilderness, 



God permitted them to be bitten by fiery serpents. He 
instructed Moses to raise up a brazen serpent upon a pole, 
that whoever looked upon it might live. (Numbers 21:6-9.) 
Our Lord said that "As Moses lifted up the 
serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man 
be lifted up: that whosoever believeth in Him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life." (John 3:14,15.) Even 
as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness for the 
healing of the people, so all may be healed by looking to 
our Lord for the help necessary. 

There was no injustice done to the serpent, when God 
said, "On thy belly shalt thou go." God has made no 
covenant with any one except His intelligent creatures. 
So if an ox were degraded to the condition of a bullfrog, 
there would be no violation of justice. The serpent and 
other beasts have life as an unmerited favor from the 
great Creator. No creature would have the least right 
to question whatever privileges or blessings would come 
to him. To simply degrade the beast from one form of 
life to another form of life was no injustice. It is, however, 
a lesson in humility, which has been profitable, more 
or less, all through the six thousand years of man's history, 
and will be profitable all through Messiah's coming 
glorious reign of righteousness. 



R5239 : page 150 

STORMS ON THE SEA OF LIFE 

"He maketh the storm a calm."— Psalm 107:29. 

IF THERE is anything in the world which 

causes a man to feel his own littleness it is 

a storm at sea. The voyagers realize that 

no human arm could calm that storm. The 

text, then, refers to the Almighty One, our 

Heavenly Father. Our Heavenly Father, 

however, always uses instrumentalities. The 

Scriptures tell us that after He had created 

one great being, He rested. This One was 

the Logos, the Only Begotten of the Father, 

the First-born of all creation. (Colossians 1:15; Revelation 3:14.) 

All the power the Father has since exercised 

has been through the Lord Jesus. 

The passage of Scripture used as our text may not 
have been understood fully and completely by the Psalmist, 
the one who uttered this prophecy. Like many other 
Scriptures it has a special application to the Church of 
Christ. The Apostle Paul tells us that these things were 
written beforehand for our admonition, instruction. (I Corinthians 10:11.) 
We believe that nearly all the 

prophecies recognize the Lord and His Body first. There 
have been many storms permitted by the Lord to come 
upon the little company of His followers. Sometimes the 



whole journey of life has been a stormy one. We sometimes 
sing, "When the storms of life are raging." In his 
Epistles, the Apostle intimates that those who do not have 
storms, trials and difficulties lack proof that they are 
God's children; for God would not be dealing with such 
as His children.— Hebrews 12:7,8. 

If we are children of God, we need to have trials and 
testings, that these may make us meet for the inheritance 
of the saints in light. (Colossians 1:12.) In all these 
experiences, the tendency of the trial is to drive us nearer 
to the Lord, to make us feel that we need the Divine 
shelter and care. And so a blessing comes out of these 
storms. We are not to think of God as making these 
storms, either literal or figurative. Satan is the great 
Enemy. While literal storms come about by natural laws, 
apparently, yet there may be a power exercised by spirit 
beings to produce them. During our Lord's ministry a 
storm of this kind was raised on the Sea of Galilee. The 
storm was so sudden and so great that, although the lake 
is not very large, the boat seemed in danger of going 
down, and the disciples, although experienced fishermen, 
were in terror. Jesus was asleep in the end of the boat. 
They came to Him and said, "Master! carest Thou not 
that we perish?" 

STORMS A TEST OF FAITH 

Satan knew that Jesus and the disciples were in the 
boat on the sea. Perhaps he thought that by causing this 
storm he could destroy Jesus and thwart the Father's 
Plan. Jesus rebuked the storm. This He would not have 
done, we suppose, if it had been caused by the Father. 
Then He applied the lesson to the disciples, saying, "O ye 
of little faith, why did ye doubt?" 

The Lord's evident intention in letting the storm go 
as far as it did was to test the faith of the disciples, and 
to give a lesson such as this text is giving us now. It 
would cause them to remember in future years, in all 
their difficulties, whether from their own imperfections, or 
the imperfections of others, or as the result of the work 
of fallen angels, that all things were under Divine oversight. 
This also we should remember: We have the assurance 
that all these things will work for good to us, and 
that He will with the temptation provide also a way of 
escape, that we may be able to bear it. — I Cor. 10:13. 

This was illustrated in the storm on the sea, and the 
Lord's act in rebuking the storm. So if we have trials 
and difficulties, we should cry unto the Lord— we should 
exercise faith enough to cry unto Him. It should not be 
that blind faith which would say, "Whatever the fates 
have ordained, that is my portion; and there is no escape." 
This latter is the condition of the heathen, but is not the 
case with us. The Lord allows the storms to press us 
more and more so that we will cry unto Him. Then He 
will hear us and give us the necessary deliverance. He 
may not always make it a very speedy deliverance, but 



He will make a way for us to escape. We must remember 
also that it is the New Creature with which He is dealing. 
These storms may be right inside, in our own person— 

R5239 :page 151 

storms of passion, of anger, of resentment. These we are 
not to allow to go on; but we are to cry for the Lord's 
help, that we may be overcomers of these storms— trials. 

GREAT STORM OF WRATH COMING 

This incident of the Sea of Galilee pictures what the 
Lord is doing for the Church now, and what He will do in 
the future for the world. He intends to deliver the whole 
world from sin and death, which have had a long reign 
of six thousand years. This period has been one continuous 
storm, with occasional brief lulls. Meantime the 
world is receiving certain great lessons as to the desirability 
of harmony with God. By and by they will come to 
understand, and will then greatly appreciate the importance 
of being fully in accord with God and very 
obedient to the Divine direction. Thus a foundation stone 
is being laid in their education for the next Age. 

Finally, this storm on Galilee seems to picture very 
graphically the great time of trouble with which this Age 
will end. Then the reign of Satan will cease, and the 
reign of Messiah will begin. We are not to think of 
Jesus' Kingdom as bringing about the great time of 
trouble. The Scriptural thought seems rather to be that 
Christ's work in the present time is with the Church, and 
that with the completion of the Church, with the glorification 
of the Church, Christ's Kingdom will be set up. This 
Day of Trouble will be more particularly the Day of 
Jehovah. In this, Divine Justice will have a hand. 

We do not mean, however, to exclude the Lord Jesus, 
for He is the chief factor in all that God does. But when 
the Kingdom of Messiah comes, it will exercise a restraining 
power— will bring down the lofty, will turn the 
wrath of man so as to cause it to praise God. This wrath 
of man will bring "a time of trouble such as never was 
since there was a nation." In some of the Scriptural 
pictures it is represented as a whirlwind, and in others it 
is represented as a great tidal wave— the sea and the 
waves will roar. Then in the midst of a great storm, 
which will be sufficient to wreck the whole human fabric, 
Messiah's Kingdom will be set up. It will cause wars to 
cease. Satan will be bound. The light of the knowledge 
of the glory of God will fill the whole earth. "The desire 
of all nations shall come," and will be recognized in the 
making of the storm a calm, by this Kingdom of Messiah. 



R5239 :page 151 



LEGAL AND ACTUAL CANCELLATION OF SIN 

BECAUSE the entire race of Adam was in him 

when he was sentenced, it was condemned 

with him; and during the six thousand years 

since, it has been unable, on account of 

weakness, frailty, sin, to extricate itself 

from this Divine condemnation. God has 

provided the Redeemer for the very purpose 

of lifting the death-penalty upon mankind 

because of the disobedience of Adam, in 

order that as condemnation has passed 

upon all because of the disobedience of one, so justification 

to life, through the obedience of one, might pass 

upon all.— Romans 5:18,19. 

More than eighteen hundred years ago our Lord laid 
down the Ransom-price for man's life. During the interim, 
the Church has been called from amongst mankind 
and permitted to become sharers with Him in His sacrificial 
death, that they might afterwards share in His glory. 
When the last member shall have passed beyond the veil, 
and the great High Priest shall have been completed— 
Jesus the Head and the Church His Body— then Christ 
will present His merit for the sins of the whole world. 
Divine Justice will accept this merit. With this acceptance, 
the sins of the whole world will be canceled in 

R5240 :page 151 

a legal sense, just as those of the Church are now. When 
we come into the Divinely appointed relationship with the 
Lord, there is no condemnation to us who are thus in 
Christ Jesus.— Romans 8:1. 

At the end of the Gospel Age, when the Ransom-price 
shall have been applied for the world, and shall have 
been accepted by the Father, the whole world will be 
placed in the hands of Jesus Christ. Then, through The 
Christ as the Mediator, the New Covenant will go into 
operation, the terms and conditions of which will be open 
to all mankind— for it will contain blessings for all. 

Nevertheless, there will be something for men to do 
in order to avail themselves of the blessings of this 
Covenant. As it is God's part to make such a Covenant, 
so during the thousand years of Christ's reign it will be 
the part of humanity to accept the terms and come into 
harmony with God through its requirements. Gradually 
mankind will come up, all who will, to the standard of 
everlasting life, but those who refuse to respond will die 
the Second Death. 

From this point of view, we see that it will require 
the entire thousand years of Christ's reign to accomplish 
fully the work of the antitypical Atonement Day— making 
all mankind at-one with God. The work of At-one-ment 
includes the satisfaction of Justice, not only at the beginning 
of the Millennial Age, but throughout the Millennium. 
This is shown in the type of the inauguration of the Law 



Covenant. Moses sprinkled the blood first upon the tables 
of the Law, and then upon all the people. As the work of 
sprinkling the people was a task that undoubtedly took a 
long time to accomplish, so the antitypical sprinkling of 
mankind will require many years. 

A COMING SETTLEMENT FOR SIN 

The answer to the question, Will mankind come forth 
from the tomb free from condemnation? depends largely 
upon the point of view. They will come forth free from 
Divine condemnation, for all of the condemnation which 
came upon them through heredity will have been satisfied 
by the Ransom-price paid by Christ for Adam and all of 
his race. And for other sins than those of heredity there 
will have been a settlement— at the end of the Gospel 
Age. The Scriptures indicate that of this present generation 
God will require all the righteous blood shed from 
the time of Abel down to the present. Hence for wilful 
sin there will be satisfaction rendered through a great 
time of trouble, such as never was since there was a 
nation, even to that time.— Daniel 12:1; Matthew 24:21. 

A type of this trouble is seen in that which came upon 
the Jewish nation at the end of the Jewish Age. 
(Matthew 23:34-36.) In the Revelation, we find an illustration 
of this coming satisfaction, for injustice perpetrated. 
We read, "How long, O Lord, holy and true, 
dost Thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that 
dwell on the earth? And white robes were given unto 
every one of them; and it was said unto them that they 
should rest yet for a little season, until their fellow-servants 
also and their brethren, that should be killed as 
they were, should be fulfilled." (Revelation 6:10,11.) 
That Day of Vengeance is about at the door of 
Christendom. 

From all this it is evident that Divine Justice does not 
intend to terminate fully the adjustment of accounts until 
there is a full ledger of Justice, so to speak. From that 

R5240 : page 152 

time forward, each one will be responsible for the weaknesses 
and blemishes of his own conduct.— Jer. 31:29,30. 

RESPONSIBILITY ACCORDING TO ABILITY 

Mankind will not be accountable for the violation of 
a perfect standard, but each will be held responsible in 
proportion to his own knowledge and ability. During the 
Millennium, the rule will be such as would now be considered 
just in a well regulated family. The stronger 
child is given the heavier burden to carry. So it will be 
during the coming Age. Each one will be accountable for 
what he can bear. He will not be held responsible for 
perfection and condemned for inability to reach it, but 
will be judged according to his ability. 



During the thousand years, each individual will make 
progress to the extent that he shall endeavor to comply 
with the regulations of the Kingdom. But before he can 
do this, he must enter into the New Covenant and 
formally purpose to be one who will come into line with 
the requirements of the great King and His Assistants. 
If he fails to do this, he will be considered an outlaw, 
and at a hundred years old he will be destroyed as a 
sinner. (Isaiah 65:20.) The weaknesses upon him will 
not be regarded as sin, except as all imperfection is sin. 
But no one will be held responsible for more than he is 
able to do, nor will he be condemned for what he is not 
able to perform. 

Under the Millennial Kingdom, mankind will be dealt 
with, not individually, as with the Church of this Age, but 
collectively, as with the Jewish nation. Individual relationship 
with the Father will not be possible until the end 
of the thousand years— until Messiah shall have put down 
all imperfection and shall have lifted mankind up out of 
sin and death conditions into perfection as human beings. 
Then He will deliver the Kingdom over to the Father, and 
will no longer stand between humanity and Divine Justice. 
-I Corinthians 15:24. 

The Scriptures show, however, that before the 
Heavenly Father will receive the restored race of mankind, 
He will give them a very crucial test by permitting 
some wonderfully deceiving influence to go abroad in the 
world. This influence proceeds from "the dragon, that 
old serpent, which is called the Devil and Satan." By 
that time every one will know right from wrong. The 
test, therefore, will be to determine whether those who 
know right will practise wrong. Consequently the Lord 
will prove them, as He did Father Adam and Mother 
Eve, to demonstrate whether they are as loyal to Him as 
they should be.— Revelation 20:7-10. 

Those who fail in any of the tests of obedience will 
be judged unworthy of everlasting life, and will be 
destroyed. Those who prove themselves worthy of everlasting 
life will receive it. Of that time the Apostle Paul 
says, "The creature itself also shall be delivered from 
the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the 
children of God." (Romans 8:21.) All the members of 
the groaning race of mankind, who will be obedient, will 
be delivered from sin and death conditions into the full 
liberty of the sons of God— such as Adam enjoyed before 
his fall. They will have the knowledge which he lacked, 
and will pass the test which he failed to pass. 



R5240 : page 152 

ALL THINGS WORK FOR GOOD TO THEM 
-JUNE 15. -GENESIS 46:28-34; 47:12,28-31.- 



"To them that love God all things 
work together for good."— Romans 8:28. 

SO JACOB and all his family left the land of 

Canaan, the Land of Promise, Palestine; 

and, at the invitation of Pharaoh through 

Joseph, they located in the land of Goshen, 

suitable to their business which was that of 

herdsmen and shepherds. Joseph went in 

his chariot to Goshen, and there met his 

father Jacob, whom he had not seen for 

many years. After the custom of oriental 

countries, they kissed each other, and Joseph 

wept. Then came the official presentation of Jacob and 

his family to Pharaoh. Joseph was careful that they 

should make no mistake. He therefore let the king clearly 

know that their occupation was that of shepherds and 

herdsmen; for the Egyptians despised that business, and 

hence would keep themselves separate from the Hebrews. 

Thus the land of Goshen became almost like a separate 

country from Egypt. 

Jacob at this time was one hundred thirty years old, 
and quite feeble. Brought into the presence of Pharaoh, 
Jacob blessed him— in the sense of asking the Divine 
blessing upon him, we may assume. Thus the family 
of Jacob, now called by their new name, Israel, became 
firmly established in the land of Egypt. Jacob lived 
seventeen years thereafter, during which Joseph and his 
people, the Israelites, were in favor with Pharaoh and 
the Egyptians. 

Our lesson relates especially to God's willingness and 
ability to make all the experiences of His people to work 
out for their good. This naturally suggests that we inquire 
in what way Jacob's life experiences were to his 
welfare. The Scriptures declare, "Jacob have I loved; 
Esau have I hated [loved less]." God's Love should be 
distinctly seen manifested in some way in making matters 
work for good to Jacob and his family. The question 
is, How? Can we see the lines along which Divine favor 
operated for the welfare of Jacob and his family? 

Only with the eye of faith, guided by the words of 
Jesus, His Apostles and the Prophets, can we see how 
God's blessing was with Israel and gave them blessings 
more than others. Many have not this eye of faith. 
Hence only the few can see, appreciate, understand, this 
matter. The majority both of professing Christians and 
of Jews fail to see what blessing came to Israel. Proportionately 
such are weak in faith, and quite ready to be 
turned aside by Higher Critics and Evolutionists into 
total unbelief in the Bible and the Divine Plan of the 
Ages which it sets forth. 

Jacob, having become the heir of the great Promise 
made to Abraham (in thy Seed shall all the families of 
the earth be blessed), straightway seems to have gotten 
into trouble. He fled from home, leaving everything to 
his brother. He served his uncle Laban for seven years, 



that he might have Rachel for his wife, but Divine Providence 
permitted him to be cheated, and he was obliged to 
serve seven years more for her. Time and again his 
uncle Laban changed his wages in an endeavor to get 
the best of him. Thus Jacob was thrown into competition 
with his uncle in the endeavor to protect his own interests. 

Finally, with the fruit of many years' toil, he returned 
to Canaan, fearful, however, of his brother Esau, whom 
he placated with a rich present. Later, he lost his wife 
and was bereft of Joseph, his beloved son. Then came 
the famine, the recovery of Joseph and the incidents of 
our recent lesson. Later on, that very move into Egypt 
appeared to have been a disastrous one, for the Egyptians 

R5241 :page 153 

enslaved the Israelites. Finally, they were delivered, only 
to have trying experiences in the wilderness of Paran for 
forty years, before entering Canaan proper. 

HOW DID GOD BLESS ISRAEL? 

Then it was a gradual matter to get possession of the 
land. They had various trials and difficulties, captivities 
to the Philistines, the Syrians, etc. Later on, they had 
kings, and then a rebellion, or division of the Kingdom, 
followed by more wars, famines, pestilences, until they 
were all carried captive into Babylon. They went away 
numerous, they returned a comparatively small company. 
Then they had more trials, wars, etc. 

By and by, Jesus came, and was repudiated by all 
except the few. Then the nation was repudiated by God. 
"Your house is left unto you desolate." Gradually trouble 
and anarchy came upon them, until as a nation they went 
to Hades— nationally they fell asleep. They have been 
asleep for more than eighteen centuries, while personally 
they have endured persecutions in many nations. 

What we want to see is how God's blessing was 
identified with all those experiences of Israel. We want 
to know in what way God overruled for their good and 
blessing more than in the affairs of other nations. To 
understand this, we must take a glance at other nations 
and peoples and their experiences and then must look 
also into the future. 

Where is Egypt— where is the government of the 
Pharaohs today? Where is Assyria— where are their 
peoples today? Where are the Philistines? Where are 
any and all of the nations who flourished in the days of 
Israel? The answer is that they are no more. They 
have merged with other peoples or have been blotted out 
by natural processes. They could not be restored today, 
because none of those peoples remain anywhere. We 
are not discussing the numerous tribes of India, nor the 
consolidated bands of China and Japan, nor the barbarous 
tribes of Africa. These all have been outside the line of 
our history, because not closely identified with the nation 



of Israel, Natural or Spiritual. 

But Israel exists today, even though the nation is 
asleep in Hades, Sheol, waiting for a national awakening 
and resurrection. That awakening is already arousing 
"dry bones" from despair, and pointing forward to a future 
day of blessing and prosperity. One result of God's providential 
care over Israel has been that as a people they 
have been maintained in existence. It is this hope of 
future blessings, based upon God's promise to Abraham, 
which continues to vitalize that people. It is this hope 
which by and by, according to prophecy, will re-vitalize 
Israel, and again bring her forward and identify her with 
the great Messianic Kingdom, which will bless the world. 

But some one may say, Tell us not about national 
blessings, for we shall have to think of the whole world 
from the standpoint of one human brotherhood. If Israel 
has been blessed of God, there should be some personal 
blessing manifest and not merely a national prolongation 
of grace, in their life as a people. 

Very true, we answer. There are both personal and 
national blessings of the past and for the future. God's 
dealings with Israel in the past did not indeed prove all 
of that nation to be holy, saintly, and worthy of the 
highest honor and stations in the Divine Program. But 
those providences served to select in that nation a peculiar 
people, of similar characteristics to those possessed by 
Abraham; viz., faith and obedience. Following Abraham 
came Isaac; following Isaac came Jacob; and following 
Jacob came the nation of Israel amongst whom there 
were a few, from time to time, worthy of being ranked 
with their fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. 

The trying experiences of centuries of national life 
tended to develop noble characters, strong in faith and 
loyal to the core. St. Paul enumerates some of these 
besides Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and the Prophets. He 
includes with them all those "Israelites indeed" who were 
loyal to God to the extent of suffering persecutions for 
righteousness' sake and for the sake of the hopes which 
they received through that Abrahamic Promise. Some of 
these, he says, were "stoned to death, some were sawn 
asunder. ...of whom the world was not worthy." 

This selecting process continued down to the time 
of Jesus, and found a glorious company, even if it were 
not a numerous one. God was seeking such people, and 
He found the ones whom He sought. True, they have not 
yet received their reward. True, their reward is not be 
a Heavenly one, but an earthly one as was promised them. 
"All the land that thou seest will I give to thee, and to 
thy seed after thee." 

These faithful ones of Israel are the ones for whom 
all things have been working together favorably— because 
they loved God, because they were responsive to the 
righteousness which He set before them and to the great 
Promise which He gave them. The time is near at hand, 
we believe, when these will constitute Messiah's earthly 
representatives in the ruling and blessing of the world 



of mankind. 

What was prophesied of them before will be fulfilled. 
Instead of being the fathers, they will be Messiah's children, 
receiving everlasting life from Him as a Father. 
He will make them princes in all the earth, in subordinate 
co-operation with His Heavenly Empire. (Psalm 45:16.) 
Thus we see that all the trials and difficulties of Israel 
were, under Divine Providence, working together for 
good to that special class, "Israelites indeed, in whom was 
no guile," and who loved God supremely. And their 
reward is nigh at hand. Through them, the blessing will 
extend to every nation of earth. 

SPIRITUAL ISRAEL'S EXPERIENCES 

When God's time came, at the First Advent, to call 
out from the world a special class of Spiritual Israelites, 
He gave the first opportunity to the children of Jacob. 
As many of them at that time as were "Israelites indeed, 
in whom was no guile," were privileged to have special 
opportunities and instructions from Jesus. All of that 
true, loyal class were enabled by special providential guidance 
and instruction, to recognize Him as the Messiah, 
while all others were blinded by prejudice, superstition 
and obscure statements. 

This was another advantage that came to the natural 
seed of Abraham— that they should have the first opportunity 
of becoming members of Spiritual Israel, of which 
they had previously had no information whatever. Nor 
have they yet learned that The Messiah for whom they 
were waiting is to be a Spiritual Messiah, instead of a 
fleshly one, and that He is to be a composite Messiah, 
instead of a single person— that He is to be composed 
of many members. 

Thus the natural children of Abraham had "much 
advantage every way, chiefly because to them were committed 
the oracles of God," and because having those 
oracles, those prophecies, they had the best opportunity 
of all people of knowing respecting Messiah and of coming 
into harmony with Him, becoming His disciples. 

But as was said of Natural Israel, so with still greater 
emphasis it might be said of Spiritual Israel, that their 
privileges brought to them special sufferings and persecutions. 
Jesus was buffeted, all manner of evil was said 
against Him falsely, and He was finally crucified as a 
criminal, because He averred that He was the Son of 

R5241 : page 154 

God, and did not deny that He was the One who ultimately 
would be the King of Glory. 

Then for centuries the faithful followers of Jesus had 
bitter experiences. Sometimes they were literally tortured, 
literally persecuted, literally flayed alive. At other 
times they suffered symbolical persecution, symbolical flaying 
alive, and had all manner of evil spoken against them 



falsely for Christ's sake. Deceptions, false doctrines, and 
antitypical carrying into symbolical Babylon— all these 
have been experiences of the people of God. Nor does 
this close the list; for St. Paul declared, "Whosoever will 
live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." So 
whoever today belongs to the Lord has the assurance that 
if he is faithful to his Master, he will have the opposition 
of Satan, of the world and of his own flesh. 

The questions arise, How are these things working 
better for us than for the world? Do not Christians die 
the same as unbelievers, the same as Jews, the same as Mohammedans, 
the same as the heathen? Do they not have 
their share of sickness, sorrow, and pain in connection 
with their dying experiences? Surely none can dispute 
the truthfulness of this suggestion! Wherein then, shall 
we say, is there an advantage in being a Spiritual 
Israelite? If all the world is redeemed by the precious 
blood of Christ, if all the world is to have a blessing 
under Messiah's glorious reign of a thousand years, and 
if the Ancient Worthies are to have the first place in the 
Kingdom that will then be established under the whole 
heavens, what will be the advantage, if any, to those who 
have been faithful and loyal Spiritual Israelites— to those 
who have endured hardness as good soldiers and have 
sought to lay down their lives in the Master's service, 
in the service of the brethren, in the service of the Truth, 
in the service of God? 

R5242 : page 154 

MUCH ADVANTAGE EVERY WAY IS OURS 

The advantages of this class are numerous, and lay 
hold upon the present life, as well as that which is to 
come. In the present time, it is the privilege of these 
to enjoy the peace of God, which passeth all human understanding. 
It is their privilege to know by faith that all 
things are working together for good to them because 
they love God. It is their privilege to realize that whatever 
may happen to others in the world, nothing can 
happen, so far as they are concerned. Their affairs and 
interests are all subject to a Divine supervision. No 
wonder they can have peace in every storm! No wonder 
they are able to rejoice even in tribulation! 

Theirs is a joy of spirit, of which no earthly experience 
can rob them, and their joys increase daily, yearly, 
as they ripen in Christian experience, and as they grow 
in knowledge and in grace. Theirs is a privilege of access 
to the Throne of Heavenly Grace, and a privilege of 
communion with the Heavenly Father and with their 
Lord Jesus Christ. They may count themselves, as St. 
Peter declares, members of the Royal Priesthood, the Holy 
Nation of Israel, the Peculiar People of God. They may 
rejoice in the privilege of being God's ambassadors, and 
of telling the Good Tidings to others, thus to "show forth 
the praises of Him who called them out of darkness into 



His marvelous light." Oh, great are the privileges and 
mercies and blessing of these Spiritual Israelites, far 
more than compensating for their disciplines, tribulations 
and oppositions! 

JOYS OF THE LIFE TO COME 

But beyond all these experiences of the present life lie 
the riches of God's grace for the future, which these 
possess and hold with the power of faith. As St. Paul 
declares, they have the "promise of the life which now is 
and also of that which is to come." And that life to 
come is such a wonderful life that the study of it is an 
endless matter. Every step of obedience brings them 
rights and privileges with God, brings them a step forward 
also in knowledge of Himself and of His glorious 
Plan. Thus the more saintly and self-sacrificing the character, 
the deeper may be his knowledge, the richer his 
experiences, the more precious his hopes and anticipations. 

Are we asked, What are the anticipations of this 
class? The answer is, They anticipate the things which 
God has promised; they anticipate that as they are now 
children of God, so their promised resurrection from the 
dead to full spiritual perfection will make them sons of 
God on the highest plane. And if children, then they will 
be "heirs, heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, 
their Lord." Besides, these Spiritual Israelites are heirs 
of a Spiritual Canaan, a Spiritual Kingdom. To enter 
upon their Kingdom they must needs experience the 
powers of a better resurrection than others. And this will 
mean, the Apostle assures us, that they will "be changed 
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye," for "flesh and 
blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." Is it not true 
then, in the fullest and most absolute sense, that all things 
are working together for good to those who love God, 
to the called ones according to His purpose, not only to 
those who were called during the Jewish Age, but also to 
those who have been called and who have accepted the 
call during this Gospel Age! 



R5242 : page 154 

REPORTS OF MEMORIAL CELEBRATIONS 

The annual reports of the numbers participating in the 
Memorial Supper constitute one of our best means of knowing 
approximately the number of fully consecrated Christians 
interested in what is styled Present Truth. For this reason 
we have specially requested that reports be sent to us as 
promptly as possible after the celebration each year. For some 
reason we are continually disappointed. Evidently many of 
the Classes do not elect scribes or secretaries, or else those 
elected are not suitable persons or slack in the Lord's business. 
We have waited the press in order to print a satisfactory report. 



Ten days have passed since the Memorial, and only a 

small fraction of the Classes have reported. For instance, 

there are over eleven hundred Classes in the U.S. and Canada, 

but we have heard from only two hundred and sixty-five of 

them, representing 7,944 commemorators. The following statement 

shows only those cities reporting fifty or more participants. 

The Brooklyn report for this year is smaller than a 

year ago, not because of less interest, but because some of the 

outside Classes have grown to an extent that justifies holding 

separate Memorials more convenient for some of the more 

feeble members. The same applies to Pittsburgh, Pa. 

Brooklyn, N.Y 815 Allentown, Pa 73 

Boston, Mass 360 Binghamton, Pa 72 

Pittsburgh, Pa 350 Toledo, 71 

Los Angeles, Cal 310 Worcester, Mass 71 

Cleveland, 189 Spokane, Wash 70 

Seattle, Wash 164 Cincinnati, 70 

Washington, D.C 160 Jacksonville, Fla 58 

Minneapolis and St. Paul. 160 Newark, N.J 57 

Detroit, Mich 149 San Francisco, Cal 56 

Indianapolis, Ind 129 Springfield, Mass 55 

St. Louis, Mo 124 Pasadena, Cal 50 

San Antonio, Texas 119 Altoona, Pa 50 

Portland, Ore 112 London, Eng., Tabernacle.. 525 

Columbus, 98 " " Forest Gate.. 313 

Buffalo, N.Y 97 Bristol, Eng 95 

Lancaster, Pa 87 Oldham, Eng 87 

Denver, Colo 85 Sheffield, Eng 73 

Houston, Texas 80 Birmingham, Eng 56 

Richmond, Va 79 Glasgow, Scotland 428 

Lynn, Mass 78 Eleven Classes S. India... 455 



R5242 : page 155 

WOES ANCIENT AND MODERN 

--JUNE 22.-AMOS 6:1-8.- 

"Seek good, and not evil, that 
ye may live."— Amos 5:14. 

FT IS safe to say that everybody is seeking 

good, and not evil. Everybody is seeking 

pleasure, and not misery— happiness, and 

not woe. The difficulty is that all of our 

judgments are more or less perverted. Some 

have greater wisdom than others; but there 

is none perfect, "none righteous, no, not 

one." All come short of the glorious standard 

which God has set. The difficulty is 

that we have all been born in sin and are 

all misshapen. Not only our bodies are imperfect, but 

likewise our brains are unbalanced— some one way, and 



some another. Consequently young men and maidens, 
looking forth from childhood and youth upon the problems 
of life, have various conceptions of happiness, 
pleasure, joy, and make various resolutions and endeavors 
respecting the filling of their cup with blessings— long 
life, riches, ease, honor, etc. 

The teachers of our public schools and colleges have 
a most wonderful opportunity for influencing the course 
of humanity. We rejoice in the thought that the teachers 
of the world in general are striving nobly for the fulfilment 
of gracious, benevolent ideals, and they are using 
their opportunities for the blessing and uplift of their 
pupils. And yet evidently many of them have but a slight 
appreciation of their great privileges. And some, of 
course, like the remainder of the world, are selfish, and 
think of their work from the standpoint of business— so 
much effort, so much pay. 

Fain would we encourage the teachers of the world to 
look not entirely to the reward of the present, but especially 
to the still more important reward of the future. 
It is growingly the view of Bible students that our every 
act and word, yea, and our very thoughts, our motives, 
have to do not only with our present experiences, but also 
with our future life— secured for all through the redemption 
Sacrifice at Calvary. 

Of course, the first and chief responsibility for children 
rests upon their parents. And no doubt the majority 
of parents, to some extent, realize their responsibility in 
God's sight and man's, for the children they bring into 
the world. But they labor under the difficulties of their 
own ignorance. They knew not the proper course to 
take in life themselves. Their lives have been a succession 
of blunders— some more, some less, serious. They 
presume that their children must blunder similarly, and 
that success will be largely a matter of luck. Not seeing 
the principles underlying life's experiences, they are unable 
to guide their children intelligently. Here teachers, 
moralists, religionists and humanitarians, find their opportunity. 
But how little anyone seems able to accomplish 
along any line! And how discouraged the philanthropic 
become! 

On the whole, however, a broad view, contrasting the 
present time with fifty years ago, shows that progress is 
being made in many directions. Our cities are cleaner— 
both physically and morally— so far, at least, as outward 
appearance and standards are concerned. However 
shocked and shamed we may be at occasional disclosures 
of corruption and vice, those whose memories go back 
half a century can tell that no longer do we have the vile 
"doggeries" of old, with poor sots sitting, lying, in various 
degrees of intoxication inside and outside the premise. 

R5243 : page 155 

No longer does vice flaunt itself in the face of society. 
The battle against intoxication and the social evil is making 



progress in that, at least, it has made former conditions 
impossible. 

In some States the progress has been more than in 
others. The "doggeries" have been transferred into 
gilded palaces. The sot is disdained, even by the man 
who contributes to his fall by tempting his appetite beyond 
the power of his will. 

NEW ISSUES NOW--NEW TEMPTATIONS 

Our lesson tells of a time in the history of Israel when 
the prosperous class had become wealthy— when many of 
the nation's wisest and most brilliant people had settled 
down to ease and luxury— to self-gratification. They 
considered that they had won in the battle of life, and 
would now take their ease and enjoy the fruits of their 
strife and diligence. They would let the other fellow 
do the worrying for awhile, and they would live on Easy 
Street. 

The Lord through the Prophet upbraided them, assuring 
them that He was not pleased with such a course. 
He tells them that woes are to be expected as a result. 
It was made the mission of Amos to call attention to the 
fact that aggressive selfishness had accumulated great 
riches, that the wealthy were living in great luxury, and 
that these conditions fostered pride and moral laxity 
amongst the wealthy; while the poor were being filled 
with avarice, losing respect for God and religion, for 
truth and mercy, and the desire for further knowledge 
of God. Society was on the edge of a great volcano, and 
God declared that an eruption was near at hand. Amos 
was His mouthpiece. Today's lesson is a part of the 
Message he delivered. 

PRESENT DAY CONDITIONS CORRESPOND 

Our lesson is not inappropriate to our times. Notwithstanding 
the progress that has been made in many 
good lines, and notwithstanding the philanthropic sentiments 
of many, inside and outside the Christian denominations, 
nevertheless there is danger. First of all, let 
us consider the danger of the rich. The wealth of our 
day to a certain extent reaches to the very humblest and 
scatters blessings to all. 

But the bulk of the world's wealth is in the hands of 
the few. The inordinately rich are in great danger of 
injuring themselves. Some of these cannot devise ways 
and means by which to consume even their incomes. 
Luxuries of every kind are tasted in the hope of finding 
rest, happiness, joy, peace. Not finding these, mankind 
still pursue them, seeking new avenues to happiness. 
Wealth brings increased opportunity for sin in its various 
forms, including debauchery. 

The influence upon the poor is notable. The latter, 
seeking pleasure, imagine erroneously that the rich and 
indolent are finding it, while they themselves are seeking 



in vain. Thus the poorer, surrounded by the wonderful 
blessings of our day, are often miserable, because their 
minds are discontented. They want happiness, joy, 
pleasure, and believe they can obtain these only through 
wealth. The result is that their hearts are filling with 
anger and malice, and jealousy of the rich. The way is 
thus paved for most evil and atrocious conditions, and 
many are fully persuaded that our present favorable social 
conditions are maintained only through police and military 
power, backed by all the assistance of modern times 
—the telegraph, telephones, etc. 

"WARN THEM THAT ARE RICH" 

These words of the Apostle never were more in season 
than now. Those trusting in the uncertainty of riches 
need to arouse themselves. They need to learn the lesson 

R5243 : page 156 

that the pleasure they seek lies not in the direction of 
their indulgence of self, but rather in self-sacrifice— in 
the service of others. Indeed this is the great lesson for 
all to learn— both rich and poor. While millions are seeking 
for joy, pleasure, only a remarkably few have found 
them. Those few are God's saintly people— whether 
Catholics or Protestants. 

The secret of their success in finding what others are 
still seeking for lies in the fact that they have been 
Heaven-directed, and that they have followed the guidance 
of God's Word. And the more fully they have 
heeded His instructions, the greater has been their blessing. 
God's Message to all is, Seek first God's righteousness, 
God's will, the Divine Rule or Kingdom. Father 
Adam rebelled against the Divine will, and by breaking 
his covenant precipitated upon himself an avalanche of 
imperfection and death, which has since remained on the 
world— the reign of sin and death. 

God's Word reveals that in due time He will roll away 
the curse, and bring blessings and opportunities to every 
member of our race. But meantime He would gather out 
a special class for a special purpose— the Church of the 
First-borns, whose names are written in Heaven. (Heb. 12:23.) 
These are to be highly exalted and to be used 
of the Almighty with the Savior Jesus in the great work 
of blessing the whole world. These are the Seed of 
Abraham, the Body of The Messiah, of which Jesus is the 
Head.— Galatians 3:16-29. 

The greatest privilege of the present time is to get 
into this elect company of God's saints. In order to enter 
this company, faith and obedience are necessary requisites. 
That faith must recognize Jesus as the Lamb of 
God, the Sin-bearer. It must recognize Him also as the 
Pattern and Exemplar. The reward will be to those who 
have His spirit, His disposition, and who will walk 
through the present life in His footsteps. Such will 



eventually gain with Him glory, honor, immortality— the 
Kingdom. 

In the present time, they will to the world seem to 
have the unfavorable side, a battle against the world, the 
flesh and the Adversary. The world cannot understand 
what pleasure and blessing these really enjoy because of 
the surrender of their wills to God's will, and because of 
the Spirit of the Lord, which they consequently receive. 
But these alone have the peace and joy and blessing which 
the world can neither give nor take away. What other 
men are seeking and failing to find, God's saints enjoy. 

"Peace is theirs which knows no measure, 
Joys which through all time abide." 



R5243 : page 156 

THE VICTORIES OF FAITH 

-JUNE 29.-ACTS 7:9-16; HEB. 11:20-22.- 

"This is the victory that overcometh 
the world, even our faith."— 1 John 5:4. 

WE ARE living in a day when faith is greatly 

discounted— in a day when people seem disposed 

to say, "I care not what a man believes, 

if only his life be honorable." And 

by this generally is meant that faith is of 

no consequence. Those who so hold usually 

put honor of men as the highest goal. Their 

sentiments, translated into plain English, 

would be, "With all your getting, get money 

and prosperity; for without these, no matter 

what you believe, or whom you worship, you will never 

prosper in the present life, success in which is the only 

goal now recognized by an increasing number." 

The Bible standpoint, however, is the very reverse of 
this. God's Word puts faith first, and builds character 
upon that faith. God declares that no human being can 
do perfect works. Hence He has not made works the 
standard. Faith is God's standard, and He assures us that 
whoever has the proper faith must of necessity have works 
which will correspond to his faith. In line with this 
principle, we note that God's favorites of the Bible have 
all been men of faith. Their faith did not make them 
perfect, nor were their works always acceptable in God's 
sight, but He punished them for evil works and rewarded 
them for their great faith. 

Thus we find in the Bible record that some of God's 
favorites committed grievous sins and made serious mistakes, 
and still, for all that, maintained themselves in 
God's favor, by reason of their faith. 



GOD LOVES NOT THE WICKED 

Of all religious books ever written or ever read, the 
Bible is perhaps the most candid. It tells of the mistakes 
and the sins of the very characters which it holds up as 
models and examples of men after God's own heart. Yet 
the Bible leaves no room for any one to assume that God 
loves wickedness, or that the friends of God are the depraved 
of mankind. Quite to the contrary, the highest 
possible standards of righteousness, in word, in deed and 
in thought, are inculcated, and we are distinctly told that 
full acceptance with God can be only along the lines of 
truth and righteousness. 

God tells us that we and all mankind are by nature 
sinners. He tells us that we could do nothing to clear 
away our own guilt and the sentence that stands against 
us as members of the fallen race. But He also tells us 
that He purposes to adjust that matter for us satisfactorily; 
and hence that our responsibility is not for what 
we cannot avoid, but for what we can avoid— not for what 
we cannot do, but for what we can do. He tells us that 
the foundation of all our noblest endeavors will lie along 
the lines of confidence in Him. This confidence He calls 
faith. He assures us that without faith it is impossible 
to please Him, and He has shown us this in all the 
lessons of the Bible. 

FAITH IS NOT CREDULITY 

Many make the mistake of supposing that faith is 
credulity. Under this delusion they are ready to swallow 
any and everything of a religious kind, if they are told 

R5244 : page 156 

that God says so. But this is not the faith which the 
Bible encourages. On the contrary, the Bible would have 
us know definitely the things that God has promised, and 
exercise a definite faith in those things and give no heed 
whatever to the seductive vagaries of Satan, of our fellow 
men, or of our own imagination. 

It is not for us to quarrel with those who take a 
different view of matters and who in the name of faith 
bind their followers with ignorance and superstition, and 
seek to prevent them from using their reasoning faculties. 
It is for us to address those who are feeling after God 
if haply they might find Him— those who are not content 
with superstitions, but whose hearts and minds cry out 
after the living God and His definite Word, His solemn 
statement of His will respecting us, and of His Plan, and 
of the part which we may have therein. So Jesus and the 
Apostles attempted not to teach everybody, but merely 
those who hungered and thirsted after righteousness. In 
the language of Jesus, "He that hath an ear to hear, 
let him hear." 



R5244 : page 157 

THE FAITH BEFORE CHRIST CAME 

Let us look into the past, and note the method by which 
God has all along sought His peculiar people. The first 
proclamation of God's purposes respecting our race was 
made to Abraham. God spake to Abraham, saying, "Walk 
as in My presence, and be thou perfect"— i. e., Do your 
best to be perfect. After Abraham had manifested some 
faith, God gave him further tests. When in obedience to 
those tests Abraham left his native land to live in Canaan, 
he manifested so great a faith that God called him His 
friend, and made to him the very first revelation of the 
Divine purposes in respect to humanity. 

Abraham knew that there was a curse upon the race, 
under which the whole creation was groaning, going down 
to the tomb, and God's declaration to him was that the 
time would come when, instead of the curse, He would 
send a blessing. This meant to Abraham that, instead 
men becoming more imperfect and wasting away in 
death, a change would come, by which they would be 
rescued from the dying condition, and resurrected from 
the power of the tomb. 

This was a wonderful proposition, even for God to 
make; yet Abraham, with childlike faith, believed the 
Message. God declared to him that, because of his own 
faith, He would greatly bless him and his posterity, so 
that through him as a father eventually would come 
children who would accomplish the great work of blessing 
mankind, and would rescue all from the power of sin, 
Satan and death. The briefly epitomized statement of 
all this was in the words, "In thee and in thy Seed shall 
all the families of the earth be blessed."— Genesis 28:14. 

What was it to have faith in that Promise? What 
did it mean to Abraham? Assuredly it meant that thenceforth 
Abraham's mind would take in a larger horizon— 
the world of humanity, instead of merely his own immediate 
family and flocks and herds, and his nearest 
neighbors. It meant that if God would so honor his 
posterity, Abraham would seek in everything to co-operate 
with God and that great Promise. 

For years God tested Abraham's faith. Yet he still 
believed. "His faith staggered not." After Isaac had 
been born and as yet had no child, God directed that 
this son of promise, the one in whom the whole Promise 
centered, should be sacrificed. What a test of faith! 
What a grand development of faith Abraham had acquired 
when he was ready to obey the Voice Divine, 
accounting that God was able to raise Isaac up again 
from the dead! Oh, for such a trust in God! Oh, for 
such a faith! Oh, for such an appreciation of Divine 
Power! What could not be accomplished in the world 
through the Divine Message if such faith prevailed 
amongst God's children! What would God not do for 
children who would trust Him thus! 



It was the same with Isaac and with Jacob. They 
trusted that same Promise. It influenced the whole course 
of their lives. It made them more like God. It shaped 
every interest of life. Although they understood practically 
nothing of how God would accomplish so great 
a blessing, their faith laid hold upon the fact. From 
their posterity God would raise up a holy people to be 
His agency, His channel, for instructing the world, ruling 
the world, uplifting the world, resurrecting the dead, 
bringing mankind back to all that was lost through 
Adam's disobedience. 

Their faith might have had plenty of opportunities 
for stumbling, if it had been weaker. If they had been 
more worldly-wise, they might have said, How can God 
do this thing and yet be just? Having once pronounced 
a sentence, how can He clear the guilty? But their faith 
wavered not. In their hearts they said, "God has promised; 
and what God has promised, He will do, and He will 
have His own way of accomplishing it." 

By and by, the nation of Israel as a whole was called 
the people of God. The nation as a whole entered into 
a Covenant with God, and He with them, through Moses, 
the mediator of the Law Covenant. Israel was impulsed 
by faith— faith in the Promise made to Abraham that God 
would use his posterity and through it bless all people, all 
of Adam's race— the living and the dead. 

The Covenant of Sinai pledged the people of Israel 
that they would be a holy nation, that they would keep 
God's Law blamelessly. God covenanted that in that 
event He would fulfil in them the Promise made to 
Abraham. God knew that imperfect human beings could 
not keep His perfect Law. But He would let them try; 
He would let them learn the lesson; He would through 
that lesson give instruction to the angels respecting His 
own righteousness. He would also through it give instruction 
to Spiritual Israel, whom later He would develop 
and through whom the blessings actually would come. 
This St. Paul explains, saying, "The Law Covenant was 
added because of transgressions, until the promised Seed 
should come."— Galatians 3:19. 

In other words, God started this work with Israel, in 
a typical manner, long centuries before the real Spiritual 
Israel would be developed. But He did not thereby do 
injury to the people who had covenanted to keep the 
Law, but who were unable to do so. On the contrary, 
they as a people were blessed by their endeavors to keep 
that Law, and blessed also by the chastisements which 
came upon them because of their failures and lack of faith. 

But God especially blessed all of that people who 
shared Abraham's faith, so that the Apostle Paul could 
enumerate, in addition to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, a 
considerable number who pleased God because of their 
faith, long centuries before Christ, the Spiritual Seed of 
Abraham came. Those Ancient Worthies, although they 
will not be the Seed of Abraham in the highest sense, on 
the spirit plane, will be the seed of blessing on the earthly 



plane— the channel through which the heavenly blessings 
will ultimately be extended to all nations. 

What was it that impulsed the Jewish people during 
all those centuries past? Was it not faith in God— faith 
that He would fulfil the Promise made to Abraham? It 
surely was! And it is that Promise that still actuates 
such of the Jews as have not lost their faith— such of 
them as are still Jews. Those who have lost the faith 
of Abraham are no longer in any sense of the word related 
to the Promise; for the Promise was according to faith. 

St. Paul speaks sympathetically of the Jewish nation, 
in respect to that original Promise which God made to 
them, saying: "Unto which Promise our twelve tribes, 
instantly serving God day and night, hope to come." 
(Acts 26:7.) And all the Jews, in proportion as they 
still maintain that hope, may still expect to come to a 
realization of all and more than they ever dreamed of. 

FAITH SINCE CHRIST CAME 

The coming of Christ did not change the Divine Purpose, 
and therefore did not change the faith of God's 
people. Jesus and the Apostles believed and taught the 
very Gospel which, St. Paul says, God preached in the 
beginning to Abraham. (Galations 3:8.) The Apostolic 
Message also was that all the families of the earth were 
to be blessed through the Seed of Abraham. But there 
was an additional feature then to be proclaimed and to 
be believed; viz., that God had begun the work of providing 
this Seed of Abraham, The Messiah— that God 
had sent the Logos, His Son, into the world, that He 

R5244 : page 158 

might become the Seed of Abraham on the spirit plane, 
and eventually fulfil every feature of the original Promise. 

All the Jews were in expectation of the Messiah, 
but they were not all Israelites indeed; they did not all 
have the proper faith. God preferred, therefore, to allow 
some of them to remain in a measure of blindness on 
the subject, while others were granted a special anointing 
of the eyes of their understanding, their eyes of faith. 
To this class Jesus said, "To you it is given to know the 
mysteries of the Kingdom of God"— the Messianic Kingdom, 
through which the Seed of Abraham is to bless all 
the families of the earth. 

Then came another step of faith. The early disciples 
said: We desire to believe that Jesus, the Son of God, 
is the foretold Seed of Abraham, but we do not see Him 
doing the work of blessing the world. Instead of reigning 
in triumph to dispense to the world the blessings secured 
by His sacrifice, He has gone to Heaven. How shall 
we understand this? 

THE MYSTERY-CHRIST IN YOU 



The answer of God through the Apostles was that 
"the faith once delivered to the saints" was still the same, 
but that now, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, they 
were to understand that The Messiah would not be one 
person, but many persons— not Jesus alone would be the 
Seed of Abraham, but Jesus as the Head and the Church 

R5245 : page 158 

as His members, or Body, would be that Seed. St. Paul 
says, "Ye, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of 
Promise." Jesus was represented by the head of Isaac, 
the Church was represented by the body of Isaac, in that 
figure. It has taken the entire Gospel Age to develop 
the Body of Christ, the Church. 

Under another figure, Jesus was represented in Isaac, 
and the Church was represented in Rebecca, his bride. 
According to this figure, the antitypical Isaac has entered 
into glory, but waits for the development of the antitypical 
Rebecca. At the appointed and appropriate time 
He will come, the Seed of Abraham, and receive His 
Bride to Himself, and they twain will be one. And 
through the One, through the Kingdom of Glory, will 
come to all the families of the earth the blessing promised 
nearly four thousand years ago to Abraham. 

This is "the faith once delivered to the saints," the 
hope set before us in the Gospel— the faith that God will 
use the Seed of Abraham to bless all humanity, and the 
hope that we by faithful perseverance and trust may 
become joint-heirs with Jesus, the Redeemer, in all that 
glorious inheritance of the Messianic Kingdom. 

Let us not doubt the Wisdom of God in the arrangement 
which He has made, and which He has caused to 
be set forth in the Scriptures; viz., that this faith, based 
upon the Abrahamic Promise, is the Power of God by 
which it is His will that all His people shall be sanctified- 
separated so far as possible from the world and from 
sin; sanctified to Himself in Christ Jesus, their Lord. 
This is "the faith once delivered to the saints." This is 
the faith which enables us to gain the victory over the 
spirit of the world, and to be separate, sanctified to God, 
for service here and hereafter. 



R5245 : page 158 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 
MORE ABOUT HIGHWAY OF HOLINESS 

Question.— Will any one be forced, or compelled, to 
walk up the Highway of Holiness? 

Answer.— At present there is no Highway of Holiness; 
consequently no one is walking on it during the 
Gospel Age. There will be no such Highway until the 



Great King takes control of affairs, overthrows the present 
order of things and sets up the Kingdom of Heaven. 
Then a Highway of Holiness will be prepared, upon which 
the righteous can walk. During the Gospel Age there 
are but two ways— the Narrow Way and the Broad Way. 
(Matt. 7:13,14.) The former is for those who desire to 
walk in the footsteps of Jesus, and is a steep, rugged path. 
The latter is the road that leads to destruction and is a broad 
way on which the human race are hurrying to the tomb. 

Those who walk acceptably in the footsteps of the 
Master must do so willingly. Theirs must be a voluntary 
devotion. To be forced is not at all the thought. The 
Little Flock will thus run the Narrow Way; but the Great 
Company will have experiences which will force them, 
not to take one special way, but to decide for themselves, 
what course they will pursue. There is a difference between 
forcing a man to go aboard a vessel, and bringing 
certain influences to bear which will cause him to desire 
to do so. 

In the next Age, when the world's Highway of Holiness 
shall have been opened up (Isa. 35:8), force will be 
used to bring all mankind to a knowledge of the Truth 
respecting God's provision for them. Wrong doing will 
then be punished with corrective stripes. But it would be 
far from right to suppose that mankind will be driven or 
forced along the Highway of Holiness. All who go up 
thereon must exert themselves; for it will be an upward 
way. Our Savior stated the Father's sentiment respecting 
all to whom He will ever grant everlasting life. His 
words were, "But the hour cometh, and now is, when the 
true worshipers shall worship the Father in spirit and 
in truth; for the Father seeketh such to worship Him." 



"PERFECT LOVE CASTETH OUT FEAR" 

Question.— What kind of fear is referred to in the 
text, "There is no fear in love, but perfect love casteth 
out fear."— I John 4:18. 

Answer.— Fear is a mental condition which is begotten 
of uncertainty. There are some things which we ought to 
fear, and some which we need not fear. The Adversary 
seems to take advantage of the fallen condition of the 
race, and to cause them to fear God; for it is natural to 
avoid whomsoever we fear. Mankind realize instinctively 
that they are sinners by nature and that there is a penalty 
for sin. Taking advantage of this fear of the consequences 
of sin, the Adversary tries to instill in them a dread of 
God. He pictures before their imperfect minds a God 
who is unjust, over-severe in His dealings with sin and 
the sinner, for whom He has prepared a place of everlasting 
torture. 

As we gradually come to a clear knowledge of God 
and of the principles by which He regulates the universe, 
we lose this improper fear; and in its stead comes a love 



for God and a realization that He has love for us. Our 
love for Him grows in proportion as we perceive that He 
loves mankind, and has made provision for them whereby 
they may have an opportunity for everlasting life. After 
we have come to love Him perfectly, all fear in the sense 
of dread is cast out. 

Our knowledge and love should not, however, cast out 
the fear of displeasing God; for proper fear (reverence) 
must never be cast out. The more we have of reverential 
love, the more of the proper fear we shall have. Who 
would not fear to offend a brother or a neighbor whom he 
loved and appreciated? Much more should we dread 
offending our just, wise, loving God. 

R5245 : page 159 

The principle that "perfect love casteth out fear" 
should operate between husband and wife, between parents 
and children. The wife who fears her husband cannot 
be as happy as she would be if there were perfect love; 
and so also children who are in dread of either, or both, 
of their parents cannot love them with true filial affection. 
Each should fear to wound or offend the other, and should 
strive to have that perfect love which God is pleased to 
have all of His intelligent creatures exercise. 



RIGHTEOUS JUDGMENT AND CRITICISM 

Question.— How may we distinguish between "righteous 
judgment" and criticism? 

Answer.— The Lord says, "Judge not according to the 
appearance, but judge righteous judgment." (John 7:24.) 
St. Paul says, "Therefore judge nothing before the time, 
until the Lord come." (I Cor. 4:5.) The question then 
arises, What is "righteous judgment"? A righteous judgment 
is a right decision. But since we cannot read the 
heart, how can we render a right decision? The Scriptures 
answer that we cannot read one another's hearts 
and therefore should not attempt to judge them. 

If, then, we cannot judge each other's hearts, motives 
or intentions, what can we judge? The answer of Scripture 
is that we may judge each other's conduct. If we 
see one of the Lord's people doing something improper, 
we might say, "Dear Brother (or Sister), your conduct 
would seem to be contrary to the Word of God, and to be 
bringing forth bad fruitage." If that person should reply, 
"It does not seem to me that I am doing wrong," we must 
not judge or condemn that one's heart. But we should judge 
between good and evil conduct, and at the proper time and 
place call attention to the matter and leave it there. 

There is a difference between judging the heart, which 
we have no right to do, and judging the conduct, which 
is right to do. But it does not always follow that our 
judgment of another's conduct must always be right. We 



are all prone to make mistakes. 

If we should come to a brother and say, "Dear 
Brother, your conduct seems to be wrong, but I am sure 
that you want to do right. Will you explain?" He may 
be able to show us that the fruitage was good when we 
thought it bad. We may have misunderstood the matter. 
We are not to condemn our brother, but to go directly to 
him and get his view. Then if we cannot agree, we should 
tell him how it seems to us, and ask him to judge his own 
heart. We can do no more. 



SETTING MEMBERS IN THE BODY 

Question.— What is signified by God's "setting the 
members every one of them in the Body, as it hath pleased 
Him "?-I Corinthians 12:18. 

Answer.— In the present time there is a Church of 
Christ on probation. We sometimes say that we are members 
of the Church Militant; but to be a member of the 
Church Militant will not prove that we shall be in the 
Church Triumphant. Only those who are "faithful unto 
death" will be in the Church Triumphant. St. Paul, 
whom God had set in a very high position in the Church 
feared lest he might become a castaway. He said, "I keep 
under my body, and bring it into subjection; lest that by 
any means, when I have preached to others, I myself 
should be a castaway." (I Cor. 9:27.) Various privileges 
and opportunities are granted to us while in the flesh, 
and our acceptance in the end and our participation in the 
glory beyond will depend upon our faithfulness here. 

The Apostle says that the various members, "fitly 
framed together, grow into an holy Temple in the Lord." 
(Eph. 2:21.) We may not use this figure too literally or 
we may get into confusion. The stones in the Temple differ 
to some extent one from the other. In what is called 
"random range work" building there are places for little 
stones and places for larger stones. This might, in some 

R5246 : page 159 

respects, represent our being a larger or a smaller stone in 
the Temple— representing the privileges or honor which 
we may have beyond the veil. 

St. Paul also says that he was trying to do much more, 
that he was trying to have a larger share in the trials 
and self-denials, in order that he might have a larger 
share in the work beyond. This did not mean that he 
desired self-aggrandizement, or that he was either proud 
or self-seeking. And we shall not be so if we would attain 
that to which God would have us attain— the glorious 
character-likeness of our Master. 



"JERUSALEM... MOTHER OF US ALL" 

Question.— In the text, "Jerusalem which is above is 
free, which is the mother of us all" (Galations 4:26), who 
are meant by "us," and how is the spiritual Jerusalem the 
"mother of us all"? 

Answer.— The Apostle here uses a figure of speech 
which is common in the Scriptures, and in which a city is 
referred to as the mother of its inhabitants; for instance, 
"daughters of Jerusalem," "daughters of Zion," "Sodom 
and her daughters," etc. The "us" class mean the saints 
of God. The citizenship of the saints is in Heaven— in 
the Heavenly Jerusalem, which will not be built until the 
First Resurrection. By faith we look forward and speak 
of that promised condition and of our citizenship therein. 

The Church is developed under the same Covenant-Mother 
as was Christ; for we are His members. His was 
a covenant of sacrifice. "Gather My saints together 
unto Me; those that have made a covenant with Me by 
sacrifice." (Psa. 50:5.) The Man Christ Jesus entered 
into a covenant with the Father, which meant the sacrifice 
of His flesh, His earthly nature. As a reward for this 
sacrifice, the Father made Him a New Creature of the 
Divine nature— "far above angels," constituting Him the 
Great Messiah who shall bless the world. 

Carrying out the Father's Plan, our Lord imputes His 
merit to such as now follow His example, and walk in His 
footsteps, performing the same covenant of sacrifice. If 
these are faithful, they will share in the great work of 
Messiah in blessing the world, and will constitute the New 
Jerusalem, the Millennial Kingdom. By faith we are its 
children. Even now, our citizenship is in Heaven. 



BROAD UNSECTARIAN QUESTIONS 

The following are the questions usually put by Brother 
Russell when receiving candidates for Water Immersion. 
It will be noticed that they are on broad lines— questions 
which any Christian, whatever his confession, should be 
able to answer in the affirmative without hesitation if he 
is suitable to be acknowledged as a member of the Church 
of Christ: 

(1) Have you repented of sin with such restitution 
as you are able, and are you trusting in the merit of 
Christ's sacrifice for the forgiveness of your sins and the 
basis of your justification? 

(2) Have you made a full consecration of yourself 
with all the powers that you possess— talent, money, time, 
influence— all to the Lord, to be used faithfully in His 
service, even unto death? 

(3) On the basis of these confessions, we acknowledge 
you as a member of the Household of Faith, and give to 
you as such the right hand of fellowship, not in the name 
of any sect or party or creed, but in the name of the 



Redeemer, our glorified Lord, and His faithful followers. 



page 161 
