VOL. XXXIII JUNE 15 No. 12 
A.D. 1912-A.M. 6040 



CONTENTS 

1912-GeneralConventions-1912 190 

Toronto, Canada 190 

Washington, D.C 190 

Glasgow and London Conventions 190 

How Jesus Preached to Spirits in Prison 191 

Spirits Once Disobedient 191 

"This One Thing I Do" 193 

"Not Ashamed of the Gospel of Christ" 194 

Christ Made a Curse for Israel 195 

Law Covenant Guaranteed Life to Only 

One 195 

Beyond the Veil 197 

Embryo Kingdom Parables 198 

God's Wheat Field 199 

The Kingdom a Prize 200 

Interesting Questions 201 

Answering a Fool 201 

Ransom and Sin-Offering 201 

Interesting Letters 202 

Pastor Russell's Foreign Itinerary 203 

page 190 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. 
Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please 
address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



1912-GENERAL CONVENTIONS- 19 12 



TORONTO, CANADA, JUNE 30-JULY 6, 7 

All sessions to be held in the Horticultural Hall at the 
Canadian National Exhibition Park, West Toronto, June 30-July 6. 
The Park is easily accessible by Grand Trunk Railway 
and by King Street and other trolley car lines. 

Railway Rates: Canadian railways give half fare rates 
for July 1 and the following day, possibly beginning June 30. 
American lines give low rates for a few days before and after 
July 4, available for friends in the border states. There are 
always special rates to Niagara Falls, which is only about two 
hours sail by steamer to Toronto, at a moderate price. There 
may be other excursion rates good for even ten days. Ask 
your local agent a week in advance. 

If no rate as low as l-l/2c. per mile each way is available, 
purchase a single ticket to Toronto, and have the agent fill 
out a certificate and bring it with you. This will entitle you 
to a return ticket at a greatly reduced rate— perhaps free. 

Lodging can be secured through the Committee at from 
50c. each per day (2 to a room) to $1.50 per person; in some 
cases this will include breakfast. All expecting to attend should 
give prompt notice by addressing the Convention Committee, 
c/o W. G. Brown, Sec'y, 51 Tiverton Ave., Toronto, Canada. 
Give full name of each person and indicate which prefer to 
room together, and at what rate. 

Brother Russell will deliver a public address in the Royal 
Alexandra Theatre, King St., West, at 3 p.m., July 7. 

WASHINGTON, D.C., JULY 7-14 

This Convention will be held in the suburbs of Washington 
City, D.C., at the Glen Echo Chautauqua Grounds, July 
6-14. Arrangements for board and lodging will be made by 
our Committee on request at such prices as you may authorize 
from $1.10 per day upward. No pains will be spared to 
make you comfortable as possible. All expecting to attend 
should notify us AT ONCE. Give full name of each person 
and indicate which prefer to room together, and at what rate. 

The Committee of investigation say, "The location is 
ideal. The average Park temperature is ten degrees lower 
than that of Washington City. The Auditorium is still cooler 
by reason of its peculiar location and the fact that it is built 
over running water." 

Washington City commands reasonable railway rates from 



all quarters. The railroads have granted the I.B.S.A. a 
special rate of one and one-half fares for the round trip from 
points East of Pittsburgh, on sale July 5, 6 and 7, return limit 
July 18. A specially cheap excursion is on sale to New York 
City and return with stop-over privileges at Washington. 

We are advised that the Pacific Coast friends are arranging 
for "Special Coach" service from San Francisco. The 
party will start from San Francisco via Southern Pacific, 
Train No. 4, at nine o'clock on the morning of July 2, and 
will go via Ogden, Cheyenne, Omaha, Chicago; leaving Chicago 
at 9:45 on the evening of July 5, arriving Washington 
early the second morning. 

Friends in the territory of this route may find it advantageous 
to join this party and can get all the necessary information 
by addressing C. W. Gerdes, 2552 Hyde St., San 
Francisco. Your railroad agent will be glad to secure definite 
information as to time of train, route, rate, etc., and can do 
so by telegraphing at once the agent of the Southern Pacific 
at San Francisco. 

GLASGOW AND LONDON CONVENTIONS 

The Glasgow General Convention will be held in St. 
Mungo Halls, South York street, July 25-28. Arrangements 
have been made for several prominent Brethren to give addresses. 
The meetings will be continuous, except for intermissions 

(Continued on Page 203.) 

page 203 

GLASGOW AND LONDON CONVENTIONS 

(Continued from Page 190.) 

for rest and refreshment— opening at 9:30 a.m. 

The Sunday meeting, specially arranged for the public, 
will be at St. Andrew's Grand Hall on Sunday, July 28, at 
6:30 p.m., and will constitute the conclusion of the Convention. 
Brother Russell will be the speaker. 

As the arrangements are being made in anticipation of 
considerable numbers of visitors from surrounding cities and 
country-side, all desirous of securing accommodations in advance 
will please address Brother G. MacKenzie, 28 Kilmailing 
road, Cathcart, Glasgow. 

Arrangements will be made for the accommodation of any 
of the friends desiring to symbolize their consecration by 
water immersion. A large attendance is expected and all who 
trust in the precious blood of Jesus as the basis for their 
acceptance with the Father are cordially invited. Come asking 
a blessing and seeking to impart one by "showing forth 
the praises of Him who has called us out of darkness into His 
marvelous light." 

The London Convention this year will be held in the 
London Tabernacle, Lancaster Gate W., August 1-4. An 
interesting list of speakers has been arranged for and a cordial 



invitation is extended to all who love the Lord in sincerity 
and truth and who are trusting in the merit of His blood and 
are fully consecrated to His service. Others who are seeking 
such a fellowship Divine are also invited. 

Those desirous of accommodations will please address the 
Society, the London Tabernacle. An opportunity for symbolizing 
consecration unto death by water immersion will be 
afforded. Robes and everything else necessary will be 
provided. 

A large attendance is confidently expected. It is to be hoped 
that all present will receive a heavenly benediction and be 
enabled to carry home with them refreshment to those not 
privileged to attend. 

To those who cannot attend this convention we suggest a 
fellowship of spirit during the days of the convention— that 
their thoughts be with the convention and their prayers also; 
that thus bearing up the interests of the brethren at the throne 
of grace they may have a share also in the refreshments of 
these seasons. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JULY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
July follow:-(l) 205; (2) 105; (3) 129; (4) 238; (5) 60; 
(6) 67; (7) 120; (8) 325; (9) 214; (10) 20; (11) 145; (12) 198; 
(13) 127; (14) 106; (15) 182; (16) 75; (17) 7; (18) 126; 
(19) 22; (20) 333; (21) 229; (22) 107; (23) 217; (24) 78; 
(25) 170; (26) 30; (27) 320; (28) 313; (29) 50; (30) 109; 
(31) Vow. 



R5043 :page 191 

HOW JESUS PREACHED TO SPIRITS IN PRISON 

"Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the Just for the unjust, 
that He might bring us to God, being put to death in the 
flesh, but quickened in the spirit, by which [two 
experiences— death and resurrection] He preached 
unto the spirits in prison."— 1 Peter 3:18,19. 

THIS TEXT has been made the basis for some 
peculiar presentations. From it some have 
deduced an intermediate state lasting between 
death and the resurrection. Others 
have claimed it as an authority for the 
doctrine of Purgatory. The difficulty in 
every case seems to be the failure to remember 
that the Bible always and everywhere 
teaches that the dead are really dead, that 
they know nothing, and that, therefore, it 



would be impossible to do any preaching to the dead 
humans. Undoubtedly the theory that people are more 
alive after they die than when they were alive is responsible 
for nearly all of the foolish things which we have 
all at some time professed to believe. 

Before dismissing the thought that these "spirits in 
prison" are human spirits, let us note the fact that to say, 
"human spirits," is an absurdity of itself, because human 
beings are not spirits and spirit beings are not humans. 
"Who maketh His angels spirits," is the Scriptural proposition. 
True, we do sometimes speak of humans as 
possessing a spirit of life, but by this we merely mean 
that they possess the power or energy of life, and the 
same would be equally true of the lower orders of creation, 
beasts, fish, fowl, etc. 

Again, we sometimes speak of the Church as spirit 
beings— begotten of the Holy Spirit. Thus the Apostle 
speaks of the natural man in contrast with the New 
Creature, a spirit being. To appreciate this statement we 
must remember that the Church class receive the begetting 
of the Holy Spirit to the end that, if faithful, they 
may attain unto a spirit resurrection and become spirit 
beings, like unto the angels and like to the Redeemer. 
But we are not spirits yet, except by faith— by hope. However, 
the context shows the Apostle had no reference 
to the Church, either: we were not in prison; we received 
the message of salvation through the Apostles. 

SPIRITS ONCE DISOBEDIENT 

The spirits to whom the message was given had proven 
themselves disobedient, says St. Peter. He even tells us 
the time of their disobedience, namely, that it was "in the 
days of Noah, while the ark was preparing." Surely, if 
noticing these particulars mentioned in the context, no 
one would be excusable for misunderstanding this Scripture 
and considering it in any way applicable to humanity 
of our day or to humanity in general. However, it is 
helpful to us to learn the full particulars of the matter. 
What was their disobedience, and when and how were 
they imprisoned? 

Turning to Genesis 6:1-5, we find there the cause of 
the disobedience of those angels, who for a time had been 
permitted to see what they could do for the uplift of 
humanity, or, rather, permitted to demonstrate that the 
downward tendency of sin is incurable except in the 
manner which God has already arranged through 
Messiah and His glorious reign of a thousand years. 

Instead of those angels helping mankind out of sin 
they helped themselves into sin, and by so doing they increased 
the depravity amongst humanity until the astounding 
record is that "the wickedness of man was great 
in the earth, and that every imagination of the thought of 
his heart was only evil continually." The particular sin 
of those angels was that when they were granted the 
privilege of materializing— of taking human bodies for 



the sake of helping and instructing mankind— they misused 
this power and took to themselves the daughters of 
men for wives. 

Thus these angels came gradually to prefer to live as 
men amongst men and to rear earthly families rather than 
to abide in the condition in which they were created— 
spirit beings, higher than humans. Not only was this 
wrong in the sense that it was taking a course in opposition 
to the Divine arrangement, but it was wrong also 
because the thing was done for the cultivation and gratification 
of lust, and it led to their own moral defilement 
as well as having a baneful influence upon humanity; for 
we can readily see that for the angels, of superior powers 
and intelligence, to become leaders in lustful practices 
would mean a great influence upon mankind toward sin 
and defilement of mind and body. 

We are particularly told that the offspring of this 
improper union between the angels and the daughters of 
men were giants, both physically and mentally superior 
to the fallen human family— "men of renown." And this 
statement, that they were "men of renown," was at a 
time when manhood's estate was reached at a hundred 
years, and implies that God did not interfere to hinder or 
stop the progress of sin for perhaps several centuries. 
In the meantime the race had become so corrupt that 
apparently only Noah and his family were uncontaminated 
—all others had more or less come under the influence, 

R5043 : page 192 

directly or indirectly, of these fallen angels or their 
giant sons. Hence, of Noah it was written (not that he 
was a perfect man, but), "Now Noah was perfect in his 
generation" (uncontaminated) and his family apparently 
the same. Hence these alone were saved in the ark, while 
all the remainder, more or less contaminated, were destroyed 
by the flood. 

"IN CHAINS OF DARKNESS" 

It was then and there that God imprisoned those 
spirits, angels, who kept not their first estate, and are 
therefore called fallen angels, devils, demons. They were 
not imprisoned in some far-off world called hell, nor are 
they engaged there in stoking fires for the torture of poor 
humanity. Following the leading of the Scriptures we 
find that when the flood came they were not destroyed 
because, while their fleshly bodies which they assumed 
might indeed perish, yet they would merely dematerialize, 
or assume their spirit conditions again. 

The record is that God cast them down, that He condemned 
them to an overthrow— that they might not any 
longer associate with the holy angels, but must be reserved 
in tartarus— our earth's atmosphere. Here they were 
imprisoned, not in a special place, but in the sense of 
having their liberties restrained, "in chains of darkness." 



They were no longer permitted to materialize and thus 
to associate with humanity. These things are distinctly 
told us by St. Jude and St. Peter (Jude 6; 2 Peter 2:4,5) 
—an explanation in full harmony with the Genesis account 
of their fall. 

ONCE DISOBEDIENT-STILL DISOBEDIENT 

We, of course, cannot know that all of those fallen 
angels are still in a disloyal condition of heart. On the 
contrary, in harmony with our text, we may suppose that 
some of these fallen angels have since repented of their 
wrong course and it would be none too strong a way to 
state the matter— that any such repentant ones would 
surely have terrible experiences as a result. To be obliged 
to be in close touch and relationship with the more evil 
and malignant ones and to have knowledge of all their 
evil designs and efforts would be a terrible experience 
and, besides this, we may be sure that the rebellious would 
not hesitate to persecute the repentant ones in every conceivable 
manner, as they would be lawless, regardless of 
the Divine will. 

On the other hand, the repentant ones would be obliged 
to restrain themselves and to not render evil for evil, 
knowing that this would be contrary to the Divine will. 
In other words, repentant ones amongst those fallen 
spirits, influenced by the preaching of Jesus or otherwise, 
would have a kind of purgatorial experience, and the very 
thought calls forth our sympathy. 

When imprisoned or cut off from the privilege of 
materialization, many of the fallen spirits, we know not 
what proportion, continued their active opposition to 
God, after the manner of Satan. Hence they are spoken 
of as his angels, his messengers, his servants and he is 
spoken of as Beelzebub, the Prince of Demons. Satan, 
who sinned much earlier than the others, and in a different 
way, the Scriptures tell us was an angel of a higher 
rank, or a higher nature, and this superiority of his has 
made him the Prince or ruler over the hosts of fallen 
spirits. 

FIGHTING AGAINST GOD 

The fight of Satan and his fallen angels is against 
God, against all who are in harmony with Him, against 
all the regulations of righteousness, and against all the 
channels and servants whom the Lord may use. St. Paul's 
words along this line are forceful; he remarks that God's 
people contend not merely "with flesh and blood," but 
also "with wicked spirits in high positions," and the question 
arises, "Who is sufficient for these things?" The 
reply is that none is sufficient; without the aid of the 
Redeemer His church would be quite overcome and vanquished 
by evil. 

Likewise, without the Redeemer's aid through His 
Kingdom, without the binding of Satan, without our 



Lord's releasing of the world from the bondage of sin 
and death, there would be no hope of the world's recovery 
from its present bondage. But with the Apostle we exclaim, 
"If God be for us, who can be against us?"— 
Romans 8:31. 

R5044 : page 192 

THROUGH MEDIUMS AND OBSESSIONS 

Satan's original plan of attack was to bring our race 
under his influence by misrepresentation— by putting 
darkness for light and light for darkness— for instance, 
the temptation under which Mother Eve fell. Satan there 
represented himself as Eve's friend, giving her sound 
advice. He represented God as having a selfish motive 
behind His command that our first parents should not 
eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Satan 
declared that God had told an untruth when He said that 
the penalty for sin would be death. Satan declared that 
man cannot die. 

And has he not since kept up the same line of falsification? 
And has he not deceived the whole world upon this 
very subject? Do not all peoples in every land believe 
that when a man dies he does not die, but gets more alive 
—exactly Satan's lie of the first instance? How few 
have believed God, even amongst His people who truly 
love Him, and who truly desire to believe the teachings 
of His Word! We have all been under a kind of 
"hoodoo." "The god of this world [Satan] has blinded" 
our minds on this subject. We are now coming to see 
that death is the penalty for sin and that the resurrection 
is the salvation which God has promised and will provide. 

Satan has had powerful allies and servants in the fallen 
angels, and it is through their persistence that his lie has 
seemingly triumphed over the Divine Word— "Dying, thou 
shalt die." These fallen spirits have made various manifestations 
in every land for centuries, and thereby have 
apparently substantiated the theory that a dead man is 
more alive than when he was alive. Knowing that mankind 
would have nothing to do with them if their real 
personality were known they hide their personality and 
represent themselves as our dead friends who desire to 
speak with us, either directly or through mediums. 

A further desire of these angels is to obsess or to get 
possession of a human being. Being chained or restrained 
from the privilege of materialization, the next most 
desirable thing in their estimation is to gain control over 
a human being and to use his body instead of their own. 
This is styled obsession, and persons so afflicted today are 
sent to an insane asylum where, it is estimated, they constitute 
at least one half of the entire number. In the days 
of our Lord these were not mistakenly supposed to be 
insane, but rightly declared to be obsessed. All remember 
the New Testament account that our Savior and His 
Apostles cast out legions of fallen spirits from humanity. 



"KNOW YE NOT THAT THE SAINTS SHALL JUDGE 
ANGELS?" 

We need not discuss this question with Bible Students, 
for it is too well recognized to be disputed. We suggest 
a topical study of this subject by all of our readers. See 

R5044 : page 193 

how many times Jesus and the Apostles cast out demons, 
and note the particulars. Although we still have with us 
spirit mediums and many obsessed, we cannot know 
whether the proportionate number is greater or less 
than in our Lord's day. Since the world's population today 
is so much larger, the same number of evil spirits 
(which do not increase) would show proportionately less. 

But, however that may be, we may assume that some 
fruitage resulted from the great sermons preached to these 
in connection with the death and resurrection of our Lord, 
respecting which St. Peter tells us in our text. Additionally, 
St. Paul remarks, "Know ye not that the saints shall 
judge angels?" (I Corinthians 6:3.) We do know that 
the holy angels need no judging, no trial, hence the 
Apostle must in some way refer to a trial or judgment or 
testing of these spirits in prison who were once disobedient, 
in the days of Noah. And if the judgment or testing is a 
part of the Divine plan, it implies a hope for them, and 
in conjunction with St. Peter's statement in our text it 
gives the reasonable inference that the preaching which 
Jesus did to them was not wholly in vain. 

HOW JESUS PREACHED IN DEATH 

Here arises another question: If Jesus was really 
dead, as the Scriptures declare, if "He poured out His 
soul unto death," and "made His soul an offering for sin," 
and His soul was not raised from the dead until the third 
day after His crucifixion, how could He in the meantime 
preach to spirits in prison, or to anybody else? We reply 
that He could preach in the same way that the Apostle 
refers to in respect to Abel, saying, "He, being dead, yet 
speaketh" (Hebrews 11:4); and again, in the same way 
that the blood of Abel is said to have cried to God- 
figuratively. Of one thing we are sure, namely, that 
Jesus gave no oral address while He was dead. He 
preached in the way we sometimes refer to when we say, 
"Actions speak louder than words." 

It was the great object lesson which the fallen angels 
saw that constituted to them the great sermon that gave 
them a ground for hope. On several occasions the fallen 
spirits, when commanded to come out of human beings, 
declared that they knew Jesus. In the long ago they had 
known Him, when, as the Only Begotten of the Father 
and His Representative, He had created them and all 
things that are made, and was also the mouthpiece for all 



Divine orders and regulations. 

The fallen angels realized that He had come into the 
world to be its Redeemer; they perceived the great stoop 
that He had made from His lofty position on the heavenly 
plane to the servant position on the human plane. They 
admired His loyalty and faithfulness to God, but doubtless 
believed Him to be foolish; they never expected Him to 
arise from the dead. But when they perceived His resurrection 
on the third day to glory, honor and immortality, 
"far above angels, principalities and powers and every 
name that is named," His sermon to them was complete, 
namely, that "the wages of sin is death," but that "the 
gift of God is eternal life." (Romans 6:23.) And as 
they realized thus the Power of God and the Love of 
God for His human creatures, the Apostle's words imply 
that this constituted to them a message of hope. Perhaps 
if they would show full contrition God eventually would 
have mercy upon them, even as He had had mercy and 
had provided for humanity. 

The lesson is one for all. God's power is Infinite, so 
is His love, His mercy, His goodness. Nevertheless, every 
wilful sin will have its punishment, a just recompense of 
reward, and only the willing and obedient shall have the 
Divine favor and everlasting life. Let each apply the 
lesson to himself. 



R5044 : page 193 

"THIS ONE THING I DO" 

"I determined not to know anything among you, save 
Jesus Christ and Him crucified."— 1 Cor. 2:2. 

THE TALENTED APOSTLE PAUL gives in 

another place his testimony as to the wisdom 

of shaking off some of our plans and arrangements 

and of relaxing our efforts in 

various directions in order to concentrate 

our energies upon those things which we 

can best bring to perfection, saying, "This 

one thing I do." (Phil. 3:13.) The 

Apostle's one business in life was to be, so 

far as he was able, acceptable to the Lord, 

personally, and to do with his might what he could to 

assist others into the same condition. 

In harmony with this, the thought of our text seems 
to be that whatever the Apostle knew respecting other 
matters prominent in his day— customs of the Age, 
scientific questions, etc.— he would ignore. He would 
be a specialist. He would confine his thoughts, words and 
teachings along this one line; for he thought it was 
worthy. He had been at Corinth as an ambassador of 
Christ. He was not there to air his knowledge, but to 
tell the message of the Kingdom. He would make preaching 



the Gospel his one business, to accomplish which he 
felt that all of his knowledge and energy were too little. 

The Apostle did not determine to ignore all of his 
knowledge without having a good reason, or purpose 
therefor. It was because he wished to concentrate all of 
his attention and influence upon one great subject. That 
subject was Jesus Christ, Jesus the Anointed; Jesus the 
Messiah was the main thought of all his preaching. He 
realized that the great Messiah was a part of the Divine 
Program which had been promised— the "Seed" which 
was to bless all the families of the earth; that Jesus was 
that great Messiah, and that all men should recognize 
Him, should flock to His standard. 

But St. Paul would preach, not only that Jesus was 
the Messiah, but that He was the crucified Messiah, for 
he would not be ashamed of the Divine teaching. He 
would preach that God sent forth His Son; and that the 
Son had left the glory He had with the Father, had 
lived on the earth, and had "died, the Just for the unjust," 
for this very purpose— that He might manifest His obedience 
to the Divine arrangement. In thus preaching 
Christ and His crucifixion, the Apostle was not ignoring 
the fact that there was to be a Church; Jesus was the 
Anointed Head over His Body, the Church. Hence, in 
preaching Jesus the Anointed One, St. Paul was showing 
how the Divine Plan was being outworked under Divine 
supervision, and what the glorious results would be. To 
these things he had determined that all his time and 
attention should go. 

How evident it is that today many ministers have lost 
something possessed by the Apostle, who thus recognized 
the importance of the Gospel of Christ! This loss very 
largely accounts for the various peculiar topics advertised 
for religious meetings; sometimes the topic is politics; 
sometimes temperance; sometimes woman-suffrage. The 
reason for this change from the old-time style of preaching 
is that during the Dark Ages the Gospel became perverted, 
misrepresented; and that now people are ashamed 
of what was formerly preached— "Be good and go to 

R5045 : page 194 

heaven; be bad and go to hell!" It is not a great message. 
We cannot wonder that an astute mind grasps the whole 
thing in a few minutes. We are rather glad, indeed, that 
ministers are ashamed to preach what their creeds profess, 
and that, therefore, their creeds must be kept in the 
background. 

"NOT ASHAMED OF THE GOSPEL OF CHRIST" 

For us, however, who see the importance of the 
Gospel, the case is different. We know that this 
Gospel of the Kingdom, of which the Apostle was not 
ashamed, teaches that the elect Church is to be the Bride 
of Christ; that Messiah is to bless the whole world; that 



Jesus is the Messiah; that He was crucified, dead, 
buried, raised from the dead by His Father; that His 
crucifixion was a part of the great Divine Plan, and that 
without this very arrangement no salvation could be 
effected, either for the Church, or for the world in the 
future. Therefore, as the Apostle did, we are preaching 
Jesus, the Crucified One, who died for our sins, who 
rose again for our justification, and who, coming in glory 
with His Church, is the great Messiah, to bless the world 
through natural Israel. 

Because we have found the Truth we, like St. Paul, 
feel constrained to preach nothing but this Message. The 
same truth that influenced Him should influence us. If, 
therefore, any of the brethren feel disposed to go out 
after the manner of Babylon and preach something else, 
here is the reproof— "Not.. .anything save Jesus Christ 
and Him crucified." This is the only subject. St. Paul 
would be as though he knew nothing else. This subject 
would be the one thing to which he would give his time 
and attention. Let it be so with us! 

Beloved, as you value the glorious hope set before you, 
we beseech you that you give no heed to seducing spirits 
and doctrines of devils, as the Apostle terms them (I Tim. 4:1); 
but that with fixedness of purpose you apply yourselves 
to the one thing to which you are called, and which 
as prospective heirs of Messiah's Kingdom you are privileged 
to do. Let us not forget that we are a "peculiar people," 
separate from the great body of nominal Christians, 
as well as from the world, having higher hopes, aims and 
ambitions, and favored with a clearer insight into the deep 
things of God, having been called out of our former 
darkness into His marvelous light. Thus separate from 
the world and from Christians who partake largely of the 
spirit of the world, what wonder if we find them all out 
of harmony with us, and either ignoring or opposing us! 

We expect such opposition; and we know that it will 
continue until our course has been finished in death. If 
we endure hardness as good soldiers for the Truth's sake, 
no matter how that hardness may come, in our efforts to 
do the Lord's will and to advance the interests of His 
Kingdom, then we are presenting our bodies as living 
sacrifices in the Divine service. To be really in His 
service includes both the careful and continual study of 
God's Plan, and the imbibing of its spirit, leading to an 
enthusiastic zeal for its accomplishment, and to activity 
to the extent of ability in its service, whatever the cost 
or sacrifice it may require. 

If faithful in this service we have neither time nor 
disposition to give heed to other themes having no bearing 
on the one thing to which we have solemnly dedicated our 
lives. If we have consecrated all to God our time is not 
our own; and consequently we have none to spare for the 
investigation of theories built upon any other foundation 
than that laid down in the Bible. Nor have we time to 
devote to the ideas and pursuits which engross the 
world's attention, many of which are harmless or even 



elevating in themselves, but which would be harmful and 
degrading to us if we allow them to occupy consecrated 
time and to divert our attention from the one thing we 
ought to be doing. 

The Apostle warns us to "Shun profane and vain 
babblings; for they will increase unto more ungodliness"; 
but counsels, "Study to show thyself approved unto God, 
a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing 
the Word of Truth"; "Teach no other doctrine, 
neither give heed to fables and endless genealogies, which 
minister questions rather than godly edifying which is in 
faith."-2 Tim. 2:16,15; I Tim. 1:3,4. 

HOW NARROW THIS WAY! 

Is not this a very narrow way? Yes, so narrow that 
our Lord foretold respecting it, "Strait [difficult] is the 
gate and narrow is the way which leadeth unto [the] 
life, and few there be that find it!" (Matt. 7:14.) It is 
so narrow that it is wide enough to admit only the Lord's 
Plan and those who are willing to discard all other plans, 
projects and questionings, and to devote themselves fully 
to its service; and who are quite willing to bear any reproach 
it may bring. 

Are you endeavoring from day to day to vindicate the 
Divine character and to make known God's righteous 
ways? Are you diligently studying to make yourself 
thoroughly familiar with the Truth, so that you may 
indeed be a living epistle known and read of all men 
within the circle of your influence? Are you indeed a 
workman that need not be ashamed (2 Tim. 2:15)? 
Are you of those who have really given themselves to 
the Lord, saying truthfully to Him: 
"Take myself— I will to be 
Ever, only, all for Thee"? 

If so, you are just narrow minded enough to say, 
"This one thing I do; and I make everything else bend 
to this one thing of showing forth God's praises and of 
helping others into His marvelous light; and to this end 
I cultivate and use what talents I possess as a wise steward 
of my Heavenly Father." 

Dearly beloved, we impose neither vows nor bondage 
upon each other, but the call has its own limitations; the 
Master has directed us to teach all nations (for the Gospel 
is no longer confined to the Jewish nation), not astronomy 
nor geology nor any of the vain philosophies about which 
the world speculate, but— "Observe all things whatsoever 
I have commanded you."— Matt. 28:20. 

This is what the Apostle Paul did. Hear him in his 
zeal for this one thing to which he had devoted his life: 
"And I, brethren, when I came unto you, came not 
with the excellency of speech or of wisdom, declaring 
unto you the mystery of God; for I determined 
not to know anything among you save Jesus Christ and 
Him crucified. [I riveted your attention on this one 
thing! I kept this one thing continually before you.]... 



And my speech and my preaching were not with enticing 
words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the 
Spirit and power [of the Truth], that your faith should 
not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of 
God."-I Cor. 2:1-5. 

St. Paul was an outspoken, uncompromising teacher. 
When he knew that he had the Truth, he spoke it with 
confidence, and boldly declared that everything contrary 
to it is false doctrine. He also taught believers that 
it was not only their privilege, but their duty to be established 
in the faith, to know on the evidence of God's 
Word, why they believed, and to be able to give to every 
man that inquired a reason for the hope that was in them. 

Let it be so with us also. Each consecrated believer 

R5045 : page 195 

should ask himself, "How carefully have I studied that 

which I recognize as Divine Truth? How fully capable 

am I of handling the Sword of the Spirit?" Few indeed 

are those who can say they have fully digested and assimilated 

all they have received; and that they have let 

none of these things slip from memory; that they have so 

treasured it up in their hearts that it is their meditation 

by day and by night; that they have a ready answer— a 

"Thus saith the Lord"— for every man that asks them a 

reason for the hope that is in them, concerning any point 

of doctrine; that they can clearly and intelligently portray 

the Divine Plan, quote the Divine authority for each successive 

step of it, and, if need be, point out its place in 

the Divine system of types. To gain such proficiency in 

the Word is the work of a lifetime; but every day should 

see a closer approximation to that proficiency, and will if 

we are faithful students and faithful servants of the 

Truth. 

If all the consecrated were thus busily engaged in 
putting on the armor of God, and in proving it by actual 
use in zealous endeavor to herald the Truth and to help 
others to stand, there would be no time left for even 
good temperance reform work, nor for work among the 
slums of the great cities, nor for the doctrine of 
healing, nor any such things. We have no consecrated 
time for these matters, which are only side issues and not 
harmful in themselves, except as they divert attention 
and consume time which has been consecrated to another 
and higher use. All these works will be effectually 
accomplished in the "Times of Restitution" (Acts 3:19-22), 
now in the near future. Besides, there are 
others engaged in these works; we recognize and 
seek to accomplish the work set before us in the Divine 
Plan. 

In all the history of the Church there has never been 
a time in which the great Adversary has been so active in 
diverting attention from the Truth by introducing unprofitable 
and irrelevant questions as at present. Just now, 
when the exaltation and glory of the Church are soon to 



be accomplished, and when the faithful are about to be 
received into the joy of their Lord, Satan is resorting to 
every device in order to beguile them of their reward and 
to frustrate this feature of the Divine Plan. 

But really to frustrate any part of the Divine Plan is 
impossible. God has purposed to take out from among 
men a "little flock," "a people for His name"; and such 
a company is assuredly being gathered. Yet whether all 
those now in the race for the prize will surely be of that 
company, is still an open question. Take heed, beloved, 
that no man take thy crown. (Rev. 3:11.) If any come 
short of their privileges and prove unworthy of the rich 

R5046 : page 195 

inheritance, there are others who will quickly fill their 
places. 

Our observation of those consecrated ones who have 
permitted other themes than this "Gospel of the Kingdom" 
to engross time and attention, leads us to advise such to 
be very jealous in husbanding time and talent for the 
ministry of the Gospel, leaving all subjects outside of this, 
however interesting they may be, to those who prefer to 
devote time to them now; and to the future life for ourselves, 
when all knowledge shall be ours. We have invariably 
observed that those who, for any avoidable cause, 
have turned aside from the true and only Gospel, are 
quickly turned out of the way or greatly hindered in their 
course toward the "prize" of our "high calling." 

May we, dear brethren, be able truthfully to express 
our position in the words of the Apostle: "This one thing 
I do; forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching 
forth unto those things which are before, I press toward 
the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in 
Christ Jesus"; "I determined not to know anything among 
you, save Jesus Christ, and Him crucified."— Phil. 3:13,14; 
I Cor. 2:2. 



R5046 : page 195 

CHRIST MADE A CURSE FOR ISRAEL 

IT HAS ESCAPED the attention of many 
Bible Students that, while the Israelites had 
many advantages every way under their 
Law Covenant (Rom. 3:1,2), yet each one 
who failed to meet all the requirements of 
that Law Covenant came under a curse, or 
sentence, not upon individuals of other 
nations. Thus it is written, "Cursed is every 
one [every Israelite] that continueth not in 
all the words of the Law [Covenant] to 
do them."-Gal. 3:10. 
The Apostle shows that this curse was upon only 



those who were under that Covenant, saying, "What 
things soever the Law [Covenant] saith, it saith unto them 
who are under the Law [Covenant.]" (Rom. 3:19.) Moses 
also made the same statement— "The Lord our God made 
a Covenant with us in Horeb. The Lord made not this 
Covenant with our fathers, but with us, even us who are 
all of us here alive this day." (Deut. 5:2,3.) Indeed, 
no other arrangement would have been just, for the 
blessings of that Covenant and its promises of life were 
to the one nation. (Rom. 9:4.) How, then, could its 
curse extend beyond the nation which enjoyed its favors 
and privileges? 

The blessings of that Law Covenant were earthly, and 
so also were its curses; with one exception, noted further 
along, neither blessings nor curses related to the everlasting 
future. The future had already been determined 
for them and for all the race of Adam, in the death 
sentence pronounced in Eden. Nothing short of the 
ransom price— the corresponding price— which our Lord 
gave long afterwards, could set aside that original 
sentence, and secure for mankind a complete release from 
the sentence of death. The sin-offerings of Israel's Day 
of Atonement were not of permanent value, but only for 
a year in advance, and were, therefore, repeated yearly. 

THE LAW COVENANT GUARANTEED LIFE TO ONLY 

ONE MAN 

The blessings and curses of the Law Covenant were 
very particularly explained to Israel. (See Deut. 28, 
entire chapter.) This Covenant included every member 
of the nation of Israel, so that they shared in common the 
blessings or the curses. There was one provision, however, 
for an individual, namely, that the man who would 
fully obey all the requirements of the Law should live— 
be guaranteed lasting life. (Lev. 18:5.) Even if Israel 
may have imagined it possible for all or for many of the 
nation to thus gain life everlasting, we can see that God 
never had any such expectation concerning them. He 
knew from the beginning what He has taught us by 
experience, as well as by the inspired words of the 
Apostles, that "By the deeds of the Law shall no flesh 
[i.e., none of the fallen race, needing justification] be 
justified in God's sight."— Rom. 3:20. 

The Man Christ Jesus, who obeyed the Law absolutely, 
was the One in the Divine purpose for whom the provision 
was made, that "He that doeth these things shall live." 

R5046 : page 196 

Consequently, He had a right to life everlasting, and 
therefore might have asked for more than twelve legions 
of angels to defend Him from those who sought His life. 
Had He done so, He would have received them. (Matt. 26:53.) 
But He laid down His life. The one death, 
begun at Jordan and "finished" three and a half years 



later at Calvary, accomplished two things: one for Israel 
only, the other for the whole world. 

Since the children of Israel, as well as the other nations, 
were Adam's posterity, they in common with others 
shared his sentence of death, and were redeemed by our 
Lord's offering of Himself a sin-offering and corresponding 
price for Adam and those who lost life in Adam. 
(Rom. 5:12,18.) But since Israel alone, and no other 
nation or family or people of earth, had been brought 
under the terms of the Law Covenant made with them at 
Mt. Sinai, therefore only Israelites needed to be "redeemed 
from the curse of the Law [Covenant]."— 
Gal. 3:13. 

That the one Man, Christ Jesus, could justly redeem 
our race is stated by the Apostle, and is clearly evident 
when we see that all men were sentenced in the one man 
Adam; but how could one man redeem the multitudinous 
nation of Israel from the curse of their Law Covenant? 

MOSES THE TYPICAL FATHER OF ISRAEL 

We answer that in connection with Israel's Covenant 
there is a point that few have noticed. It is that God 
dealt with only one man in connection with the making 
of that Law Covenant; and that man was Moses, who 
stood in the position of a father to the whole nation, the 
nation being regarded and treated as children under age. 

See Moses' own words regarding the matter: "And 
Moses said unto the Lord, Wherefore hast Thou afflicted 
Thy servant? And wherefore have I not found favor 
in Thy sight that Thou layest the burden of all this 
people upon me? Have I conceived all this people? 
Have I begotten them, that Thou shouldest say unto me, 
Carry them in thy bosom, as a nursing father bearing the 
sucking child, unto the land which Thou swearest unto 
their fathers? Whence should I have flesh to give unto all 
this people? for they weep unto me, saying, Give us 
flesh that we may eat. I am not able to bear all this 
people alone, because it is too heavy for me. And if Thou 
deal thus with me, kill me, I pray Thee, out of hand, if I 
have found favor in Thy sight; and let me not see my 
wretchedness."— Num. 11:11-15. 

The Lord talked with Moses in the Mount. The Lord 
gave the tables of the Law to Moses. And Moses spoke 
to the people, gave them the Law and bound them by the 
terms of the Law Covenant. 

"Moses alone shall come near the Lord."— Exod. 24:2. 

"As the Lord spoke unto Moses, so did the children of 
Israel."— Num. 5:4. 

"The people cried unto Moses; and Moses prayed unto 
the Lord. "-Num. 11:2. 

God "sent Moses His servant."— Psa. 105:26. 

"They envied Moses also in the camp."— Psa. 106:16. 

"He [God] said that He would destroy them, had not 
Moses, His chosen, stood before Him in the breach."— 
Psa. 106:23. 



"Remember ye the Law of Moses My servant."— 
Mai. 4:4. 

"Moses. ..hath in every city them that preach him." 
-Acts 15:21. 

"Did not Moses give you the Law?"— John 7:19. 

"What did Moses command you?"— Mark 10:3. 

"One accuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye trust."— 
John 5:45. 

All Israel were "baptized unto [into] Moses, in the 
cloud and in the sea."— I Cor. 10:2. 

"He that despised Moses' Law died without mercy."— 
Heb. 10:28. 

"The Law was given by Moses, but grace and Truth 
came by Jesus Christ."— John 1:17. 

So thoroughly was the one man Moses the representative 
and typical father of the nation of Israel that God 
could and did propose its destruction and the fulfilment 
of all His engagements with Moses' family instead. 
(Exod. 32:10,31,32.) It was thus, as God's representative 
on the one hand, and as Israel's representative on 
the other, that Moses could be and was the mediator of 
the Law Covenant between God and that nation. 

CHRIST THE "EVERLASTING FATHER" 

When the Man Christ Jesus, by full obedience to the 
Law Covenant, became entitled to life everlasting under 
its provisions, He had attained the right to "Moses' seat," 
the right to supersede Moses as the Lawgiver and representative 
of the nation. Of Him Moses bore witness 
saying, "A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto 
you of your brethren, like unto me; Him shall ye hear in 
all things. "-Acts 3:22; Deut. 18:18,19. 

By fulfilling the requirements of the Law Covenant 
and by His obedience even unto death, Christ became the 
heir of its promise of life, and the prospective Mediator 
of the prospective New Covenant, based upon that better 
and everlasting sacrifice for sins, which, therefore, needed 
not to be repeated yearly, and was effective, not for 
Israel only, but for all the families of the earth, for "this 
Man," "the Man Christ Jesus, gave Himself a Ransom 
for all." (I Tim. 2:6.) Hence this Gospel of the New 
Covenant was for the Jew first and also for the Greek 
(or Gentile). Thus the one sacrifice, finished at Calvary, 
did not only a special work for Israel, but also a general 
work of redemption for the world, including Israel, which 
suretied the New Covenant and in due time will make it 

R5047 : page 196 

operative for all mankind. 

Thus seen, the expression, "Christ is the end [fulfilment] 
of the Law [Covenant] for righteousness [justification] 
to every one that believeth" (Rom. 10:4), can 
apply only to Jews who have by faith accepted Christ. It 
cannot apply to others— either to those who never were 



Jews and who consequently were never under that Covenant, 
or to those who still trust in Moses' Covenant and 
who are still vainly seeking life by obedience to its 
provisions, law, etc. 

ISRAEL NOW UNDER THE CURSES OF THE LAW 

It is a common mistake to suppose the Scriptures to 
teach that the Law Covenant died, or was destroyed by 
our Lord. It became dead in the sense that its proffer of 
life ceased when our Lord Jesus fulfilled the requirements 
of the Law Covenant, and inherited all of its blessings 
and life-rights; but it lives in the sense that its blessings 
and curses still cling to Israel, as so many assets and 
liabilities. Hence all the children of Jacob are still bound 
by this Law Covenant, unless they have died to it. 

Only those who realize that they cannot gain everlasting 
life through their union with Moses (the Law 
Covenant) are ready to abandon all hope of saving their 
life by that union with Moses and to become dead to all 
such expectations, and to accept the death of Christ, the 
Ransom price for Adam and all his race, as the basis of 
a new hope of a new life. Hence, only those Israelites 
who by faith reckoned themselves as hopelessly dead 
under the Law Covenant, and as risen with Christ to a 
new life secured by His sacrifice, and who in will are 

R5047 : page 197 

dead to sin— only such could be united to Christ as members 
of the "Seed" of the Abrahamic Covenant. 

Thus, according to the Apostle's reasoning, the idea 
of so blending the two Covenants that Christians are 
united to both Moses and Christ, is wholly out of the 
question. Gentiles, who never were under the Law 
Covenant, could not, of course, be released from it; and 
in order for a Jew to be released from that Covenant he 
must by faith recognize that Jesus Christ fulfilled the 
terms of the Law Covenant, and then must consecrate 
his flesh to death with Christ as reckonedly a member 
of Christ's flesh, that so doing he might be reckoned as a 
"New Creature," united to the Lord as a member of His 
spiritual Body. 

The text, "Christ is the end [or fulfilment] of the 
Law [Covenant] for righteousness to every one [under it] 
that believeth" (Rom. 10:4), does not conflict with the 
above; for only believers are specified. Eph. 2:15, "Having 
abolished in His flesh the enmity of the Law of commandments 
contained in ordinances," and Col. 2:14, refer 
to Jewish believers, for whom the handwriting of ordinances 
is blotted out, while Col. 2:20 refers to the Gentile 
converts who must become dead to the "rudiments of the 
world," before entering upon the Covenant of sacrifice, 
even as the Jews must become dead to the rudiments of 
their Law Covenant. 



ISRAEL'S PRESENT EXPERIENCE A PART OF THEIR 
COVENANT 

That the Law Covenant with Israel is still binding 
upon that nation is further evident from the fact that 
upon their national rejection of Christ they were nationally 
blinded until the end of the Gospel Age (Rom. 1 1 :7,25), 
and that God declares that He has not cast away His 
people of that Covenant, but that under the New Covenant 
He will open their eyes to see Christ as the only 
Door of hope, that of a new life purchased with His own 
blood. -Rom. 11:27,29; compare Deut. 30:1-9. 

Meanwhile, we have the evidence that their Covenant 
continues in force in the fact that, as a nation, they have 
for centuries been receiving the very "curses" specified 
under their Covenant. (See Deut. 28:15-67.) Verses 49-53 
describe the Roman siege, etc.; verses 64-67 describe 
the condition of Israel since. As shown in previous writings 
the Lord (Lev. 26:18-45) declared the symbolical 
"seven times," 2,520 years, of Israel's subjection to the 
Gentiles, and their deliverance— A. D. 1914. Thus their 
present experience was foretold as a part of their 
Covenant. 

Israel as a nation is still bound by that Covenant which 
they at first supposed would bring life, but which experience 
proved could bring them only death, because of 
the weakness of their flesh and their inability to fulfil its 
requirements expressed in its Law of Ten Commandments. 
There is only one door of escape from it, viz., 
Christ, and the New [Law] Covenant which is soon to 
be made with Israel. God shut them up to this one and 
only hope (Gal. 3:23), and He promises that by and by, 
when the Gospel Church, the Body of Christ, has been 
selected, He will open their blind eyes and cause them to 
see Christ in His true character— as their Redeemer 
from sin and their Deliverer from death and their Covenant 
of death.-Rom. 11:25-29. 

CHRIST MADE A CURSE FOR ISRAEL ONLY 

As to the significance of the statement, "Christ hath 
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a 
curse for us, for it is written, Cursed is every one that 
hangeth on a tree" (Gal. 3:13), the Apostle in this text 
is speaking, not to Christians in general, but to those 
Christians who had passed from Moses into Christ— out 
of the Law Covenant into the Covenant of sacrifice with 
Christ, as members of His Body. It would not be true to 
say that Christ redeemed us Gentiles from the curse of 
the Law, for we were never under the Law. Those, 
therefore, who were under the curse of the Law were 
Jews. The Apostle classifies himself with Israel, some 
of whom were in Galatia, some in Palestine, etc. "Christ 
hath been made a curse for us; for it is written, Cursed 
is every one that hangeth on a tree." 

The particular sense in which Christ redeemed the 



Jews was as a nation and not as individuals. The whole 

nation was involved in the contract made at Sinai. Consequently, 

in order to meet all the requirements of the 

people as a whole, the One who would redeem Israel 

from the baneful effects of the Law Covenant must suffer 

the extreme penalty imposed by that Covenant. Therefore 

to redeem Israel from that condemnation our Lord 

had to be crucified. 

As for the remainder of mankind, they suffer from 
the sentence of death that came upon Adam, but no particular 
form of death was implied. The Jews alone needed 
this particular form of death for their release. The whole 
nation was under this Law Covenant because the contract 
was made with them as a nation and through one 
mediator, Moses. Our Lord will redeem the whole nation 
from their failure to keep that Law, from the condemnation 
of that Law, by instituting the New Covenant, by 
taking over into the New Covenant all those who were 
under the old Law Covenant. 

That New Covenant will go into operation in due time. 
Christ has already redeemed the Jews and all mankind in 
the sense that He has laid down the Ransom price; but 
He has not yet redeemed them in the sense of recovering 
them nor even in the sense of applying that price. At 
the end of this Age He will apply the price for Israel 
and the world; and then the New Covenant arrangements 
will go into effect for the blessing of all who come under 
its regulations. 



R5050 : page 197 

BEYOND THE VEIL 

These stammering lips, that now 
So vainly strive to speak Thy praise- 
Beyond the veil 
Shall make the heaven of heavens resound 
Through endless days. 

These yearning eyes, that strain 

To catch by faith a glimpse of Thee— 

Beyond the veil 
Shall see Thee as Thou art through all 

Eternity. 

These trembling hands, these feet, 
That seek to serve so earnestly— 

Beyond the veil 
Shall for Thy Kingdom's glorious work 

Empowered be. 

And this poor, throbbing heart, 
That cannot now unfold its love- 
Beyond the veil 



Shall bloom and shower its fragrance through 
The heaven above. 

My soul, that neither seeks 

Nor findeth here its perfect rest- 
Beyond the veil 

Shall in Thy likeness wake and be 
Forever blest! 

GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT. 



R5049 : page 198 

EMBRYO KINGDOM PARABLES 

-MARK 4:26-32; MATTHEW 13:33 -JULY 21.- 

Text: "Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done on 
earth as it is done in heaven."— Matt. 6:10. 

MANY OF US in the past have overlooked the 
fact that nearly all of the teachings of the 
Redeemer appertain to the Kingdom— His 
Messianic Kingdom. Some of us indeed had 
gotten the unscriptural thought that Messiah's 
Kingdom would consist merely of a 
sovereignty in the hearts of His followers 
and in the present life. 

Now we see the real import and connection 
of the Great Teacher's numerous utterances 
on this subject. As He taught us to pray, "Thy 
Kingdom come, Thy will be done on earth, even as it is 
done in heaven," He meant that we should have in mind 
God's glorious promise that eventually, through Messiah's 
Kingdom, ignorance, sin and death will all be overthrown, 
and the willing and obedient of mankind will be released 
from these until "every knee shall bow and every tongue 
confess" to the glory of God. 

Our Lord meant that we should connect this Kingdom 
with the great promise made to Abraham, "In thy Seed 
shall all the families of the earth be blessed." The Master's 
teachings and the Message which He commissioned 
us to give in His name is the Gospel of the Kingdom— 
the Message of coming glory, and the Message that now 
God is selecting a "little flock" to be the spiritual Seed of 
Abraham, joint-heirs with Jesus in the Throne of that 
Kingdom. Paul refers to this in Galatians 3:29: "And if 
ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs 
according to the promise." 

Today's study sets before us a number of Jesus' 
parables respecting the Kingdom. The majority of these 
refer to the Kingdom class of the present time rather 
than to the Kingdom in its fully developed state during 
the thousand years of His glory. All of God's consecrated 
people, begotten of the Holy Spirit during this Age— since 



Pentecost— constitute together the Kingdom class, the 
Kingdom in embryo— unfinished, undeveloped, incomplete. 
Some of these embryo members of the Kingdom may yet 
fail to make their calling and election sure, and they may 
become "castaways" as respects the glory and honor to 
which they have been called. 

THE KINGDOM DEVELOPMENT SLOW 

The first illustration of our lesson is that God's Kingdom 
in its present embryotic condition is of slow, gradual, 
methodical development, covering the entire period of this 
Gospel Age. It is like seed cast into the ground, which 
brings its maturity after many days and varied experiences 
—when it is finally harvested. Jesus and the Apostles 
did the seed sowing, not only for their own day but for 
the whole wheat class developed throughout this Age. 
And as Jesus explained in another parable, "The Harvest 
is the end of the Age." The gathering for the heavenly 
garner will be accomplished by the First Resurrection. 

LIKE A MUSTARD SEED 

The different parables do not view the embryo Kingdom 
from the same standpoint. It is because it may be 
viewed from such a variety of angles that so many 
parables are given us. Just so we might take various 
photographs of a building. One might show the eastern 
side, another the western, another the front elevation, 
another the floor-plan, and another show it with its scaffolding 
Or, if a concrete building, the frame work might 
be pictured, inside of which the concrete is cast. 

The parable of the mustard seed appears to represent 
the Kingdom from the viewpoint of the world— as the 
nominal church, developed from the original little seed 
of the true Gospel. From that little seed we have a great 
institution today with many denominational branches. 
But alas! its thrifty development has invited into its 
branches the fowls of the air, which the Lord elsewhere 
describes as representing the Wicked One and his angels 
—Satan and his representatives— who of course should 
have no place in the Church; and they would have no 

R5050 : page 198 

place in it if the Church were loyal and zealous enough 
to proclaim only the true Gospel and the narrow way of 
self-denial. 

Indeed, it is the neglect to preach this Gospel of the 
"narrow way" that has brought such prosperity to nominal 
Christianity and made it a desirable place for the fowls 
of the air— Satan and his deluded ones— to lodge in its 
branches, to be the real life of Ecclesiasticism. This seems 
to be the same picture which the same Great Teacher 
gives us in Revelation 18:2. There we read that the 
nominal systems are represented symbolically as Babylon; 



and there we read, "She hath become the hold of every 
foul spirit and the cage of every unclean and hateful bird." 
The word "cage" would seem to imply that these unclean 
birds are considered very desirable, and are held 
on to by nominal Christianity— probably because regarded 
as being amongst their best paying members and because 
of having the most attractions. 

PARABLE OF THE LEAVEN 

Throughout the Scriptures leaven is used as the symbol 
of sin. Thus when Jesus in His purity was to be 
symbolized as the "bread from heaven," the Jews were 
directed to use unleavened bread. Again, at their annual 
Passover season, the Jews were directed to cleanse their 
houses of leaven, to burn it up, to destroy it. Here again 
leaven was a symbol of sin, corruption. St. Paul, commenting 
on this, writes to the Church, "Purge out, therefore, 
the old leaven [sin, malice, hatred, strife, etc.], that 
you may be a new lump"— that you may be, with Christ, 
the one unleavened loaf. It is of this Loaf that he declares, 
"For we, being many, are One Loaf, and one Body; 
for we are all partakers of that One Loaf."— I Cor. 10:17. 

It is true that in one of the official sacrifices bread was 
to be baked with leaven; but this, we believe, was for the 
very purpose of symbolizing or representing us, the 
Church, and the fact that we were by nature sinners, children 
of wrath, even as others, and that the baking would 
arrest the corrupting influences of the leaven; and this 
baking represented symbolically the experiences through 
which the Church must pass in order that sinful and corrupting 
tendencies might be completely destroyed in us. 

In this parable our Lord represents a woman mixing 
leaven with a family baking of meal, with the result that 
the whole mass was leavened. Consequently, if any of 
the family desired pure, unleavened bread, it would be 
unobtainable, because the leaven pervaded the entire baking. 
What does this represent? We reply that in Scriptural 
symbolism a woman represents an ecclesiastical system. 
The woman in the parable represents a system organized 
and in power at an early date, and possessed of 
the pure meal— the pure food provided by the Lord for the 
household of faith. 

The woman mixed leaven, error, false doctrine, with 
all the meal, with all the food supplied. Not a particle 
of it was left uncontaminated. The result has been indigestion. 
The Word of God, originally pure, is no longer 
accepted. The leaven, or fermentation, has spread so that 

R5050 : page 199 

today the entire mass of theological doctrine is putrid and 
offensive to all Christian people of all denominations. 

The parable was a prophecy of what has occurred. It 
is time all true Christians were hearkening back from the 
creeds of the Dark Ages to the Words of Jesus, the Apostles 



and the Prophets. We are glad to note that "His 
Holiness, the Pope," is prominent amongst those who are 
pointing back again to the teachings of the Bible, as being 
the unadulterated Word of God, which alone "is able to 
make us wise unto salvation," and by which alone "the 
man of God may be thoroughly furnished unto every good 
work."— 2 Tim. 3:15-17. 



R5048 : page 199 

GOD'S WHEAT FIELD 

-MATTHEW 13:24-30,36-43. -JULY 28.- 

Text: "Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in 
bundles to burn them, but gather the wheat into My Garner.' 
Verse 30. 

OUR International Sunday School Lessons are 

specially helpful this year. We are glad 

that the selection contains so many lessons 

on the Kingdom. This topic heretofore has 

not had sufficient consideration, considering 

its prominence in the Bible— from the promise 

made to Abraham, recorded in Genesis, 

to the records of Revelation, representing 

the full establishment of the Kingdom, its 

binding of Satan, and its thousand years of 

prosperity, resulting in the bringing of "every creature in 

heaven and in earth" to worship and praise the Almighty, 

and in the abolishment of sin, tears and death.— Gen. 22:18; 

Rev. 20:2; 21:4; 5:13. 

Today's study is another of the Kingdom parables, and 
one of the few which the Master particularly explained, 
and in harmony with which all the other parables are to 
be interpreted. Again it is the embryo Kingdom that is 
pictured, and not the Kingdom in glory; in other words, 
this parable also relates to this Gospel Age, and the work 
of selecting the Church. It therefore pictures the entire 
Age from start to finish. 

"THE FIELD IS THE WORLD" 

Our Lord's personal ministry was to the Jews only, 
and likewise His disciples labored only with the Jews for 
the fixed period of time— until the end of "the seventy 
weeks" of the promise of Divine favor to that nation. 
Those symbolic weeks ended three and a half years after 
Jesus' crucifixion. Then the door was thrown open to 
the Gentiles also, Cornelius being the first Convert. ~ 
Acts 10. 

This parable also shows us the very commencement of 
the Lord's call for His Bride from amongst all nations, 
and not from the Jews alone, although in the Divine Plan 



it was necessary that they should have the first opportunity. 
So St. Paul declares, saying to the Jews, "It was 
necessary that the Gospel should be preached first unto 
you, but seeing ye reject it,...lo, we turn to the 
Gentiles." (Acts 13:46.) The entire world constituted the 
"field" for the sowing of the "good seed," and the "good 
seed" is not any and every kind of a message, but is 
strictly defined, "the Gospel of the Kingdom." 

Jesus and the Apostles sowed this "good seed," and all 
His true followers since have been authorized to continue 
the work in His name, and have more or less done so. 
But the Adversary, Satan, as pointed out here in the 
parable, brought in false doctrines, false teachings, a 
different kind of seed from the Kingdom "seed," and 
sowed this everywhere over the wheat field. The result 
is that today the "tares" are so plentiful, and so conspicuous 
that they think they are the "wheat," and the 
world in general so considers them. 

The wheat class are considered "a peculiar people." 
Their hopes and ambitions in life are toward bearing good 

R5049 : page 199 

fruit, and "showing forth the praises of Him who called 
them out of darkness." Of their good fruits the Apostle 
mentions meekness and humility, and these tend to bow 
their heads, while the "tares" stand proudly up, erect, in 
the display of their "form of godliness," which, however, 
lacks the power. 

"LET BOTH GROW TOGETHER" 

The Lord knew all the time what Satan would do in 
the way of perverting the Truth through false doctrines, 
which would tend to make void and belittle the Gospel 
of the Kingdom and the children of the Kingdom; but He 
allowed the matter to go on, fully assured that He would 
have in the end the crop which He desired, and very content 
to allow a great lesson to be taught by the presence 
of the "tares" and the ultimate treatment accorded the 
"wheat." 

The Lord could have hindered the Adversary from 
bringing in the false doctrines in the early centuries, or 
He could have separated centuries ago between the wheat 
and tare classes, but this was not according to His intention, 
as the parable shows. He purposed to "let both grow 
together until the Harvest." So it has been true that 
Christians and imitation Christians have lived side by side 
in the same city, in the same house, and oftentimes in the 
same family— the one the result of the true Gospel Message 
of the Kingdom, leading to a full consecration and 
begetting of the Holy Spirit, and to the entrance upon a 
new life; the other with merely "a form of godliness," 
intermixed with worldly wisdom, earthly ambitions and 
selfish desires. 

But the tares are not to grow on forever. Just as 



surely as there was a beginning of this Age, there will be 
an ending. As surely as there was a sowing time for the 
good seed, there will be a reaping time, a Harvest time. 
In the Common Version the Words, "The Harvest is the 
end of the world," have been seriously misunderstood. It 
does not mean the end of time, nor the end of the earth- 
its destruction— nor the end of Divine favor. It merely 
means the end of the present Age— the close of the present 
dispensation. This Age will close when it has accomplished 
its intended work— when the full number of God's 
elect shall have been found faithful and ready for the 
"garner." 

"IN THE TIME OF THE HARVEST" 

This expression signifies that the Harvest of this Age 
will not be an instantaneous work, but a gradual one, 
requiring time. There is good reason for believing that 
the Harvest of this Age is a period of forty years, as the 
Harvest of the Jewish Age was of that length. In this 
time of the Harvest two things will be accomplished: (1) 
The tares will be gathered into bundles, ready for the 
burning— destruction. (2) The wheat, at the same time, 
will be gathered into the garner— the heavenly garner. 
This gathering into the heavenly garner is elsewhere represented 
as being the change from earthly to heavenly 
conditions, which will be accomplished for the Bride class 
in the end of the harvest, by the first resurrection. These 

R5049 : page 200 

will "all die like men." At the appointed time their resurrection 
change will take place and be invisible to men— 
"sown in weakness, raised in power; sown in dishonor, 
raised in glory; sown an animal body, raised a spirit 
body"; "They shall be priests of God and of Christ, and 
shall reign with Him a thousand years."— I Cor. 15:42-44; 
Rev. 20:6. 

BURNING OF THE TARES. 

"They shall gather out of His Kingdom all things 
which offend, and them which do iniquity;. ..there 
shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth." Let us remember 
that these tares are not all of the world of mankind, but 
merely that portion of them associated with the Kingdom 
class— that portion which now verily believe that they are 
God's people, as the Pharisees considered themselves in 
the Harvest of the Jewish Age. There will be two classes 
amongst these tares: one class, "doers of iniquity (inequity, 
unrighteousness), the other class, those that have 
caused others to stumble. Doubtless this will include 
many teachers and preachers, and many doers of wonderful 
works. 

But we must not forget that we are considering a 
parable, and that the "tares" are symbolical, and likewise 



the "furnace" and the "fire." The interpretation is that, 
in the end of this Age, the Harvest time, there will be a 
great "time of trouble" for all nations, society, governments, 
financial institutions, etc. The wheat class will 
be saved from that "time of trouble" by the resurrection 
change. But the tares will not be saved from it; they 
will be cast into the trouble and have their portion with 
the hypocrites. 

That trouble will not last forever. Many Scriptures 
seem to show that it will be terrific but of very short 
duration. It will be on the earth, and not in some far-off 
place. When the fire of that great day of anarchy and 
trouble shall cease to burn, there will be no more tares, 
there will be no more people having mere forms of godliness 
and pretensions for the Kingdom, begotten of error. 
All humanity will be greatly humbled, and, according to 
the Scriptures, ready and anxious for Messiah's Kingdom, 
which will then be established. It will be "the desire of 
all nations." (Hag. 2:7). Those formerly tares, as well as 
the remainder of the groaning creation, will welcome it 
and its blessings. In that Kingdom the righteous, the 
garnered, glorified wheat class "shall shine forth as the 
sun" for the blessing of all the families of the earth.— 
Matt. 13:43; Gal. 3:29. 



R5047 : page 200 

THE KINGDOM A PRIZE 

-MATTHEW 13:44-53.-AUGUST 4.- 

Text:— "Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and His righteousness, 
and all these things shall be added unto you."— Matt. 6:33. 

TODAY WE HAVE further precious lessons 

from the Great Teacher respecting His 

Kingdom. The parable of the "Treasure 

hid in the Field," and the parable of the 

"Pearl of Great Price," both picture to us 

the great value of the Kingdom of Glory 

which is ultimately to be established 

amongst men for the blessing of the world. 

These parables also furnish lessons of what 

it will cost to secure a share, a place in that 

Kingdom. A third parable of the lesson treats of the embryo 

Kingdom; that is to say, the Parable of the "Net 

Cast into the Sea," pictures the condition of this present 

Age, during which the Elect, or Kingdom class, the Bride, 

is being found and gathered by the Lord's providences. 

"TREASURE HID IN THE FIELD" 

This is not one of the parables which Jesus expounded. 
His people, therefore, are left to exercise their judgment 



of its meaning, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit and 
the light shed upon it by other Scriptures. Indeed, there 
might be more than one application of it correct. For 
instance, we might apply the parable to our Lord Jesus 
and say that He bought the whole world at the cost of all 
He had, and that He purchased the world because of the 
"treasure" which it contained. And that treasure might 
consist of a variety of treasures of different values— for 
instance, the Church, the Bride class, the Lord's special 
"treasure," and such of the world as will ultimately receive 
and be blessed by the Messianic Kingdom. 

But our preference of thought is that the Great 
Teacher referred, not to Himself at all, but to those whom 
He instructed. By virtue of His own covenant of sacrifice, 
the Kingdom was already promised to Him, and He, 
in turn, in the Father's name, was inviting those who had 
the ears to hear, and heart to appreciate, to become members 
of His Bride class— members of His Kingdom class. 

He recommends that these should view the Kingdom 
after the illustration of this parable. Suppose in their 
journeying they saw a field for sale at a certain price, and 
suppose, upon examination of it, they found it to contain 
a great treasure. The treasure might consist of very 
excellent soil, especially suited to their purpose, or it might 

R5048 : page 200 

consist of a valuable vein of precious metal, or it might 
consist of money buried long centuries ago and forgotten, 
and not belonging to the owner of the field more than to 
others who might find it. In such a case, the parable suggests, 
any one of ordinary intelligence would be willing to 
invest everything that he possessed to acquire the title. 

So the Master declared to those who heard Him then, 
and to us who receive His words now, that He has information 
to give respecting a Great Treasure, a Priceless 
Treasure, which can be obtained, but only by the expenditure 
of great energy and the investment of everything of 
value. The Great Treasure is the share in the Messianic 
Kingdom— that by accepting the terms of discipleship we 
may become not only sons of God, but, if children, then 
heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord 
to His heavenly inheritance. This inheritance was the 
same as was promised to the Seed of Abraham, and we 
acquired an interest or share in it, not by being the actual 
seed of Abraham and the actual heirs to the Kingdom, 
but by becoming Messiah's Bride and Joint-heir. 

When we think how much time and energy are put 
forth, and how much money and influence are expended 
to obtain some little, petty earthly honor of worldly renown 
and glory, and when we reflect that these at most 
will last but a few years and be unsatisfactory at best, 
then we can appreciate the better the glory, honor and 
immortality which God has in reservation for the "called 
and chosen and faithful," the Bride, the Lamb's Wife. 



A PEARL OF GREAT VALUE 

In the days of our Saviour pearls were represented 
amongst the most precious and most desirable of jewels, 
and the larger and more nearly perfect the pearl the 
greater its value. The Great Teacher used this familiar 
matter as the basis for a lesson on the value of the Kingdom. 

R5048 : page 201 

The Merchant of the Parable found a Pearl so 

superior in every respect to all other pearls that he considered 

it cheap to give everything that he possessed to 

become the owner of that Pearl. 

This, said the Master, illustrates the value of the Kingdom, 
with its glory, honor and immortality, which I am 
inviting an elect, saintly little flock to share with Me. 
Those who prize it properly will show their appreciation 
by the amount they will be willing and glad to pay for it. 
Whether a man be wealthy or poor, learned or ignorant, 
influential or otherwise, the cost of this Kingdom Pearl of 
great value will be— his all. It cannot be had for less. 

The wealthiest or most talented person in the world 
could not obtain a share in that Kingdom if he kept back 
one single atom of his possessions; the price of the Kingdom 
is self-sacrifice, even unto death, and nothing less 
will secure it. Nor would any sacrifice that we could 
make secure a share in this Kingdom for us, except as our 
sacrifice would first be made acceptable in God's sight 
through the precious merit of our Redeemer's sacrifice, 
which He finished at Calvary. 

THE PARABLE OF A FISH NET 

We are not to think of the Kingdom as like a net, but 
to understand that the embryo Kingdom resembles a fishing 
experience with a net, in which were gathered all 
kinds of fish, which were brought to shore and sorted. 
This is a parable of the embryo Kingdom because it relates 
to a work done in this Age, in connection with the 
finding of the "little flock" who will constitute the Kingdom 
in glory. The Lord during this Age has not been 
fishing for all kinds of fish; He has not been seeking for 
all kinds of people. He has been calling, drawing especially, 
and dealing with, only the elect, only the saintly. 

But, incidentally, a variety of other kinds of fish have 
gotten into the Gospel Net, some from worldly ambitions, 
some because religious systems are a good matrimonial 
field, others because of social privileges and standing, 
others because they desire to breathe a moral atmosphere, 
others because they would use religion as a cloak for business 
enterprises, etc. But the suitable fish, which the Lord 
is seeking, and who alone will constitute the Kingdom 
class, are those who hear His Message with joy and count 
the cost and appreciate the situation and desire to be 
"bond servants of the Lord Jesus Christ." They are willing 



to suffer with Him now that they may be glorified 
together with Him in His Kingdom. 

The parable tells us that "when the net was full it was 
drawn ashore" and the fish sorted. This evidently signifies 
that there will come a time in the end of this Age when 
the Lord will have gathered a sufficient number of saintly 
ones to serve His purpose— to complete the number foreordained 
by the Father to be members of the elect Church 
in glory. Then the fishing will cease. Who can say that 
the opportunity for entering the "net" as one of the true 
"fish" of the kind the Lord is seeking may not be almost 
at an end? Who can say that the Gospel Net, with its 
full assortment of churchianity of every style, will not 
soon be drawn ashore that the suitable, the elect, may be 
gathered into the Kingdom? 

The unsuitable "fish" of this parable correspond with 
the "tares" of the parable considered a week ago. The 
"furnace of fire" will be the same "time of trouble" which 
will come upon the whole world of mankind very shortly. 
The unsuitable fish in the net are all church members— 
the unprofessing world are not represented in the parable 
at all. 

Jesus asked His disciples if they understood the parable. 
They answered, Yes, and He told them to consider 
His parables as a householder would consider his reserve 
of food supplies, from which from time to time truths 
"both new and old" would be brought. 

Our text emphasizes this study. If the Kingdom is the 
Pearl, and the Treasure, which the Master indicated— if 
we believe His testimony, then by all means let us show 
our faith, not merely by professions, but in every act and 
word. Let us seek the Kingdom as the pre-eminent matter 
of our lives, in comparison with which all other things are 
inferior, and, as St. Paul declared, "not worthy to be compared." 
If seeking the Kingdom seems to hinder some of 
our earthly prospects, so much the better. The Master 
said it must cost us our all. Our earthly considerations we 
have left in His hands. Let Him apportion our earthly 
blessings according to His wisdom of what will be most 
helpful to us in making our "calling and election sure" to 
a place in the Kingdom. 



R5050 : page 201 

SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS 
RELATIVE TO ANSWERING A FOOL 

Question.— Please explain: "Answer not a fool according 
to his folly, lest thou be like unto him. Answer 
a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own 
conceit."— Prov. 26:4,5. 

Answer.— When talking to any one who speaks foolishly, 
do not talk foolishly in return. You dishonor yourself. 



In the second case: "Answer a fool according to his 
folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit," would signify 
that you do him a service if you show him the folly of his 
position, thereby kindly helping him to a proper attitude 
of mind. 



ARCHANGEL SIGNIFIES HIGHEST ANGEL 

Question.— Is there, or will there be more than one 
Archangel? 

Answer.— To speak of Archangels (plural) would be 
contrary to the Scriptures. The word archangel signifies 
highest angel, the prefix arch meaning the same as 
chief; for instance, the chief of the fire department. In 
the twelfth chapter of Daniel we read (vs. 1), "And at 
that time shall Michael [the Archangel] stand up, the 
great Prince which standeth for the children of thy people." 
In the Hebrew the name Michael signifies One who 
as God, or like God. That One who is "like God," we 
understand to be the great Messiah, the Lord Jesus Himself. 
"Michael will stand up"— that is, Messiah will stand 
up, "Who standeth for the children of thy people"— that 
is, He will stand up for Israel. But He will also stand up 
for the Church, which is His Body, and for all who are 
in harmony with God, and all who will be in harmony 
with God. This will include all mankind during the Millennial 
Age. "In due time" they may be released from 
the bondage of corruption and death, and brought into 
full harmony with God. 



RANSOM AND SIN-OFFERING 

Question.— May we have a concise statement in which 
you differentiate between "Ransom" and "Sin-Offering"? 

Answer.— The word "Ransom" signifies "corresponding 
price," and indicates one feature of the Divine arrangement 
for man's recovery. As by a man sin entered 
into the world, so the recovery would be by a man's redemptive 
work. -I Cor. 15:21,22. 

The term "Sin-Offering" is used to represent the 
modus operandi by which this Ransom price will be used 

R5050 : page 202 

for the recovery of mankind. It shows the actual application 

of the Ransom price on behalf of mankind in 

securing their release from condemnation and in permitting 

the glorious New Covenant arrangement to go into 

effect. 

The Ransom price has nothing whatever to do 
with the method by which that price will be applied. 
When our Lord Jesus died, He laid down a sufficient 



price, but the application of that price is not yet completed. 
The grand outcome of the redemptive work will be seen 
in the end of the Millennial Age, when as a result of 
the application of the Ransom price there will be Christ 
and the Bride on the divine plane, the "Great Company" 
on the spirit plane, the "Ancient Worthies" in their perfected 
condition and the whole world of mankind restored 
to the perfection lost in Eden. 



RE TERM "NEW CREATION" 

Question.— Why is the term "New Creation" applied 
to the Church? 

Answer.— The Scriptures tell us that our Lord was 
the Beginning of the Divine creation, the First-born of 
every creature, the First and the Last; that the Heavenly 
Father never created any other being; and that by our 
Lord all things else were made. In other words, the 
Father's power was exercised through His Only Begotten 
Son. According to the Scriptures, man was the last of 

R5051 : page 202 

the creations in God's image. But the Heavenly Father 
has purposed the creation of an order of beings higher 
than any that has been made, and has arranged that His 
Only Begotten Son shall be the One to occupy the highest 
position in that New Creation. 

"For the joy that was set before Him" our Lord endured 
the cross, despised the shame, and then sat down 
at the right hand of the Majesty on high. Originally, He 
was the first creation. Now He was the second creation 
—the new creation, in contradistinction. And the entire 
Church has been invited to come up to this highest place, 
to be associated with Christ, to be partakers of the 
divine nature. But in order to attain to this high position, 
to be with Him, they must become dead to the earthly 
nature and its interests, its aims and its projects, and 
alive with Him beyond the veil. Jesus is the Head of 
this New Creation, of which the Church is the Body. We 
do not understand that the "Great Company" will be a 
part of the New Creation. Only the "Little Flock" will 
have the honor of being members of Christ's Body. 

Eventually, when the Divine Plan shall have reached 
its consummation, there will be Jehovah, the Head over 
all things and the Head over Christ; next will come our 
Lord and the Church which is His Body; then will come 
the various orders of angels, and lastly mankind. As the 
Apostle in his letter to the Ephesians tells us, "In the 
dispensation of the fulness of times, God will gather together 
in one all things in Christ, both which are in 
Heaven, and which are on earth, even in Him."— 
Eph. 1:9,10. 



SIN-OFFERING AND SIN-ATONEMENT 

Question.— What is the difference between Sin-Offering 
and Sin-Atonement? 

Answer.— The term "Sin-Offering" relates to the 
presentation of something sacrificially, as an offering or 
sacrifice, on account of sin and on behalf of the sinner. 
It thus relates, not only to the work of the Lord Jesus in 
His own person during the work of His ministry of three 
and a half years, when He offered up Himself, but also 
to Him as the High Priest when He offers up the members 
of His Body, during this Gospel Age. The entire 
work is sacrificial; and since this offering is on account 
of sin, it is, therefore, a sin-offering. The sin-offering 
must be complete before the result can be applied. 

When our Lord ascended up on high, He completed 
His own personal work; and on account of the merit 
which He possessed He was enabled to become the Advocate 
of the Church— those who become the members of 
His prospective Body. Since He intends to make application 
of that merit for the sins of the whole world, 
after He has offered in sacrifice the members of the 
Church, He therefore delays the matter of the presentation 
of the Sin-offering merit until the entire offering has been 
completed— until the Church shall be with Him in glory; 
for "if we suffer [with Him] we shall also reign with 
Him."— 2 Tim. 2:12. 

The expression "Sin- Atonement" may be used in 
respect to any part of the work of making satisfaction on 
account of sin. Strictly speaking, however, the term 
Sin-Atonement applies to the satisfaction of Justice on 
behalf of mankind. Man has been condemned; Justice 
executed a sentence, and in order that man may be released, 
Justice must be satisfied. 

Let us not in any sense of the word confound 
Sin-Atonement with Sin. After sin has been atoned for, 
then the sinner will be given an opportunity to return to 
the original perfection in which Adam was created and 
from which he fell. The Sin-Atonement, therefore, will 
be completed when Christ shall have presented His merit 
on account of the entire world. But the results of sin 
will not be fully removed until the end of the thousand 
years of the reign of Messiah. 



page 202 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER:- 

I am impressed to see how our dear Lord is now leading 
His people along! 
About the time of your recent return from abroad I wrote 



you a letter regarding some matters, with questions, etc. 
Thinking this too long, I did not send it, but wrote another 
letter, only to be dissatisfied with it also, and finally discarded 
the idea of writing, knowing how entirely your time is 
occupied. 

But when, in the last TOWER, I found a complete answer 
to all my questions, I thought I would tell you about it. 

I have of late been appreciating these things as I had not 
done before; I can see that if many truths we now have had 
been presented before, we would not have been able to see 
them so clearly. 

We are glad that the Lord of the Harvest knows and is 
able to give "Meat in due season"— when we are able to receive 
and use it to His glory and our good! 

"The Mortal Body the Servant of the New Mind"; "The 
Palace of Blessedness"; "Ye Were Bought with a Price"; 
"Beware of Pride in the Heart"; "Moses as a Mediator," etc., 
are certainly good for me! I try to feel that the dear Lord 
sent all such to me just as though there were not another 
person in the world. In this way I seem to get more out of 
it and am kept from thinking where it might fit others! 

I want the Lord's arrangements to fit me for the Kingdom, 
and since this is true of all of His "little ones," we may be a 
help to one another in the Narrow Way. 

The sermons, too, seem more impressive, as we should 
expect, since the dear Lord says "The path of the just shall 
shine more and more unto the perfect day." 

I ask that you pray that I may be more and more illuminated 
with this blessed Truth until I shall become one of 
the "rays" of the same great Fountain of Light and Truth 
with our dear Lord and all the faithful in Him ! 

Praying God ever to bless and keep you to the end of the 

page 203 

way, and to grant you "an abundant entrance into the Kingdom" 
for which our hearts long, by His grace I beg to remain 
Your brother in hope, 

EMORY WILLIAMS. -Texas. 



R5051 : page 203 

"THE JOY OF THE LORD OUR STRENGTH" 

DEAR PASTOR AND BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Please accept my hearty "Welcome Home." If I can guess 
by my own experience, I would think you are very happy 
to be home again, but O! so glad to have had the opportunity 
to take the glorious Gospel around the world. How happy 
and blessed must be your heart in the great work you have 
been chosen to accomplish in this grand Harvest Time! May 
our dear Heavenly Father give you strength and continual 
grace to finish it. 
Dear Brother Russell, my own experiences on my trip to 



Europe were at times very interesting and brought great blessings 
to me. I can say in truth that I am glad I was able to 
go out there; but how happy I was when the time came to 
come back! I was away just three months. 

I intended to send some little report to you on your trip, 
but thought you will get so much mail all the time that so 
many letters might bother you. I myself did not get any. 
Even though the children wrote, the letters never came. 

I found very many hungry Christians in Germany who 
were glad to hear the good news. I spent many half nights 
telling the glad story. It was very strange to my relatives. 
Seven years ago I sent them each the three volumes, but not 
one of them had read, but had loaned them all. Some 
of the books traveled a long distance, to Munich, and were 
read by a Catholic priest, a Protestant minister and others. 
Some of them went to Colmar, and others were loaned and 
not returned. Strange to say, my friends were consecrated 
Christians and praying for more light all the time. When 
they heard that I was coming they hoped I would bring them 
some Truth, and when they heard the glad tidings they accepted 
it. They seemed to me to be quite able to grasp the 
Truth. My dear brother, who knew nothing but Catholicism, 
cried for joy. Five of my relatives have now accepted the 
Truth. 

And now, praying that grace and peace may be multiplied 
unto you, I remain, 

Your sister in Christ, F. MUNTZER. 



BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

After our enjoyable visit to Brooklyn, Sister Thorn and I 
returned home more than ever encouraged to take up the 
cross daily and follow our Master faithfully, unto death. 

We especially enjoyed being at "Bethel" and the privilege 
of sitting at your table, listening to the helpful discussions 
and table-talks. Our interview with you in your study was 
also very helpful and drew us nearer to you. It was truly a 
"holy week" to us. 

Last Sunday, at the close of the afternoon service at Lynn, 
I told the friends of our intention to re-unite with the Boston 
Class, I. B. S. A. At the conclusion of my remarks prayer 
was offered and we sang, "Blest be the tie," etc. We believe 
we left with the good will of the entire Class. 

We then proceeded to Boston, arriving there in time for 
the evening meeting. After a few testimonies had been given 
I gave mine, reminding the friends that if we had any differences 
to settle with one another— not hereafter, but right here, 
these things must be adjusted. 

I then confessed having made some unintentional mistakes 
which I feared had caused them unnecessary pain, and that I 
was truly repentant and asked their forgiveness, also requesting 
that we might have closer fellowship with the dear Boston 
Class. 

We were assured of their forgiveness, and after several 
had expressed their joy in hearing our words (for I assured 



them that I spoke for Sister Thorn as well as for myself), 
the whole Class by a rising vote expressed their love and a 
hearty welcome. 

Both at Lynn and at Boston it was a heart-mellowing 
time— a most blessed day to us all. Many tears of joy were 
shed as the dear friends shook hands with us. We feel sure 
that you, too, will rejoice with us. Kindly remember us both 
in your prayers. 

With much Christian love from Sister Thorn and myself, 
I am as ever, 

Your brother and fellow-servant in Christ, 

WALTER J. THORN.-Mass. 



R5051 : page 203 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S FOREIGN ITINERARY 

Liverpool, England July 23 France Aug. 7 

Oldham, " " 24 — - " " 8 

Carlisle, " " 25 " " 9 

Glasgow, Scotland " 26-28 Paris, " " 11 

Aberdeen, " " 29 Geneva, Switzerland " 12 

Kirkcaldy, " " 30 Milhausen, Germany " 13 

New Castle on Tyne, Eng " 31 Sasle, Switzerland " 14 

Leeds, England Aug. 1 Zurich, " " 15 

Coventry, " " 2 St. Gallen, " " 16 

London, " " 3,4 Berlin, Germany " 18 

France " 6 Dresden, " " 19 



page 205 


