From Our Readers
Youth Suicide  I would like to thank you very much for the series of articles “What Hope for Today’s Youths?” (September 8, 1998) I was moved to tears. I have tried to commit suicide several times. But I am happy that I did not succeed.
A. Z., Czech Republic
These were very understanding articles on a sensitive subject. I attempted to end my life earlier this year while I was clinically depressed. Thank you for this timely subject. It saved my life.
R. P., England
Sad to say, I have two classmates who have tried to commit suicide. One of them did so because when he considered his future, he could not see anything good—only difficulties that had to be overcome. This article was therefore practical, for it explained in a very clear and specific way how our future can have meaning.
R. D., Spain
Your article touched my heart. It was as if Jehovah were speaking to me as a loving Father. When I was a child, I suffered abuse from my father. I have felt worthless and have often thought about ending my life. But now, as your article suggested, I am cultivating a yearning for “the real life.”—1 Timothy 6:19.
S. R., Brazil
Thanks, especially for the quotes from youths, many of which contained solutions to problems in just a few words.
W. H., Germany
Earning Money  Thank you so much for taking the time to publish the informative article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Earn Some Money?” (August 22, 1998) I was having difficulty finding employment. But I followed your recommendations and found a job, at last!
S. D., Ghana
Sign Language  After reading your article “A Language That You See!” (September 8, 1998), I had to write and thank you. Articles like this help us to understand others who do not have the same circumstances as we do. I have a friend who was born deaf, and I have wanted to learn sign language. But for one reason or another, I have never found time to do it. I am not going to postpone learning it any longer!
M. E., England
I want to thank you for the great effort you are making in supporting deaf ones. I delivered some copies of your article to government officials. Because it was so well written, they asked for more copies! I also showed it to a lady who was opposed to her deaf daughter’s studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. After reading the article, she shed tears of joy. She now supports her daughter’s efforts to attend Christian meetings and has even promised to pay for her transportation to a Christian convention!
E. R., Mexico
I just had to let you know how much I appreciated the article. I had the goal of learning American Sign Language and assisting in the local sign-language congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses. But I had become discouraged. The article gave me just the boost I need to reach my goal!
N. D., United States
It was fascinating to learn that the Deaf actually think in their signed language. As a hearing person, I will be more mindful of looking for ways to communicate with the Deaf in a positive way.
P. H., United States

