Your Brain—How Can You Best Use It?
As you read these words, your brain evokes memories stored years ago when you first learned how to read. But to give wise and thoughtful consideration to what you learn, you need to develop the brain’s thinking ability.
SCIENTISTS have discovered that the connections between the brain’s neurons are continually changing. If not used or stimulated, neurons and neuronal connections die. “Brains improve with use,” comments a recent report. “For those worried about the condition of their brains—or wishing to keep them in top-notch shape—the best advice looks likely to be a varied intellectual diet and plenty of mental exercise.”
Mental Exercise Vital
To appreciate the value of “plenty of mental exercise,” note what scientists have discovered about young children. At birth, babies are not normally blind. They simply need to develop the ability to see. At first, they can focus their eyes only on nearby objects. Later, they develop stereoscopic vision as they begin to judge differences in the images their eyes convey. But if one eye is bandaged during the time this is developing, the child may grow up with poor vision in that eye. Why? Because the input from the other eye dominates the visual cortex of the brain.
Toys that stimulate a child’s interest help prepare the brain to make sense of what is going on in the youngster’s surroundings.
Recent research also suggests that music may help with the development of language and social skills. Children who were given extra music lessons proved to be better at language and learned to read more easily than those who were not. Those who played music together also demonstrated better cooperation with one another.
Although the brain is divided into two halves, the left and the right, each part plays a vital role. The right half, for example, generally helps us to perceive emotions and understand melodies. Nevertheless, the two parts are interconnected. When music students started their studies, notes one report, listening to music mainly activated their right brain hemispheres. Three years later, after detailed discussion of music theory and composition, their left hemispheres were busy analyzing what they heard. Consequently, mental exercise is needed to stimulate the whole brain so that analytic and emotional parts become involved.
“A Varied Intellectual Diet”
Many people have learned the creeds of the religion their family practiced. But as they began to reason on the teachings of these churches, they noted inconsistencies and a lack of real purpose. This has caused some to search for a system of belief that both answers their questions and gives them a sound hope for the future.
“My life had been one of many heartaches and problems, right from my early teens onward,” explains Jean. “Although I was a member of the Church of England, I did not find direction or peace of mind. Many teachings of the church bothered me—for example, hellfire and the condition of the dead. Clergymen told me that God must be punishing me.
“At this stage I decided to leave the Church of England, and later I married a man who did not profess any religion. His violence at home distressed me.” Jean then decided to commit suicide. But before she did, she offered one last prayer to God. At that very moment, there was a knock at her door. On opening it, she found two women who were Jehovah’s Witnesses. They talked about life having a purpose and gave Jean some Bible literature to help her learn more.
“After they left,” Jean continues, “I went inside and immediately started to read the book they had left me. It felt as though a veil were being lifted from my eyes and I could see for the first time. The more I read, the clearer it became to me that this was the truth.” Jean had found satisfying food for her mind.
The Bible book of Proverbs highlights the value of discernment and godly wisdom. However, to gain these, personal effort and a desire to learn about God are required. Proverbs chapter 2 throws out a challenge: “My son, if you will receive my sayings and treasure up my own commandments with yourself, so as to pay attention to wisdom with your ear, that you may incline your heart to discernment; if, moreover, you call out for understanding itself and you give forth your voice for discernment itself, if you keep seeking for it as for silver, and as for hid treasures you keep searching for it, in that case you will understand the fear of Jehovah, and you will find the very knowledge of God. For Jehovah himself gives wisdom; out of his mouth there are knowledge and discernment.”—Proverbs 2:1-6.
Of the Bible, educator William Lyon Phelps wrote: “Everyone who has a thorough knowledge of the Bible may truly be called educated.” Contact Jehovah’s Witnesses locally or write to the nearest address listed on page 5. They will gladly help you discover how the Bible can answer your questions and provide a reliable source of rich mental stimulation. Use your brain’s thinking ability to understand the pattern of truth that the Bible outlines. Making the best use of your brain in this way may lead to your everlasting happiness.

