Honduras
HE HAD struggled mightily against a howling storm that threatened to smash his ship against the very coast he had just discovered. When at last he got free of the treacherous waters, Christopher Columbus reportedly sighed: “Thank God we have got out of these depths!” The Spanish word for depths, honduras, evidently stuck. That, at least according to some history books, is how Honduras was named.
Today, Honduras is far easier to leave​—or to reach—​than it was for Columbus. It is one of the seven small countries on the narrow neck of land that connects North and South America. With about five million people inhabiting 43,000 square miles [112,000 sq km] of land, it is neither the largest nor the most populous country in Central America. But it is the most mountainous. At 15 degrees north latitude, both its Caribbean and Pacific coasts bask in tropical warmth, while the interior highlands are much cooler.
From the mountains, pine clad up to their pinnacles, to the undulating lowland jungles where the famous Honduran mahogany and cedar grow, on to the humid swamps and beyond to the palm-fringed beaches and lagoons of the Caribbean seaboard, this land has scenic beauty aplenty to magnify the Creator and to satisfy the soul.
The people are equally varied and interesting​—Indian, white, black, and a beautiful admixture of all three races. The Maya Indians were the first to come. Where they came from nobody knows for certain.
There are striking similarities between the Maya pyramids and the ziggurats of Egypt and Babylon, and there are interesting parallels in religion as well. The worship of the Maya, with its multiple gods and its belief in the immortality of the soul and punishment after death, was not far from Babylonian religion. Nor were these beliefs greatly altered by the advent of Christendom.
Christendom entered the land by force. Spanish conquerors converged on Honduras in 1524. As was their custom, they imposed the Spanish language and the Catholic religion on the natives. To this day, some 95 percent of Hondurans are Catholic. The colonial period ended some three centuries later when independence was declared in 1821. The Spanish were not the only ones eager to exploit this land teeming with flora and fauna and abundant in gold and silver. However, subsequent invaders were called not colonists but pirates. William Parker and Sir Francis Drake both menaced the Honduran coast in the 1570’s.
Dawn of Truth
Babylonish religion, both of the ancient Maya and of Christendom’s modern variety, has held the people in darkness and in bondage to ignorance, superstition, and spiritism for many centuries. Not until these last days was there a glimmer of spiritual light in Honduras.
In 1930, Miss Freddie Johnson, a small woman in her 50’s, began preaching the Kingdom message along the north coast and on the Islas de la Bahía (Bay Islands). Accompanied only by her horse, this anointed pioneer needed strong faith and great stamina to reach the people on the scattered banana plantations and in the coastal cities of Tela, La Ceiba, and Trujillo. There were no roads then​—just tracks through the dank jungle. A train pulled by a steam engine, operated by a fruit company, brought her partway. Few people had ever seen the Bible; many, even if they saw one, could not read it. Nevertheless, during that year she left more than 2,700 books and booklets with interested people. She returned in 1934 and again in 1940 and in 1941.
With the exception of one lone publisher working in 1943, there is no further record of any preaching work until the arrival of the first missionaries in October 1945. In mid-1946, Nathan H. Knorr visited Honduras to set up a branch office and put the work on an organized footing. That same year, branch servant (overseer) Donald Burt, graduate of the third class of Gilead, traveled into the interior to assess the needs and living conditions that future special pioneers would face.
One of the first seven missionaries was Darlean Mikkelsen. After graduating from Gilead’s third class, she was assigned to the capital of Honduras, Tegucigalpa, in February 1946. She could not even pronounce the city’s name and had to look it up! She learned that in Lenca, an Indian language, “Tegucigalpa” means “Silver Hills.” It was once common to see trains of 15 or 20 burros plodding into town from the mines in the hills, laden with a cargo of silver. When Darlean arrived, the airport was just a wooden building and a very short airstrip. Still, she was relieved to find the capital more developed than she had expected.
Also among those first missionaries were Loverna Grell and her daughter Ethel. Loverna was surprised on arrival to be notified that the very next day would be her “cook day.” It is customary in missionary homes for each person or couple to take turns preparing the meals. Loverna found that quite a challenge; most of the fruits and vegetables looked quite unfamiliar, and in order to buy them, she had to bargain with merchants in an equally unfamiliar tongue.
All told, 1946 saw nine missionaries serving in Honduras. The first congregation was formed, and future prospects looked good. The missionaries were conducting 57 home Bible studies. Between 1946 and 1949, the average number of Kingdom publishers grew from 19 to 256, and the number of congregations from one to six. At the same time, Bible studies shot up from 57 to 160!
They Hung Up a Sign
Toward the end of 1946, Everett and Gertrude Weatherbee and two newly arrived missionaries established themselves in the second-largest city of Honduras, San Pedro Sula. Located some 36 miles [58 km] inland from the Caribbean Sea, this city, although known as the industrial capital, lies in one of the richest and most fertile parts of the country. Blessed with adequate rainfall, the region’s bananas, oranges, pineapples, and sugarcane grow year-round in lush green surroundings.
Right away the newcomers hung a sign on their front porch proclaiming “Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Jehovah’s name was scarcely known in the region, so the sign attracted no little attention. Some members of the local Evangelical Church even came to a public lecture. The pastor was not pleased. He devoted his next sermon to condemning Jehovah’s Witnesses, even calling out the names of those who had attended the talk to shame them publicly. His diatribe only aroused more interest; the next week, even more Evangelicals were to be found in the Kingdom Hall audience!
Six miles [10 km] east of San Pedro Sula, in the town of La Lima, the work was also progressing, but at that time there was only an English-speaking congregation. It could not cope with the growing number of Spanish-speaking interested persons. A Spanish congregation was needed, but there was a problem to overcome.
A large proportion of the population saw no advantage in being legally married; couples just settled down together to raise children. Often, when the novelty wore off, the men would abandon their families, usually in favor of younger women. Many women who were abandoned would struggle to care for their children while working full-time. So a Spanish congregation was finally organized only after enough legally married men were available to care for it. Jehovah blessed these efforts, for in just one year, the number of publishers in La Lima jumped from 24 to 77.
President Visits
The highlight of 1949 was the visit of N. H. Knorr and Roger Morgan at the general assembly in Tegucigalpa. Thereafter they traveled to San Pedro Sula and La Ceiba, giving talks to encourage the congregations.
In the audience in La Ceiba was nine-year-old Oscar. His mother would rise daily at 4 a.m. to make tortillas to sell, then get ready for field service by 9 a.m. Oscar was a very alert little boy, and because he was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses and trustworthy, a local merchant used him to deliver money to the bank. At times he carried as much as $1,500 (U.S.). While Brother Knorr was visiting, young Oscar would always squeeze into the seat next to him. Later he became a full-time minister. In a tragic accident, Oscar drowned in 1956. He will not be forgotten.
Jehovah’s Witnesses on the Air
House-to-house visiting as established by Jesus Christ is a trademark of Jehovah’s people in Honduras. But during the early years, the workers were few, and much of the population was inaccessible, as paved roads were scarce. Broadcasting the truth by radio was thus quite effective. In 1949, radio station HRQ of San Pedro Sula invited the Witnesses to provide a weekly 15-minute program. It was entitled “Let God Be True,” based on the book of the same name. Of course, not everyone had a radio in those days, but since most who did have one played it full blast, many people besides radio owners enjoyed our programs.
For four years the program continued without problems. One day, however, the owner of HRQ read an Awake! article dealing with Suyapa, the patron “saint” of the country. The owner was devoted to Suyapa​—in fact, his station was also called Radio Suyapa. Angry, he sent a message to the missionary home saying that our broadcast would be terminated. The station staff liked the Witnesses and reasoned with the owner but to no avail. If he listened to the radio that day, he must have been surprised to hear the announcer say: “The program ‘Let God Be True’ has been stopped by the owner of this station. All the personnel at the station consider this very regrettable and a violation of freedom of speech in Honduras.”
Meanwhile, the manager of another radio station proposed a daily program of Bible instruction, to be called the Catholic Hour. He asked the local priest to take part, but he refused, saying he was busy and not interested in Bible education. Annoyed, the manager replied that if the priest did not care, he knew who did. He acquired literature from the Witnesses and read it over the air. Shortly thereafter, missionaries contacted him and provided him with material called “Things People Are Thinking About.” The priest objected, but the manager replied: “You had your chance and refused.” So the program continued.
“You Must Be Holy Because I Am Holy”
During the 1950’s there were two periods of decline. The year 1950 saw a drop in the average number of publishers from 256 to 208. Why? Jehovah’s spirit moved his organization to insist that all his people be clean in his sight. (Compare 1 Peter 1:16.) Some resisted that spirit and abandoned the ranks of God’s workers. As a result of this sifting, the following four years were blessed with an upsurge in the number of both publishers and congregations.
However, in 1954 another blow was struck that staggered the work for several years to come. The branch servant, who had been appointed in September 1953, had to be disfellowshipped. His transgression, in turn, had a debilitating effect on others. Some knew of his sinful activity before it was reported, and because they had turned a blind eye instead of having the courage to intervene, they too were stumbled. (Compare Leviticus 5:1.) Others felt sorry that he was disfellowshipped because he was well liked among the brothers. Happily, though, he was reinstated later on and has served faithfully ever since.
Nevertheless, the damage was done, and it fell to Aldo Muscariello, the new branch servant, to attend to it. He recognized that other factors were also responsible for the decreases. Many publishers and missionaries were prematurely counting their Bible students as publishers, even putting reports in for them without their knowledge. The branch office explained that such students must first be qualified before joining the publisher ranks.
Honduras impressed Brother Muscariello as a country of contrasts, with cattle and burros sharing the roads with cars and trucks; thatched-roof huts alongside modern homes; the rainy season followed by the only other season, hot and dusty. One night he would study by candlelight with a family in a one-room, dirt-floored adobe hut perched on the hillsides of Tegucigalpa, and the next night in a spacious, well-lit room of the Guatemalan embassy.
The Work Goes Forward Again
The work pressed forward, penetrating the territory in all directions. The beautiful Honduran archipelago, with the principal islands Roatán, Utila Island, and Guanaja, lies in the Caribbean about 30 miles [50 km] off the northern coast, on the second-largest coral reef in the world. These islands are accessible by plane, by ferry, or for those who do not fear seasickness, by goleta. A goleta is a small boat, usually loaded to the gunwales with merchandise. Occasionally one is overloaded and sinks. On the islands many houses are made of timber, painted all colors, and built out over the water on stilts so that approach is made by a narrow catwalk.
In 1948, Donald Burt and missionaries William and Ruby White journeyed to Coxin’s Hole, the principal town of Roatán, to stimulate the work on the island. Many since then, mainly foreign brothers, have tried to establish themselves on these islands and preach the Kingdom good news there. So far the response has been limited.
When Lloyd Aldrich, branch servant in the 1960’s, visited Roatán, he found the inhabitants to be religious, sociable, informal, and easygoing. He noticed with interest that if a speaker happened to ask a rhetorical question in his public talk, the audience would speak out and answer him. For example, when a speaker asked, “How much water is there in the sea?” someone replied, “Only God knows, and he isn’t telling.” Discussing family matters, a speaker commented that some women nag and henpeck their husbands and finally even take over the headship. From the back of the room, a fervent voice responded: “Amen!”
Into the Mosquitia!
Most Hondurans have never ventured into the Mosquitia, the far eastern sector of the land. Mostly virgin woodland, rich valleys, and dense rain forest, through the centuries this sparsely populated area has been the home of all kinds of people, ranging from the Paya and Miskito Indians, who still speak their ancient native dialects, and the Zambos, the descendants of blacks who intermarried with the fierce Carib Indians, to fugitives, pirates, and slave traders.
Though few there spoke either Spanish or English at that time, someone had to take the good news to them. So thought circuit overseer Gerald Hughes in 1957, and arrangements were made for a preaching trip. He was joined by Cristóbal Valladares, who later became the first Honduran Witness to enter the circuit work. With a group, they set out for Trujillo, where their preaching trip would really begin.
They packed only the bare necessities and hired a small motorized boat that did not have such “luxuries” as bunks, seats, radio, compass, or instruments of any kind. But it did have a competent captain and crew, all expert boat handlers. This was a good thing, too, for beyond the point called Cape Honduras, the sea was angry. One man even fell overboard but was skillfully rescued.
Twenty-two hours passed before they put in at the little village of Sangrelaya. All that time they were without food or water. The next day, in a dugout canoe, they made for the Black River, which they followed into the territory they were to cover. They soon found an interested English-speaking lady and spent several hours with her both then and on the return trip, teaching her the Bible. The following evening, 35 came to hear a Bible lecture, and afterward the people kept the brothers up far into the night to answer their questions.
The next destination was Brus Lagoon. After a three-hour trudge along the sandbar that divides the lagoon from the sea, they came upon one of the largest coconut plantations in the world, Tusí Cocal. There they enjoyed their first real meal in several days and the warm hospitality of a home in which they presented the public lecture “Resurrection, Hell, and Heaven.” Thirty-four came, some of them women with babies in slings on their backs. In a village on the other side of the lagoon, more than 30 came for a Bible talk. People kept on coming, so following the Watchtower Study, the brothers presented another public talk.
They passed the days busily preaching, the nights in any accommodation offered. The food was varied: yucca, sardines, coconut bread, and the local coffee. Finally, back in Sangrelaya, they found that the priest was bent on discouraging the people from listening to them. He even refused to hand over the key to the public schoolhouse. No matter; 62 attended the public talk elsewhere. Eighteen days from the start, the group headed homeward toward the town of Limón. There, the mayor showed them a long-treasured book, The Harp of God. He had acquired it 27 years earlier, back when Sister Johnson had pioneered the region.
By the time they made their final canoe trip back to Trujillo, the group figured that they had shared the good news with nearly 800 scattered inhabitants of the Mosquitia. A good start!
Some Attacks Fall Flat
Of course, Satan makes sure that the preaching work never goes forward without opposition of some kind. Generally, Jehovah’s Witnesses are respected in Honduras. Even when the government has declared a state of emergency, it has never moved to stop our meetings. But there are always some prominent individuals who are so prejudiced that they would move heaven and earth to impede the preaching work. In each case it seems that Jehovah raised up a modern Gamaliel in defense of the Witnesses.​—Compare Acts 5:33-40.
In the 1960’s there was a group that made every effort to discredit Jehovah’s Witnesses in the eyes of the government, attacking them through both press and radio and urging the expulsion of all Witness missionaries. The government formed a special committee to determine what should be done in view of all the charges. Present at that meeting was a lawyer who had once prepared a thesis on the legal battles of Jehovah’s Witnesses around the world and on their benefits to the community. He spoke up in behalf of the Witnesses, reminding the committee: “These people have won their legal rights worldwide in countless countries.” He urged the government to do at least as much for the Witnesses, if not more. The committee decided to let Jehovah’s Witnesses continue their activity unhindered.
Because of these same defamatory news articles, a district supervisor of schools was asked to check into the affairs of Jehovah’s Witnesses. This unbiased man knew several Witnesses and had read some of their literature. He vetoed the investigation and recommended that it would be more productive to check into the character of the authors of the articles. They, he argued, were much more likely to be a threat to national security.
Jehovah’s Witnesses are strictly neutral when it comes to political affairs and conflicts. This stand is sometimes the basis for unwarranted attacks. Shortly before the 1966 district convention, the minister of education tried to force through a ruling making it mandatory for all students to salute the flag and sing the national anthem in school. But each time the committee met, someone moved for postponement. One of these was a man whose wife was studying with the Witnesses. He was sure that they must have valid Scriptural reasons for not sharing in patriotic ceremonies. The minister sent out circulars to schools advising teachers to force the children to salute the flag on pain of expulsion, but this unreasonable rule was never put in the constitution.
The Christian Conscience
The schoolchildren are the ones who bear the brunt of the flag-salute issue. Some teachers, in an effort to be understanding, are unwittingly deceitful. Some tell pupils that flag saluting is no more than a mark of respect. However, Witness children well know the difference between respect​—which they show for the flags of all nations—​and idolatry. They also know that the Honduran national anthem applies such expressions as “divine emblem” and “holy banner” to the flag, clearly giving it religious significance.
In the town of San Juancito, a teacher offered one young Witness a “helpful” suggestion: that he comply with the flag salute “just this once” in order to get his diploma and afterward just “confess” to his religious superiors and be forgiven. The young brother explained that when one sins, it is against God and Christ and that it was fear of displeasing God, not men, that motivated his conscience.
Some military officials have also learned that it is the conscience, not a spirit of cowardice or rebellion, that moves a Christian to renounce violence. Not far from Danlí, some brothers were out in the ministry when a military patrol arrived to collect recruits. They ordered two young brothers to get into a bus that would take them to battalion headquarters. When the brother directing the group learned what had happened, he got permission to witness to all in the bus. He started with the sergeant in charge, fully explaining the ministerial work of these young men. The sergeant ordered them to be released to pursue their work in peace.
The War of 1969
For some time the fires of rivalry and distrust between Honduras and El Salvador were fanned by nationalistic propaganda over the radio in both countries. In Honduras abusive mobs sometimes gathered around the homes and businesses of Salvadorans. The smallest spark was enough to detonate an explosion; that is precisely what happened in July 1969, when the Honduran and Salvadoran soccer teams faced each other in San Salvador for the play-offs of the 1970 world championship. The war started right there in the stadium! It is difficult to believe that Hondurans and Salvadorans, who had dwelt together as friends and neighbors for more than a generation, should run for their pistols and machetes and start to slay one another​—but that is exactly what happened in cities and villages throughout the two countries.
The war affected the congregations, the ministry, and the meetings of the Witnesses because of its blackouts, night curfews, loss of employment, harassment, and expulsion from the country of Salvadorans, some of whom were brothers. Brother Manuel Martínez of the Branch Committee, now doing circuit work, remembers how 23 dedicated brothers in his congregation had to return to El Salvador. He added: “I was disconcerted and not sure what to do. After the worst part of the war, I went to conduct the Watchtower Study, and only two people were in the audience.”
In many cities, civic committees were formed with the self-appointed duty to search the streets and homes for potential enemies of the State. Every member of the community was expected to participate in the committee work and night patrols. Sister Rubina Osejo ran a private school at the time. The civic committee approached and asked her to take part. She remembered Jesus’ counsel to be as “cautious as serpents” and replied that she could not participate in the night patrols, neither could she contribute money, but that she would keep a spiritual vigilance and pray that war and injustice would soon be eliminated.​—Matt. 10:16.
Sometimes war gives true Christians a chance to witness through their conduct. Some Witnesses in El Progreso had a Salvadoran neighbor who hated the Witnesses and refused to speak to them. When war broke out, mobs began to eye his lucrative business. But one day when they were about to plunder it, a man who studied with the Witnesses shouted at the mob, “Don’t be barbaric! This man’s wife is a Honduran, and you will take the food from their children’s mouths​—children who are your Honduran brothers.” The crowd subsided, and the Salvadoran slipped off with some goods and money and hid in the Kingdom Hall. Later, when he received back all that was his, he declared: “Now I know that Jehovah’s Witnesses are honest and reliable people and neutral in matters of war.” In tears he begged the brothers to forgive him for the way he used to treat them.
While war was raging, a Honduran brother was arrested and brought before an army sergeant who ordered him into the army. The sergeant was enraged when the brother explained his conscientious stand. For three nights he tried to break this brother’s integrity. He even threatened to kill him. All to no avail. Months later, the sergeant lost his position and had to look for secular work. He was hired at a local mining operation. There, he discovered to his horror that his foreman looked familiar​—it was the same brother he had persecuted! Far from seeking reprisals, the brother shared his lunch and thermos of coffee with the quaking ex-sergeant. Gradually the man’s fear abated, and in time he accepted a Bible study.
One couple were arrested and jailed on suspicion of being Salvadorans. The husband had been born in El Salvador but was now a naturalized Honduran; his wife was from Nicaragua. An elder and a missionary went to explain to the official in charge that this couple, now in their 70’s, were Jehovah’s Witnesses and not at all inclined to be enemies of the State. The official allowed the two out of their cell. When they laid eyes on the brothers, the old couple were touched to the point of tears. When the official saw this genuine affection despite differing nationalities, he released the couple. However, the greater danger lay ahead​—they had to be carried to safety in the trunk of a car. Amazingly, they cleared all roadblocks and found a safe hiding place on the edge of town.
No Need of Firearms
Whether war or peace prevails, the dangerous, violent times we live in have led many people to rely on guns and other weapons to defend themselves. There are some, though, who once trusted in firearms who have learned to put their confidence in Jehovah instead.
During the war, the director of the school in the picturesque mountain village of El Rosario was also the leader of an armed group that patrolled the streets at night​—although today he admits that he spent most of that time drinking. He was a staunch patriot, but he objected to the unnecessary brutalizing of prisoners. On one occasion a relative of his who was known for his criminal tendencies wanted to shoot down defenseless men, women, and children. The school director told him that if this was an example of his great valor, then either he should present himself on the battlefront, or else they could both go for their guns​—now! Years later this director became one of Christ’s true soldiers, a Witness of Jehovah. Now he defends right principles just as courageously​—but with God’s Word, not a gun.
One woman who ran a bar carried a gun, and many feared her. Her house was adorned with numerous images and she was learning witchcraft, but deep inside she was not happy and longed for something better. The Truth book opened the door for her, and with the help of a home Bible study, she began to ‘put on the new personality.’​—Eph. 4:24.
She started to attend meetings and destroyed her images but suffered discouragement when her “friends” misrepresented the Witnesses. The sister conducting the study was patient; in time the woman’s heart was so strengthened that she started going from house to house with her Bible​—but without her pistol, of course! Soon she had seven Bible studies of her own. Since her baptism in 1971, she has continued to progress, always trusting in Jehovah.
Santos was quite elderly when he learned the truth. He had been a military commander, mayor, justice of the peace, criminal judge, and local president of a political party. He always carried a gun as a symbol of authority. In his time he had to arrest some fearsome criminals. When Santos became a Witness and began his ministry from house to house, he found that he needed far more courage in his new career than he ever had in his old one. He found that courage, not in a gun, but in prayer to Jehovah.
Once, though, a gun was used to defend the Witnesses. The bishop of Santa Rosa de Copán was always trying to make trouble for the brothers. He would follow them from house to house and pick up the literature they had left and burn it. He would goad his flock into throwing rocks onto the roof of the Kingdom Hall. One night while the meeting was in progress, someone opened the door and threw in a large bucketful of mud​—ruining, among other things, a young sister’s white dress. A brother went to explain the situation to the local chief of police, who was outraged. He went to the bishop and, patting his pistol, told him: “If I hear of you molesting those Jehovah’s Witnesses again, I am going to use this on you.” There was no more opposition from the bishop.
Jehovah’s Word on Blood
Occasionally, Jehovah’s Witnesses in Honduras have had their faith sorely tested by those few doctors and surgeons who do not respect their Scriptural stand on blood transfusions. Cecilia and her husband, for example, were involved in a serious collision with a truck. When they finally awakened, they found themselves in the hospital, both badly injured. Cecilia’s jawbone was shattered. The doctors told her that she needed an operation and a blood transfusion. With her jawbone broken, she could scarcely reply, but Cecilia managed to explain that she would agree to any necessary treatment​—except a blood transfusion. She accepted responsibility for any consequences of her stand. The doctor told her she would have to leave the hospital, since they could do no more for her.
Before she could comply, she was surrounded one day by a group of young student doctors who, with laughter and vulgarity, demanded to know who had filled her head with such stupid ideas. They told her that in this hospital they gave the orders, not Jehovah’s Witnesses. They proceeded to give her what they called “a treatment that even animals could not endure,” inserting wires under the jawbone and twisting them inside the mouth. When she complained of the pain, she was greeted with vulgarity again, with the exception of one young man who seemed slightly more humane. He encouraged her with the words, “Look, young lady, I know it hurts a great deal. Ask your God Jehovah to help you endure it.”
Two days later the same group returned to find that their work had not turned out well. With very little compassion, they pulled out the wires. Then they inserted a clay plaque into the jaw, and she was left for another three days to recover. All this time she could not speak; she could only think and pray, and she meditated on the words of Proverbs 3:5: “Trust in Jehovah with all your heart.” When they came back, they were surprised. One exclaimed, “Look how well she is!” Another added: “It must be because of her obedience to God. No people are as obedient to God as these.”
Sonia Marilú was 13 years old and in poor health. The doctors never agreed on the cause of her pains. Finally a crisis came that put her in the hospital. She had a perforated intestine and needed immediate surgery. The parents explained their stand on blood to the doctors. Their answer: “We will operate without blood​—if you want her to die.” Her parents then took her on a perilous journey to El Salvador. She arrived in very serious condition. The doctors, one of them a Witness, examined her and undertook surgery without the use of blood. Although her condition had become very poor, she came out of it alive!
That was not the end of the matter. After four days she suddenly got worse and needed further surgery. A different surgical team was to do the operation this time. Seeing her dangerously low blood count, they said: “If you don’t accept blood, you will die, and without blood we will not operate.” Sonia adamantly rejected blood transfusion. Since it appeared that the girl would not last another 12 hours, the doctors decided to operate, as they put it, “at great risk and with our hands tied.” Even though her hemoglobin level had dropped to four grams per 100 milliliters, they did not transfuse blood. The next morning, to the great surprise of all the staff, she was alive and progressing. One doctor said: “You went to God, and he sent you back. It’s obvious that he loves you.”
Sonia needed intensive care for a while, and the doctors still recommended blood to speed recovery. But slowly, surely, she got better without it. When her discharge came, one of the first doctors to operate told her: “You have respected God’s law, you have not violated your conscience, and you are free from the danger of AIDS.”
“Faithful in What Is Least”
The Honduran government has a constant fight against petty lawbreakers. Worldly neighbors too wage endless battles because of the widely ingrained habit of borrowing things without returning them. Before baptism, new ones must learn to change such attitudes and be “faithful in what is least.”​—Luke 16:10.
One couple learned that it is not only right but beneficial to ‘render to Caesar that which is Caesar’s.’ (Mark 12:17) For nine years Edmundo and his wife, Estela, have imported merchandise from Guatemala and Mexico. They have discovered that some customs officials will “unofficially” reduce import taxes. From the start they identified themselves as Jehovah’s Witnesses; gradually, their honesty won the confidence of the officials. They now simply fill out the declaration forms, and their word is sufficient. When other importers see that this couple have few problems with customs and do not suffer the constant confiscation of their merchandise, they think about being more honest themselves.
A brother from San Pedro Sula has worked for 18 years in the government’s Administration of Customs and Revenue. In an interview the brother explained: “The inducement to enrich oneself without leaving so much as a trace of evidence is very strong, but I do not wish to violate my conscience. Besides, I know that Jehovah’s eyes are ever watchful. On one occasion, I was offered the keys to any one of a group of automobiles if I would simply adjust their taxable value. While such an offer may be tempting, it cannot compare with the value of a clean conscience and the respect of fellow workers and directors. Last year I was invited to a seminar, and in the concluding remarks, the UN representative in customs administration asked me to stand. He publicly congratulated me for being a man respectful of the law, not subject to bribery, and an example worthy of imitation.”
Progress in Rural and Isolated Territory
The brothers put forth great effort to reach the people in isolated territories. It is a task that requires sacrifice, but as is so often said, the joys and satisfaction far outweigh the toil.
Puerto Cortés, a port town on the Caribbean and built on partially filled swampland, now has several flourishing congregations. Robert Schmidt, a missionary there in the late 1960’s, recalls working this 50-mile-long [80 km] territory on foot when it had only one congregation. “The trip to visit the homes toward Guatemala was arduous in those days, a seven-day walk. Only small groups could make it. Interested people commonly offered food in exchange for literature; many who live off the land have little or no money. On the way back, we would make return visits and conduct Bible studies by candlelight in the evenings.” And what was their reward? In 1971 a congregation was established in Omoa, one of the larger towns in that area.
During the 1970’s, the Puerto Cortés Congregation made arrangements to cover the scattered territories to the east, sending out groups of brothers by the fruit company train or by an old but reliable Land-Rover. Standard equipment included a stout rope and a couple of shovels. During the rainy season, trucks would line up before particularly perilous mud holes. When a truck got through, a cheer went up; when one did not, out came the ropes and shovels. Picture the scene. Stripping off footwear, the brothers would roll up their trousers, the sisters would hitch up their skirts, and all would dig. Again, the brothers were rewarded for their patient work by seeing an isolated group growing in Baracoa and a healthy congregation in La Junta by the Ulúa River. Each now has its own Kingdom Hall.
Some special pioneer sisters, including Olga Aguilar (now Walker), from the Choluteca Congregation in the south began visiting Guásimo, a tiny place high in the mountains. In time and with help from other brothers, 25 people started meeting together. However, they recognized that to progress spiritually, they had to associate with others of like faith. But how? It was nearly a three-hour walk to Choluteca. Since they had only burros for transportation, love for Jehovah was the real driving force. Interestingly, it was usually the brothers from Guásimo who arrived first at the meetings! At the 1970 circuit assembly in Choluteca, 13 brothers from Guásimo were baptized. One, determined that his family should benefit more from the meetings, literally moved his house into town. How? He carried it on his back, piece by piece, each time he came to a meeting!
When brothers from the El Progreso Congregation began to visit the town of Santa Rita, about 15 miles [24 km] to the south, the owner of a barbershop gladly accepted literature. He pleaded with the brothers to stay and teach him, but they wanted to visit as many of the townspeople as possible before leaving. The man begged, “If you will stay and teach me, I will give you a room tonight in my house and will feed you so that you lose no valuable time.” All told, 15 brothers were fed and lodged in the barber’s house that night.
Foreign Families Arrive to Help
Many who cannot serve as missionaries have the missionary spirit. So, in 1968, when The Watchtower began encouraging brothers to move to lands where the need is greater, the Honduras branch office received hundreds of letters from at least 24 countries.
Grant Allinger, branch servant at the time, had an eight-page memorandum prepared to give detailed, positive guidance to those who inquired. The result? From 1968 to 1974, at least 35 families moved to Honduras from around the globe​—Canada, England, Germany, the United States, and even faraway New Zealand.
Some faced real challenges in trying to realize their plans. One family from Canada made the necessary investigations, counted the cost, and arranged to move. But a serious problem arose: How would they finance their trip? They depended on selling their car to pay their debts, but as the departure date approached, they still had only 16 dollars in their pocket. Jehovah did not forsake them. The day before leaving, they sold the car! What is more, when their friends dropped by to wish them well on their journey, each one left a little something to help out, and the sum came to $600. They thanked their friends, and they thanked Jehovah.
Those who came to serve where the need is greater have been a real boon to the work. For instance, Raymond Walker arrived here from England in 1969. It took time to get settled and to master the language, but thereafter he entered the pioneer ranks, then served in circuit and district work with his wife, Olga. He is presently serving on the five-member Branch Committee.
“Salvation to All Sorts of Men”
While the apostle Paul said that salvation would be made available “to all sorts of men,” he also declared: “Not many wise in a fleshly way were called, not many powerful, not many of noble birth.” (Titus 2:11; 1 Cor. 1:26) That has proved true in Honduras. All kinds of people​—a dazzling variety—​have embraced the truth but not many among the very rich or powerful.
Consider the case of one woman. Her mother raised her while running brothels for a living. When her mother died, she took over. It was not easy for her to come into the truth, but that she did​—and, of course, disposed of the family business. She became a pioneer in 1976 and now makes a simple living by laundering clothing.
Filander was just a boy when he began to study the truth, and his father did not like it one bit. The more Filander progressed, the harder his father tried to stop him. He wanted his son to attend university and make some headway in the world. He refused to let him go to meetings and assemblies or out in service, but the boy always found a way of going anyway. He was baptized in 1972 and has continued to progress, first becoming a pioneer and then being appointed an elder. After working with the construction team on the Honduras Bethel, he was sent to Colombia to do similar work. As for his family, their attitude has mellowed over the years.
The closest thing Antonio had to a profession was that of being a drunkard, for this is how he had spent the bulk of his 80 years. Missionaries had studied with him without success, so when a missionary named Russell Graham wanted to give him another chance, the brothers suggested that he had better not waste his time. However, Antonio had a good quality​—he was humble. Though his mind was so damaged by alcohol that he always had to study the same material three times, he progressed at last to dedication and baptism. He served Jehovah faithfully until he died.
José was raised in the Catholic Church but studied socialist philosophy and atheism. Convinced by university teaching that mankind is the product of evolution, he ceased to believe in God at all. The painful death of his stepson in 1966 made him realize how helpless humans are in the face of death. One day a missionary explained the resurrection hope to him. His interest was aroused, and he began to rebuild his faith in God, but this time on a solid foundation. He learned that God’s Kingdom, not socialism, is the only remedy and became a Kingdom publisher. Since then he has been appointed as an elder and has spent some years in circuit work.
The Fruits of Informal Witnessing
One of the most delightful features of the Christian ministry in Honduras is informal witnessing. Group discussions in marketplaces, in doctors’ waiting rooms, on trains, and at bus stops are a way of life in Honduras. That makes it relatively easy to approach people informally on the subject of the Bible.
In the town of Omoa, there lived a woman who did not like Jehovah’s Witnesses at all. She never talked to them or accepted literature. She was interested in making money, though, and to that end she raised chickens. Knowing her attitude, a brother spoke to her informally about a few ways to save both time and money in raising chickens. Now this she liked to hear. A few weeks later, an article came out in the Awake! magazine about saving time and money, so the brother took a copy to her. She appreciated it, and now she receives our literature happily.
A sister working in a store was somewhat frightened by the appearance of a long-haired young customer. She found the courage to talk to him about the Paradise hope, but he brusquely replied that he did not believe in fairy tales and that he was a hippie and a drug addict. The sister persisted in witnessing briefly whenever he came by. Once she explained that according to 1 Corinthians 6:9-11, the important thing is what you become, not what you have been. When he asked her what she thought about his long hair, she replied that she had no authority over anyone else’s grooming, but she believed the Bible teaching that long hair is a dishonor to a man. (1 Cor. 11:14) The next day he was clean-shaven and had short hair! He asked for a Bible study, and a brother happily complied. He is now baptized and conducting his own studies.
One little boy had the habit of talking to everyone he met, as is fairly common with seven-year-olds. Seeing a young man sitting in front of his house with a book, the child asked him if that was the Bible he was reading. When he learned that it was not​—in fact it was a mechanic’s manual—​he told the young man in no uncertain terms that only by serious reading of the Bible could he get eternal life. “If you want, my father can study with you,” he said, and he led the young man into the house to meet his father. The upshot of the story is that this young man was baptized in 1976. It turned out that years previously he had accepted magazines from a sister but lost contact with her. How important informal witnessing is!
Getting Married
When they learn the truth, many couples realize they must take measures to get legally married. It was reported in 1973 that in just the Bella Vista Congregation in Comayagua, 32 couples had taken such steps​—more than half of the congregation’s 120 publishers!
Teodoro and Mélida were grandparents. Mélida studied the Bible and decided that she wanted to serve Jehovah. Teodoro, 60 years old, agreed to marry her. So, accompanied by two of their grandchildren, they presented themselves at city hall. Just before the ceremony, Teodoro turned to the judge and said: “Have you ever thought of getting married someday?” It was commonly known that he was living with a woman and had three children out of wedlock.
But what does a person do if his partner does not want to marry? That was the problem facing Gladys. She had lived with Antonio for years, and they had three children. Gladys had been studying with a missionary sister and wanted to put her life in order so she could serve Jehovah. Finally, she said to Antonio: “I will now sleep with the children until we get married. When we are legally married, then we can sleep together again.” She stuck to her word; Antonio grew progressively grumpier. After six long months, he capitulated and said, “OK, let’s get married.”
Raising a Family
A vital facet of our ministry is to teach parents to fulfill the God-given responsibility of training their children. A married couple with five children began to study, progressed well, and were soon attending meetings. The meetings definitely had an effect. One day the missionary who was conducting the Bible study with them fell asleep while doing so. In fairness it should be mentioned that the temperature beneath the tin roof was probably in excess of 120 degrees Fahrenheit [50° C.]. The father, applying the counsel he had heard at the meetings about training the family, simply continued the study until the missionary woke up​—many paragraphs later! Some years have elapsed, and Jehovah has blessed that diligent family. The father is a ministerial servant, his wife an auxiliary pioneer, and the oldest son a regular pioneer.
Three-year-old Ernesto watched too much television, and his parents, like so many, worried about it. He would go around all day singing the commercials. To counteract this unhealthy influence, his parents bought him My Book of Bible Stories audiocassettes and taught him to turn off the TV. Ernesto was quick minded; soon he had memorized the tapes so well that just giving him a story’s number was enough to set him off reciting the whole thing. One evening at the meeting, Ernesto’s father was obviously very tired. Someone asked why he had not slept well. He replied wearily: “We couldn’t stop Ernesto until story number 43.” Ernesto is now ten years old and active in the ministry. His parents are happy that they took the trouble to fill his mind with useful information.
Can little children really make their own decisions on the basis of lessons they learn from their parents and grandparents? Little Mario, who lives in La Ceiba, is four years old and spends much time with his grandmother Chepita, who has been a Witness for many years. One day Mario’s other grandmother, who is Catholic, visited and asked Mario if he would like to go to church with her. “No more, Grandma,” he replied. She asked him why not, and he said to her: “Babylon the Great, Grandma!”
Overcoming Obstacles
Of course, few manage to serve Jehovah without facing serious obstacles and problems. When Emilia first heard the Kingdom message in 1967, she was already married, though not happily. At first she did not take the truth seriously. But when she began to do something about it, her husband threatened to throw the sister who studied with her out of the house. Emilia said firmly: “If you throw her out, we will study in the street.” One day Emilia stopped at the bar where her husband was drinking to let him know that she was going to the meeting. He was waiting on the corner when she returned and began to shout at her, publicly calling her a prostitute.
Despite such indignities and even beatings, Emilia decided to get baptized. And in spite of 20 more years of constant opposition, she trained the children. From when they were very small, she taught each one a Bible presentation to practice among the shrubs and flowers in the garden. Was it worth all the work? Of her eight sons, two are now ministerial servants and two are regular pioneers. What of Emilia’s husband? He finally accepted a Bible study​—with one of his own daughters, a regular pioneer!
Employment can also present obstacles to serving Jehovah. Maids or domestic workers in Honduras have to work very long hours and are often treated as virtual slaves, expected to be available seven days a week. Many are afraid to ask for free time for fear of losing their job. But a certain young sister always made it clear from the outset that she would accept a job only if she could take time off for her worship of Jehovah. In addition to caring for her own home, she was conducting eleven home Bible studies, most of whom attended meetings.
Fifi Strikes!
Honduras has had its share of natural disasters. Hurricanes are nothing new to this country, but when hurricane Fifi smashed into the north coast in September 1974, it proved to be the worst natural disaster in the country’s history. Some 1,600 Witnesses (two thirds of the country’s total) lived in the disaster area. Although 10,000 people were killed, no brothers lost their lives. Many did lose their homes and possessions, though, and massive flooding ravaged the communications systems, roads, rails, and bridges upon which everyone depended. One group of Witnesses set out from the Baracoa railway station by canoe to see about the welfare of isolated brothers and Bible students. They found that canoe travel was possible overland as far as Tela, some 35 miles [55 km] away! The tops of houses and trees served as landmarks. As they brushed by one tree, a stranded coral snake fell writhing into the canoe. They killed the deadly reptile with a swift blow from a machete before it could do them any harm.
Fifi caused other problems. Two circuit assemblies had to be postponed. The September report suffered a drop, as huge amounts of time and effort had to be diverted to relief work. Brothers all over the world contributed, and in a short time, supplies came in from New York, New Orleans, and Belize. In less than a month, some 63,000 pounds [29,000 kg] of provisions were distributed to the brothers, their families, and friends. November 6 of that year proved to be unforgettable. Despite formidable obstacles, a one-day circuit assembly was held right in the heart of the disaster area, and 4,000 attended. Tears of joy and relief streamed down many faces as brothers and sisters discovered for the first time that their dear friends were alive and safe.
During the following year, the brothers built two new Kingdom Halls and 36 new homes. Some homes were rebuilt in the same location, while others had to be relocated, since the former sites were now in the riverbed! One brother was so appreciative of receiving help that he redesigned his new home so as to have both the funds and the space to include a new Kingdom Hall on the same lot.
Great Earthquakes
“Like the thunder of a hundred freight trains.” That was how a brother described the earthquake on February 4, 1976, that shook his house crazily until it toppled off its nine-foot-high [2.7 m] supports into the swamp below. Some 150 other houses in the town were also severely damaged. But the epicenter of this 7.5 magnitude quake was just over the border in Guatemala, and it was there that the toll was very heavy indeed. A fisherman a few miles off the coast that moonlit night said he had been stunned to see the ocean go suddenly as flat as a mirror. Strangely, the fish all around started leaping out of the water. He still didn’t understand until all the lights in the distant town went out and a terrible roar came echoing over the water.
The Motagua Fault slipped again in 1980, shaking the people out of their beds once more, but with much less damage. The people themselves say, “It is the sign of the last days.” Unfortunately the majority take no action. In spite of great earthquakes and the indifference of many, the Kingdom work goes on increasing in Honduras. After all, that too is part of the sign that these are the last days.​—Matt. 24:7, 14.
The River Euphrates Is Drying Up
To the unenlightened it might appear that religion in Honduras is thriving; many churches are still full, at least on special occasions. The evidence grows, however, that the waters (symbolizing the people) that once sustained Great Babylon are starting to dry up. (Rev. 16:12; 17:1, 15) People are beginning to open their eyes to unsavory realities.
For instance, Honduran Catholics are very devoted to the “saints.” Many devotees were thus badly shaken in May 1969 when the pope removed some 200 “saints” from the official liturgical calendar. “Saint” Martin of Porres, a black Peruvian saint who was supposedly able to communicate with animals, was not removed, whereas “Saint” Christopher, especially beloved by truck, bus, and taxi drivers, was eliminated on the basis of historical doubt. Such decisions provoked a wave of disgust from people over having been deceived for so long.
One 23-year-old man was a fervent Catholic, a militant member of a “Christian” movement, and second only to his priest in authority. One day his life reached a turning point. He was visiting a friend when suddenly his priest appeared, completely inebriated. The priest began to insult the young man, employing the most vulgar language and accusing him of interfering in the priest’s private life​—a life that did not in itself bear up well under scrutiny.
Disillusioned, the man left the church. A few weeks later, he “accepted the Lord” in a prominent Evangelical religion, but the hypocrisy and empty traditions left him equally disenchanted. So a year later he turned to what he considered the last option: a Bible study with Jehovah’s Witnesses. At the time he thought little of the Witnesses, but he was soon impressed by the consistency of their Bible teachings. He progressed, teaching his family according to what he was learning. He dedicated his life to Jehovah in 1975 and continues to serve Him to this day.
Marta, an elderly lady, told visiting Witnesses that she would like to know more about the Bible and was willing to study with them​—but on no account was she going to change her religion. The Witnesses agreed that they would not oblige her to join anything. Five months later, she began to attend meetings. She had been a deaconess in the Adventist religion. When members of her church finally got around to visiting her, she told them that while the Witnesses were alive with love and hope, their church was dead.
In one area three families lived as neighbors but were always quarreling. One family was Pentecostal, one Evangelical, and the other Adventist. Surprisingly, when a missionary brought the good news, all three families responded to the message! The missionary suggested that they all gather in one study with him. That way, they resolved their grievances in time. Such is the fruitage of true religion.​—John 13:35.
A fruitage of centuries of false religious teaching in Honduras is a national obsession with death. Even a man’s worst enemies will turn out for his funeral and make a merry time of it, with an all-night vigil of drinking and card playing. One pioneer sister on the north coast recalls talking to an elderly man outside his humble home. When she cast a curious glance at what he was sitting on, the man explained that it was his coffin. He had had it for so long that it was rotting. Then he proudly pointed out his new coffin inside the house, neatly mounted on the roof beams above his bed. How many coffins the man will outlive remains to be seen.
The Blessings and Challenges of Circuit Work
The circuit overseers, their wives, and the work they do in behalf of the truth are all highly valued in Honduras​—and with good reason. The work is joyful, but it demands considerable sacrifice. In the early days, transportation presented a big problem. One brother in the town of Siguatepeque, high up in the mountains, recalls a circuit overseer who arrived on foot, dripping with sweat and pushing a wheelbarrow loaded down with his equipment for the week’s visit.
Bad weather, swollen rivers, and a lack of roads often made it hard for these men and their wives to get from one congregation to the next. Gary and Elaine Krause, missionaries from the 41st class of Gilead, were assigned to work on a circuit extending from San Pedro Sula to Limón on the edge of the Mosquitia. In very bad weather, neither train nor horse could get through. More than once the Krauses had to walk, carrying their baggage some 50 miles [80 km] along the beach from Trujillo to Limón and back. The ocean breeze helped to relieve the intense tropical heat​—but they found it more endurable at times to travel at night.
Aníbal Izaguirre, circuit overseer on the north coast in 1970, was assigned to visit a remote village called Chacalapa. The first leg of the journey was by fruit train, laden with bananas, coconuts, and sundry animals. Next, a spine-jolting ride by truck as far as the village of El Olvido, which, roughly translated, means “Oblivion.” The final phase was a four-hour trek; occasionally he waded through chest-deep streams with his case on his head as monkeys screamed at him from the trees. Along the way, he met a husky black man who offered to carry his case and guide him to his destination. The big man finally dropped the case in a jungle clearing occupied by some 50 thatched huts and announced, “Well, here we are in Chacalapa!” It was worth the effort though, for one of the huts bore the sign “Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Eleven publishers met there!
Unusual in the circuit work is the case of Julio Mendoza of the Juticalpa Congregation. Baptized in 1970, he entered the ranks of the special pioneers in 1977 and was soon trained for circuit work, which he started in 1980. What is so unusual about him? Well, whether he traveled in the towns or isolated regions, he was accompanied by his wife, Dunia, and little daughter, Esther. Many rural homes consist of just one room, used for living, sleeping, and cooking. Julio and his family have many times shared such a room with a host family​—and their hens, turkeys, and goats as well! Once, when they could not cross a river, they were obliged to spend the night in the only accommodation available: a single hammock, which all three shared.
During the early years of the work in Honduras, the circuit overseers were invariably foreign brothers, either missionaries or those who came to serve where the need is greater. But in time, four of the five circuit overseers were native brothers. In recent years these men and their wives, both native and foreign, have been able to stay in the work longer than in the past, despite such diseases as hepatitis, malaria, and dysentery, which are rife in the rural environment.
Of course, when their work takes them to the major cities, sometimes they enjoy the hospitality of brothers in beautiful homes. They have learned the secret of adaptability, just as the apostle Paul did. (Phil. 4:11, 12) In recent years circuit work is much easier, with more paved roads and bus service practically to all towns.
“Shepherd the Flock of God”
Adjustments in the way elders and ministerial servants are appointed went into effect in 1972 in Honduras, as in other parts of the world. As a whole, the brothers responded appreciatively, working hard to qualify. It is interesting to note that when the new arrangement was introduced, only one third of the country’s elders were Honduran brothers, but by 1976 that proportion had increased to two thirds.
With a national average of less than one elder per congregation then, there was always a danger of neglecting to shepherd the flock. So the elders were advised to train the ministerial servants in the work of shepherding. Their visits were to encourage the friends and keep the lines of communication open. Of course, they were to notify the elders where serious problems existed.
In one congregation it was thought that a sister had lost all interest in the truth because she did not attend the meetings. But the brothers discovered that she had missed meetings only because she could not afford to buy shoes! She greatly appreciated a little help and soon was back at meetings and in the ministry.
From 1978 to 1983, a deceleration of theocratic activity in the country concerned elders and faithful publishers alike. After analyzing the situation, the Branch Committee pinpointed two main causes: materialism and a lack of personal study. Television has had a big impact, especially since the mid-1970’s. It has contributed much to the decline in study habits. And while materialism is usually ascribed to wealthy nations, the reality is that love of money can affect poor and rich alike. A missionary sister was surprised to see that one Witness couple had a house with only a dirt floor and no direct water supply​—yet they owned a television set, a stereo, and an expensive living room suite. Such things can be bought on credit, but often both husband and wife must work to pay off the debt. Not surprisingly, this couple were missing meetings and were virtually inactive in service.
The branch increased its efforts to “shepherd the flock of God” and to help the brothers to ‘regain the love they had at first.’ (1 Pet. 5:2; Rev. 2:4) Additionally, in 1981 eleven missionaries arrived from the newly established Gilead Extension School in Mexico, and in 1988 three brothers came from the Ministerial Training School. Jehovah has blessed all these arrangements, as the solid increase since 1984 testifies.
Pioneering Begets Pioneers
Since 1984 there has been a conspicuous reawakening in the pioneer field. Just compare the average of 937 regular and auxiliary pioneers in 1992 with the 276 in 1976. While the number of publishers doubled, the number of pioneers almost quadrupled.
Instrumental in bringing the pioneer ranks back to health were the frank articles in The Watchtower and Our Kingdom Ministry and the encouraging talks at the assemblies. Many appointed servants in the congregations began to speak more positively about the joys of pioneering. Some readjusted their affairs so they could become regular or auxiliary pioneers. They learned how important it was not to “put out the fire of the spirit” and that the pioneer spirit is contagious. (1 Thess. 5:19) Pioneering begets pioneers.
It is not necessary, as some have mistakenly supposed, to achieve financial security before becoming a pioneer. Take, for example, the case of a young brother from Guásimo, high in the mountains. The day after he was baptized, he applied for auxiliary pioneering. He had worked hard for some months to buy new clothes in order to make himself presentable for the ministry. All went well the first week, but the second week, he did not appear for service. Concerned, the other pioneers went up to the mountains and found that one night while this young brother slept, a thief had made off with his clothing as it dried on a line. The brothers gathered some more clothing for him. Despite the loss of a week, he met his goal by the end of the month. Months later he still owned only one pair of trousers. But that hardly detracted from his joy in seeing one of his Bible students get baptized, just six months after his own baptism.
In the San Lorenzo Congregation, there is a blind pioneer in his 20’s named Adrian. In 1984 his sister accepted a Bible study, but no offer was made to Adrian. It was thought that he would not be able to study. His sister did not grasp the study very well, so Adrian, who was always listening in, explained things to her. Soon his sister lost interest. Still, no one suggested studying with Adrian. He had to ask for a Bible study. He was so deeply moved by what he learned that soon, with the help of his family, he was going to the meetings.
As the truth took root in his heart, he wanted to share it with others. Once again, it was assumed that he would not be up to the challenge. Adrian insisted, and the brothers helped him to participate in the service. He reported 24 hours for his first month’s ministry and thereafter increased his service from month to month. The month following his baptism, he applied for auxiliary pioneering, and before long he was a regular pioneer. He usually reports more than 100 hours and presently conducts eight home Bible studies. And to think that the brothers at first overlooked him!
Caring for Special Needs
People with special circumstances often need a special measure of unselfish Christian love. Teresa, for example, was blind from the age of three. She had studied a little with a Witness, but she became involved over the years with several religious groups. Some of these prayed over her that she might regain her sight​—without effect, of course. Her real desire was to study with the Witnesses again. The opportunity came, but how could the study be conducted? The sister read the paragraphs. As long as she read well, with proper emphasis and pausing, Teresa had no difficulty in answering correctly. Soon Teresa wanted to go to the meetings. So the sister, although not an experienced cyclist by any means, would carry her there by bicycle! On rainy days it was quite a spectacle to see them arrive protected by an umbrella and clad in plastic bags.
At the meetings she just spoke right out to answer questions until she was taught to wait for her name to be called. She learned to give talks in the Theocratic Ministry School and to participate in the ministry. In spite of her special circumstances, she has her spiritual eyes of discernment fixed on the prize: that glorious day when she will see the beauty of a paradise earth.
One old man, almost blind, lived up in the mountains. He accepted the Truth book from a brother who put forth extra effort to maintain contact with him. Sometimes the man was so ill he could not study, but usually when they could study together, he answered thoughtfully and intelligently. Suddenly, though, the old man was gone. The neighbors said he had gone to live with his daughter in town because he needed medical treatment. Instead of reasoning that he could do no more, the brother had a solution. When he next attended an assembly in that town, he went from house to house, searching for his former study. Well, he found him at last​—resting in a hammock! Arrangements were made to study again. Before long the old man even learned to get to the meetings by himself by counting the streets on the way to the Kingdom Hall. In time he became a publisher of the good news. How people were amazed to see that white-haired, nearly blind, 93-year-old man spending from 30 to 70 hours each month visiting from house to house!
Lagos was affectionately called Laguito by the Witnesses in Puerto Cortés. He had been a special pioneer for about as long as anyone could remember. As to his age, he could only say vaguely: “I don’t think I am any older than 86.” Laguito had very poor eyesight, so the branch office sometimes had to decipher his service reports. One month he reported the impossible total of 1,050 hours, which turned out to be a still remarkable 150 hours. For this same reason, he often collided with things as he rode his bicycle. After he rode into a creek and hurt his head, the brothers finally decided that the only kind course was gently to take Laguito’s bicycle away and sell it for him. Later he was bedridden with hepatitis and never recovered. He had no known relatives, so the congregation took care of Laguito during his last six months. A brother took him into his home, and each day someone was there to attend to the needs of this beloved, faithful old brother.
“They Were Not of Our Sort”
As must be expected, though, not all remain faithful. A number have had to be disfellowshipped from the Christian congregation over the years in Honduras, particularly for immorality and drunkenness. Apostasy too, with its arrogance and divisiveness, has cost the spiritual lives of some. Sad as this always is, disfellowshipping saves lives. It keeps the congregation clean, moves some wrongdoers to repentance, and sometimes even gives a good witness.
For instance, Blanca Rosa was studying with a missionary sister who was about to leave the country. The missionary wanted to transfer the study to yet another publisher, but Blanca Rosa did not want to continue the study. She was curious, though, as to why the missionary sister had to leave. “Go to the meeting tonight, and you will understand,” explained the sister. To satisfy her curiosity, Blanca Rosa went to the meeting that night and heard an announcement: The husband of the missionary sister, a foreign missionary himself and an overseer, was disfellowshipped from the congregation. Blanca Rosa was deeply impressed. She thought, ‘This is the truth. Neither race, nor appearance, nor position prevents a wrongdoer from being expelled from the congregation.’ This was the turning point in her life. She got baptized and for four years has served as an auxiliary pioneer.
Prodigal Sons
Many tears are shed by disconsolate parents who see beloved sons and daughters disfellowshipped or simply lost in the moral morass of this world. Jesus’ famous parable of the prodigal son, recorded in Luke chapter 15, is a fountain of comfort and hope for them. In Honduras large families are the norm, so the number of ‘prodigal sons’ is likewise large. However, there is a grain of truth in the saying, “Where there is life there is hope.”
As a child, Oswaldo knew the truth, for he was raised by an uncle who is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. He did not get baptized. During his teen years, he began to live a double life. He went to meetings and engaged in field service, but he also frequented discotheques with his worldly girlfriend. To satisfy his desires, he even stole from a brother. He had to leave his uncle’s house and thereafter only sank deeper into immorality and drugs. Finally he joined the army.
The years passed; Oswaldo began to long for the life he once had in Jehovah’s organization. But he felt powerless to do anything about it. By chance one day he met his uncle and told him that he wanted to return. Although having grave doubts about Oswaldo’s sincerity, the uncle gave him the address of the missionary home. Oswaldo went straight there and arranged for a Bible study. That same week he started to read the magazines again and attended meetings; this, in turn, gave him the strength he needed to turn away from drugs and immoral living. He found the courage to make amends to those from whom he had stolen. One sister did not wish to accept anything, but Oswaldo insisted on presenting her with a television set and a box of apples to ease his conscience. The sister’s unbelieving husband was very impressed.
Oswaldo was still in the army, though. He desired a way to get a valid discharge. It so happened that his superior at the officers’ club was discharged for theft, and Oswaldo was told that he could replace him. The promotion would have meant good pay and enjoyable work, but Oswaldo was adamant about seeking a discharge. He presented himself to the commander. Before he could even mention a discharge, the commander congratulated him on his promotion! Oswaldo stood fast and explained what he really wanted: to leave the army and take up the full-time ministry. Surprisingly, he was granted his wish. More than that, the changes he had made in his personality during his last months in the army led to his being awarded a congratulatory diploma. Many opportunities to witness opened up; before he left, his army friends respectfully nicknamed him “The Preacher.” He is now baptized and a regular pioneer​—a real preacher.
Santiago too followed a rather wayward course. He had three sisters. Two of them were regular pioneers, the other an auxiliary pioneer; all three were active, diligent, and spiritually minded. Santiago was not. He was proud of his blond hair (black hair is almost universal in Honduras), and he wore it long. His close friends were thieves, drunkards, and drug addicts; he shared their habits. Not surprisingly, he landed in jail almost every month. Despite all of this, one missionary brother reasoned, “With three theocratic sisters, surely it is impossible that their brother should be entirely lacking in good qualities.” He offered to study with Santiago, who accepted. But he did not progress. Finally the missionary terminated the study, explaining that it was purposeless to continue if Santiago did not want to apply the things he was learning.
The months passed by, and early in 1986, Santiago begged to be given another chance. This time it was different: He cut his long hair, he prepared for his studies, and he even witnessed to his former friends, who began to avoid him like the plague. Still, the missionary was not quite convinced. “Has he really quit smoking and causing problems in the neighborhood?” he asked Santiago’s sisters. Yes, he really had. In April he was permitted to participate in field service. By May he was reporting 65 hours in the work; by June he was conducting five Bible studies. He progressed to baptism, and soon he was taking the lead in all the spiritual activities of the family. In 1989 he became a special pioneer.
What made Santiago change his ways? He replies: “After studying the first time, I knew what pleases Jehovah and what does not. Then I noticed that every time I did something wrong, knowing that it was wrong, I ended up in deep trouble with other people. This helped me to see that what Jehovah asks is best and is for our protection. The person who obeys Jehovah always has fewer problems. I didn’t want to have trouble all my life, so I started to study again​—but this time practicing the things I was learning.”
The “Blue Bomb” and Other Books
The Watchtower Society’s many publications have been instrumental in helping people to change their lives and draw close to Jehovah. They are well adapted for use by the literate and the semiliterate, the young and the old. It is impossible to say which one has had the most impact on the Honduran field.
Take, for instance, the world-famous Truth book, alias the “Blue Bomb,” of which well over a hundred million have been printed and circulated around the world. One Sunday-school teacher in an Evangelical church decided to go to the Kingdom Hall to ask for a Bible study. On the way, she met a sister who asked her why she wanted to study with the Witnesses. She replied: “I have found the truth now, and do not want to continue as a Sunday-school teacher.” She had been reading the Truth book secretly. She was disappointed that her Bible study could only be held twice a week and not daily. Nevertheless, she progressed well and soon began to attend the meetings. When she overheard the Theocratic Ministry School overseer saying that anyone who wants to be a minister of God should enroll in the Theocratic Ministry School, she did so. She severed all connections with the Sunday school and set her sights on becoming a true minister of Jehovah.
The Youth book has also been well received in Honduras. In some schools and colleges, teachers have used it as a basis for class discussion. A young girl who received the Youth book from her grandmother took it to school. Her teacher examined it and asked where she got it. A boy in the class who also had one spoke up and said it was published by Jehovah’s Witnesses. The teacher requested that 34 books be bought for use in the school.
The Creation book has also had considerable impact in the colleges. A sister who is a teacher always resisted pressure from both the director and other teachers to lecture on the theme of prehistoric man. When the Creation book came out, she used it in class to good effect and also placed one with another teacher and one with the director.
In such areas as Puerto Cortés, almost every school director has a copy of this book. The Caribbean director of a worldwide charity organization, who was educated at a university in England, read it several times and said: “The book gets to the point exactly. You cannot believe in God and at the same time in evolution.”
The Live Forever book has now replaced the Truth book and is a source of hope and comfort to millions. As a youth, Leticia was preoccupied with death; whenever anyone she knew of died, she was overwhelmed with a terrible sadness. She relates: “As of two years ago, I have been free of this affliction; my sadness ended.” How so? “A college companion had the Live Forever book but did not appreciate it and so gave it to me. On page 10, I read: ‘You do not want to die, and neither does any other normal person who has a measure of health. God made us with the desire to live, not the desire to die. . . . Surely a loving God would not create humans with a desire to live forever and then not make it possible for them to fulfill that desire!’ I meditated on the matter and felt comforted. Later I told my companion that I was deeply grateful to her for giving me a real treasure.”
Of course, by far the most important book we use is the Bible. In Honduras, where people once did not dare to read this book, the New World Translation has been an invaluable tool. When it was released in Spanish in 1967, placements of Bibles in Honduras soared by more than 1,000 percent over the 1965 figure. This excellent translation continues to help people draw close to the Bible’s Author, Jehovah.
Just One Magazine
It was a big day for Honduras when they began to receive the Watchtower and Awake! magazines in full color. Their appeal was reflected in a 13-percent increase in placements for that service year, 1986. The people of Honduras really appreciate the wide scope and Biblical authority of the magazines. People can often be seen reading them on buses or in offices.
In the La Ceiba area, a doctor recommended an abortion to a pregnant woman who had repeatedly had difficulty in childbirth. She was unsure, though, so he told her to go away and think about it. The day she was to return for her next appointment, a Witness placed a magazine with her. It featured the subject of abortion and helped her to decide firmly against it. How happy everyone was when she finally gave birth to her baby​—with no problems! This lady began a Bible study. Now both she and her oldest daughter are baptized and serve as auxiliary pioneers. It started with just one magazine.
One sister placed an Awake! magazine containing the article “Pursue Peace With Your Neighbor” with the personnel manager of the Ministry of Education. She was pleasantly surprised when 300 employees were each given a photocopy of this article! It was to be used by them as a basis for discussion in a study session. Though the session was prolonged, nobody complained. As a result of the session, the atmosphere among the workers improved greatly, and the manager has gained the liking and respect of the staff. That too resulted from just one magazine.
Strangely, some brothers have had a negative attitude toward distributing magazines. In 1981 one small congregation placed very few magazines, an average of only about three per publisher monthly. The circuit overseer encouraged them to be positive about the real worth of the magazines. Soon, in that same congregation, publishers were placing an average of 16 magazines each per month. To their surprise, they found that some people were happy to accept three or four issues at a time!
Further Progress in Rural and Isolated Territory
In 1970 it was calculated that the Kingdom good news was still reaching only 3 or 4 of every 10 Hondurans. In harmony with suggestions made by the zone overseer that year, it was decided to reorganize the congregations’ territories, making a greater percentage of the population accessible. The congregations responded by arranging for carloads or even busloads of Witnesses to go out once each week into the rural areas. Even so, the entire country could not yet be covered that way. In 1971 the branch office took the initiative to arrange for the remaining unassigned territory to be worked once a year by temporary special pioneers.
Two special pioneers, Armando Ibarra and Manuel Martínez, were assigned to work the isolated territories in the region of Olancho. They made at least five expeditions to the scattered villages of that vast area. It is a territory of endless mountains and remote valleys, the habitat of such wild animals as jaguars and venomous snakes​—but also, most dangerous of all, violent men.
To cover more territory, they agreed to work separately while always maintaining contact. One day Armando realized that he had not seen Manuel for some time and went to look for him. Approaching a house, he overheard someone say: “Let your God or your Bible save you now!” He felt pangs of fear but prayed to Jehovah and entered. The scene was tense. There was Manuel, his hands up, facing two men armed with pistol and machetes. Seeing Armando and realizing that Manuel was not alone, the men lowered their weapons and let him go. Cautiously, Manuel, facing these men and slowly walking backwards, left the house and joined his partner. With that, the two of them made off to another village.
In May 1987, Hector Casado, then a circuit overseer, sent letters to the congregations asking for volunteers to organize a six-day excursion into the isolated villages of the region known as Santa Bárbara. Brothers and sisters of robust constitution were needed who would be willing to trek into the mountains and sleep in whatever village they might find themselves at nightfall. Seventy Witnesses from 26 congregations and isolated groups met together in San Pedro Sula on the appointed day. They were divided into eight groups, and after praying to Jehovah, they set off on their respective routes. They met all kinds of people, mostly very poor, some very favorable, some hostile, many illiterate, and a few already well-versed in the truth, thanks to books acquired years previously. One woman wanted the Live Forever book so much that she offered her only hen in exchange.
One group drove a four-wheel-drive vehicle for six laborious hours on tortuous mountain tracks. When they finally arrived at a little town, they were welcomed by a torrential rainstorm. This was providential, since the area had received no rain for several months. The brothers were given the credit for the storm! Consequently, the waters of truth were also well received there. Some sisters would return the very same afternoon to conduct Bible studies with interested people. Some of these studies were continued by correspondence.
Another group worked a sector virtually controlled by North American Evangelicals, who operated their own radio station. Over the air, they launched a propaganda campaign against the Witnesses, describing how they visit in pairs, carrying literature bags. “Be very careful of the Witnesses,” they warned. “They are capable and have a deep Bible knowledge. Even an expert among our brothers could be deceived by them. Avoid them! Don’t receive them into your homes!” This free publicity stimulated a great deal of curiosity and paved the way for many an interesting conversation.
In another town a hospitable but very poor man offered the use of his home to the brothers. It was no problem sleeping on straw mats on a bare earth floor. But before first light, they were awakened by fleas, who had scheduled an early breakfast! In this town the weaving of straw mats is almost the only source of income. Several women who did not accept literature during the day came in the evening to where the brothers were lodging. They offered their newly made mats in exchange for books.
After six days, the group of 70 reconvened. They had placed 623 books and 687 magazines and spent some 2,455 hours in service!
Some have wondered if it is worth so much effort to reach these isolated people, since it is nearly impossible to make return visits on them. We must not underestimate the power of the truth to take root in the human heart. In one isolated area, an interested man regularly made an expedition into town to get literature for himself. When this became known to the group covering that area, a brother saddled his mule and set off into the mountains to find this man. He found the house, but the man’s wife said that he was not at home. Where was he? She replied: “He is out preaching.”
In a similar vein, one overseer reported: “Imagine entering an isolated town expecting to find little interest. But in house after house, the people say, ‘Jehovah’s Witnesses visit us, and we are convinced they have the right religion’! This happened to us. Others in the same town would say, ‘Come on in, we have been waiting for you; we study with Don Tivo.’ ‘Who is Don Tivo?’ we would ask. We knew of no brother by that name. It seems that this man had received literature, and the message took root deep in his heart. Once he met a Witness who explained how to use the books to conduct Bible studies, Don Tivo set out to make disciples. By the time we met him, he was conducting seven Bible studies. One was with a couple who were making arrangements to get legally married in order to join Don Tivo in the preaching work!”
Notable Conventions
In 1948, when the first district convention in Honduras was held, 467 were present. One businessman who attended said: “It’s about time someone came out with a message like that. It’s new to me, but I like it.”
Eighteen years passed before the first international convention was organized. In December 1966 in the capital, 1,422 people congregated, including 225 brothers from such diverse places as Canada, Germany, and Australia. A caravan of 11 buses brought 450 brothers from San Pedro Sula. The paved road from there to Tegucigalpa was still under construction, so they had an arduous 12-hour journey over winding mountain trails. From as far as La Ceiba the brothers came, arriving one day late because heavy rains made it impossible for the fruit train to get through. None regretted the laborious trip.
They heard timely counsel on the problem of nationalism in the talk “Hear Daniel’s Words for Our Day.” They saw their very first drama, entitled “Look to the Bible as Your Guide in Life.” It served to protect our brothers living in communities where fornication is so common that a man who is faithful is regarded by the public as odd or perhaps even deficient.
Both the press and the radio stations gave favorable publicity. Of course, the enemies were busy as usual, spreading lies and negative publicity, but the truth commanded far more attention and space in the press. As the apostle Paul said, “We can do nothing against the truth, but only for the truth.” (2 Cor. 13:8) No doubt this convention contributed to the excellent growth that followed. Over the next three years, 477 were baptized, compared with 175 baptized in the three previous years.
From time to time, members of the Governing Body visit the conventions, and the brothers always rejoice in the stimulus of their company. Brother N. H. Knorr came several times. Brothers W. L. Barry, J. C. Booth, F. W. Franz, M. G. Henschel, W. K. Jackson, K. F. Klein, A. D. Schroeder, and L. A. Swingle have all been guests at one convention or another.
The “Integrity Keepers” District Convention, in 1986, was another outstanding occasion. The drama “Your Future​—A Challenge” moved some brothers and sisters to think more seriously about pioneering. One young brother had been planning to go to university after the convention but changed his mind and looked for secular work that would allow him to be an auxiliary pioneer. His sister lost her job because she refused to miss the convention. She too took up auxiliary pioneering.
A small circuit assembly held in a school in Puerto Cortés was notable in one respect: The circuit overseer was absent! He was trapped on the wrong side of a raging river with no alternative but to stay where he was. The brothers responded well to the situation. They divided the circuit overseer’s assignments among themselves so that none of the program was lost. However, they still faced a challenge: The brothers overseeing the assembly had decided that all speakers should wear jackets. Few brothers in these parts own jackets because normally they have no use for them. So when the first brother finished his part on the program, his same red jacket and green tie reappeared​—for the next three presentations. The difference in size and shape of the four brothers added a minor note of comedy to an otherwise normal assembly.
Building for True Worship
Jehovah’s Witnesses are builders​—builders of Christian personalities, of happy families, and of united and peaceful congregations. As the congregations in Honduras have grown, they have had to turn their hand to the building of Kingdom Halls and a branch office. In the early years, a mere sign on the wall and a few benches arranged in the parlor of a brother’s house would suffice for a Kingdom Hall, but soon the congregations began to see the advantages of constructing their own buildings. By 1971, of the 22 congregations in Honduras, 15 owned their own halls.
The Kingdom Halls are usually simple, neat, and appropriate to the community in which they are located. The thatched-roof hut with mahogany benches​—made from local trees—​standing in a jungle clearing in Chacalapa cost no more than $20 to build. Bamboo grows plentifully in La Junta near the Ulúa River, so the hall there, with its earthen floor and bamboo walls, cost about the same. It has been enlarged and improved several times but is still simple and fits in well with the surroundings. In contrast, other types of halls are appropriate in the cities.
Simple though the structure may be, building a hall far from any major city is no simple matter. One cannot just pick up the telephone and order timber, sand, and cement. In 1973 the hall in Siguatepeque was built by unskilled brothers from just the available raw materials. Sand and gravel were shoveled out of the riverbed and sifted. Great pines were felled and hauled out of a ravine by oxen, after which the trees were mounted on a trestle and cut into 35-foot [11 m] beams by means of a 9-foot-long [2.7 m], two-man handsaw.
The branch office, or Bethel, has an interesting history. From 1946, facilities in the capital were rented, which meant moving time and again over the years. But while Harold Jackson was serving as branch servant, the growth of Kingdom interests indicated that a building suited to the needs would have to be built. To that end a well-situated plot of land overlooking the American embassy was bought. The work started in 1961. By that year Lloyd Aldrich was serving as branch servant. Baltasar Perla of El Salvador was the architect, and Pedro Armijo of Tegucigalpa was the contractor. Tools and construction techniques were simple.
On the excellent quality of workmanship, Brother Aldrich commented: “It was amazing what the brothers could accomplish without modern machinery or equipment. Nearly everything was done by hand. The only two machines of any consequence were a cement mixer and a truck for hauling materials to the site.”
In 1961 there were just 571 publishers in Honduras, and the branch facilities were more than sufficient, but by 1986, more than 4,000 publishers were reporting and the Bethel Home, even though enlarged in 1978, was no longer adequate. The Governing Body authorized an addition that would more than double the existing space. Work started in October 1987. What a joy it has been to see the international volunteers in action! Together with the willing labor of many congregations, they finished an excellent structure, which was dedicated to Jehovah’s service on October 21, 1989.
In Retrospect and Prospect
The dedication of the new Bethel was a happy day. Brothers and sisters long in Kingdom service came from far and wide and rejoiced to see one another again after so many years. Among them were some of the first missionaries to serve in Honduras: Allan and Helen Bourne, Darlean Mikkelsen, Randy Morales, and Woody Blackburn, who served as branch servant back in the early 1950’s.
Reflecting on his experience in the Honduran field, Werner Zinke, who has served as coordinator of the Branch Committee since 1978, commented: “Thinking of the 20 years that I have enjoyed serving here in Honduras, I can say that Jehovah has blessed us richly in this land. I have seen the number of publishers increase from 1,341 in 1970 to 6,583 now. What a privilege to give even better service to our brothers in Honduras from our new branch office.”
When Ethel Grell, who has pioneered since she was 14 years old, arrived in Honduras with her mother, Loverna, in 1946, there were only 15 publishers, including 7 missionaries. At a recent assembly she was interviewed and asked what was the greatest blessing she had experienced during her more than 40-year ministry in the country. She replied: “What has made me happiest is to see stability and maturity in Jehovah’s organization, the increase in young pioneers, and the enormous increase in publishers.”
At the dedication of the new Bethel in 1989, the Governing Body was represented by Lyman Swingle, who gave the dedication talk. Asked what he thought of the theocratic prospects for Honduras, his vision went well beyond the immediate future. He replied: “The prospects for Honduras and every other country are very good because Jehovah’s organization will soon be making the entire earth into a paradise.” In truth, that is our longing​—Jehovah’s Kingdom rule! But in the meantime, there is still work to be done. We beg Jehovah’s blessing on all our Honduran brothers as they stand shoulder to shoulder with their brothers in other lands, working loyally to uphold his name under the direction of Jesus Christ and his faithful slave.
[Charts on page 207]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
HONDURAS
Average Pioneer Chart
                                 939



                          255
                  162
          59
  14
1950    1960     1970    1980   1992
Peak Publisher Chart
                                6,583


                         3,014
                 1,341
         550
 260
1950    1960     1970    1980   1992
[Map on page 148]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
HONDURAS
Capital: Tegucigalpa
Official Language: Spanish
Major Religion: Roman Catholic
Population: 5,011,107
Branch Office: Tegucigalpa
MEXICO
BELIZE
GUATEMALA
EL SALVADOR
NICARAGUA
HONDURAS
Caribbean Sea
ISLAS DE LA BAHÍA
Roatán
Puerto Cortés
Omoa
Tela
Baracoa
Trujillo
La Ceiba
Limón
Sangrelaya
Brus Lagoon
THE MOSQUITIA
San Pedro Sula
La Lima
Ulúa River
El Progreso
Santa Rita
OLANCHO
Santa Rosa de Copán
Siguatepeque
Tegucigalpa
Comayagua
Danlí
San Lorenzo
Choluteca
Guásimo
Pacific Ocean
[Picture on page 152]
Loverna Grell, left, and her daughter, Ethel
[Pictures on pages 156, 157]
Honduras, a land graced with scenic waterfalls, beautiful orchids, ancient pyramids, and coastal beaches
[Picture on page 158]
William and Ruby White
[Picture on page 162]
These missionaries serving in Honduras come from countries such as Canada, Finland, Germany, Mexico, Norway, Sweden, and the United States
[Picture on page 168]
Brother Knorr and the twins, Jeannette Fischer, at left, and Johneth, who both began missionary service in 1952
[Picture on page 172]
Grant Allinger, branch overseer from 1963 to 1978, and wife, Olga
[Picture on page 176]
Preaching near Omoa
[Picture on page 184]
Circuit overseer Julio Mendoza with his wife, Dunia, and daughter, Esther
[Picture on page 193]
Kingdom Halls are simple, neat, and appropriate to the community
[Pictures on page 200]
First branch office contrasted with branch constructed in 1961, showing the extension added in 1978
Lyman Swingle at dedication program of new facilities, October 21, 1989. New branch facilities, finished in 1989, adjacent to the former building
[Picture on page 201]
The five brothers on the Branch Committee with their wives during a zone visit by Lloyd Barry. From left to right, William and Ruth Sallis, Raymond and Olga Walker, Aníbal and Cristina Izaguirre, Lloyd and Melba Barry, Werner and Ulla Zinke, Manuel and Ada Martínez

