Announcements
ACTING AS A RIGHT KIND OF MINISTER—1 Tim. 4:6, NW.
In these days a work long ago foretold is being done by Jehovah God through his dedicated ministers in all the earth. They have learned about God’s purposes from studying the Bible, and delight to aid people of good will toward God. This they do by publishing the truth in every possible way. Not only do they give oral sermons from house to house, but Bible study literature is left with interested persons. The right kind of ministers this month will offer a year’s subscription for the Watchtower magazine for $1. In these days of stress and uncertainty The Watchtower provides a year’s course of instruction in vital Bible knowledge. With each new subscription three booklets containing fundamental Bible knowledge are given free. All who desire to be the right kind of ministers are invited to have a part in this work of publishing the truth far and wide. Write for more information, or contact the local congregation of Jehovah’s witnesses.
A MAJOR SPECTACLE!
What a spectacle it will be when several thousand witnesses of Jehovah travel from North America to Europe next July to attend a four-week series of Christian assemblies in London, Paris, Rome, Nuremberg, Stockholm and The Hague! Why are so many people becoming transatlantic travelers? Not just for the jaunt, but for reasons that are practical. What better mission is there than (1) improving one’s appreciation of Jehovah’s goodness and of the unity of the Christian organization, (2) bearing testimony to one’s brothers in other lands of the fact that all of Jehovah’s witnesses are of the same purpose and of the same mind, and (3) participating on an international scale in obeying the Christian command to ‘not forsake the gathering of ourselves together’? (Heb. 10:25, NW) Are these good reasons good enough for you? Then will you be there? Do not delay. Plans must be made now. Attend and benefit from this grand series of international assemblies that is now less than five months away.
AN EASY WAY TO KEEP INFORMED
Some people do not know very much about anything. Others know something about many things. They can follow practically any conversation with appreciation and enjoyment, because the subjects discussed are not completely strange to them. How do they get to be so well informed? Doing some reading every day, perhaps fifteen minutes or so, is a great aid. Subscribers for Awake! magazine get information on a wide variety of subjects. This 32-page magazine, which comes to its subscribers twice a month, not only keeps them informed on world happenings, but discusses things of interest in every field of human activity. Additionally, Awake! always contains a helpful Bible article of unusual merit. All this information to keep you informed is available at the surprisingly low cost of $1 a year. All who subscribe during February, March and April will be given three booklets dealing with interesting Bible matters. Wait no longer. Write today.
1955 MEMORIAL ANNOUNCEMENT
The annual celebration of the Lord’s evening meal in commemoration of Christ’s death, in which his anointed followers share, will occur this year on April 7, after 6 p.m., Standard Time. That date corresponds to the ancient Nisan 14, on which evening Christ Jesus and his apostles gathered for the institution of this memorable observance. Accordingly, Jehovah’s witnesses (including all persons of good will toward God) will assemble together on this date. A capable speaker, dedicated and baptized, one of the remnant if available and capable, will give the discourse and supervise the distribution of the emblems, after Jehovah’s blessing has been prayed for over each separately. All in attendance will be invited to share in the special week-end field service arrangements made by the congregation.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
April 3: Supporting Jehovah’s Organization, ¶1-20. Page 145.
April 10: Supporting Jehovah’s Organization, ¶21-38. Page 151.

