Is the Full-Time Ministry for You?
CHRIST Jesus pioneered the full-time service of the Christian ministry. Entering it after his baptism and forty-day fast in the wilderness, he began it with the startling announcement: “The kingdom of the heavens has drawn near,” and continued therein until his death, three and a half years later. And to expand that preaching campaign as widely and as quickly as possible he invited Peter, Andrew, the rich young ruler and many others literally to ‘leave all things and follow him.’—Matt. 4:17, 19; 19:21-27, NW.
To expedite the preaching of the good news of the Kingdom in this our day the Watch Tower Society has made special provision for similar full-time ministry as “pioneers.” It is open to all dedicated and baptized mature Christian believers who have served efficiently and zealously for at least one year. Those undertaking it agree to devote a minimum of 100 hours a month to preaching at homes. In addition thereto they must do personal study, and attend and participate in congregational meetings. It is also required of them that they meet their own expenses.
Obviously, such full-time Christian ministry is not for the lazy, for it means long hours and hard work; it is not for the greedy, for it is without opportunities for selfish gain; and it is not for the vainglorious, for there are no titles, honors or special garb connected with it.
Today in this full-time Christian ministry under the direction of the Watch Tower Society are to be found both young and old; some still in their teens and some in their eighties, upward of 17,000 throughout the world. Many are continuing therein year in year out; in the United States alone more than 1,250 have spent in excess of ten years in this service, twelve still serving after more than forty years. And not only that, but some are regularly meeting the full-time requirements even though deaf, blind or confined to wheel chairs.
One full-time minister in Honduras continues to meet the requirements though sixty years old, in poor health and having a family to support. He provides for his family by part-time carpenter work and among his preaching activities are the conducting of twenty-three weekly Bible studies. Another full-time Christian minister, living in Costa Rica, continues as such though a cripple with three children to support. By working for the government just three days a week he is able to provide for his family, leaving him four days each week for the ministry. Said a missionary regarding him: “To see him and his three children as he preaches from door to door or on the street corners is touching, and it really is marvelous how many persons with whom he studies the Bible become active ministers themselves. He is always cheerful and cannot understand why there are not more full-time ministers.”
IMPORTANCE OF THE CHRISTIAN MINISTRY
The Christian ministry works toward the vindication of Jehovah’s name by making known to the people that he is a God perfect in love, wisdom and justice, and almighty; that he has at all times all things under perfect control and that he has permitted evil for good and sufficient reasons. It clears his name of the reproaches heaped upon it by false teachings. And further, faithful service in the ministry vindicates Jehovah as right when he took the position that Satan could not turn all men away from Him.—Job, chapters 1, 2; Prov. 27:11.
Additionally, the Christian ministry brings life to lovers of righteousness. “God saw good through the foolishness of what is preached to save those believing.” This is so because taking in knowledge of Jehovah and Christ Jesus “means everlasting life.” To gain that knowledge some one must bring it to them.—1 Cor. 1:21; John 17:3; Rom. 10:13-15, NW.
Then again, by means of the Christian ministry the wicked are given warning of “the day of vengeance of our God,” Armageddon. Jehovah always serves notice on the wicked before he destroys them, making them fully accountable for their course. Besides, only because of having been warned would they know that their destruction is upon them so that “they shall know that I am Jehovah.”—Isa. 61:2; Ezek. 35:15, AS; Rev. 16:16.
And finally, those engaging in the Christian ministry relieve themselves of bloodguilt as regards the wicked and assure themselves a place in God’s new world, not to say anything about the many blessings they receive at present. “God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name.” Yes, we are counseled, “become steadfast, unmovable, always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in vain in connection with the Lord.” (Heb. 6:10; 1 Cor. 15:58, NW; Ezek. 3:16-19) Surely, in view of these four all-important purposes served by the Christian ministry, each minister should not content himself with the part-time ministry if he is at all able to engage in the full-time service.
THE OBLIGATION TO PREACH FULL TIME
Because only about four per cent of all Christian ministers of Jehovah are engaged in the full-time ministry some may be inclined to view the full-time ministry as the exception. But in this they err, for by virtue of his dedication vow every Christian is obligated to serve full time unless circumstances over which he has no control make that impossible. The command is, “You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind and with your whole strength.” Nothing is to be withheld.—Mark 12:30, NW.
We cannot escape our responsibility. “If one knows how to do what is right and yet does not do it, it is a sin for him.” Each one is obligated according to “what a person has,” and “everyone to whom much was given, much will be demanded of him, and the one whom people put in charge of much, they will demand more than usual from him.” A knowledge of the truth is due your neighbors and so you may “not withhold good from those to whom it is due, when it is in your power to do it.”—Jas. 4:17; 2 Cor. 8:12; Luke 12:48, NW; Prov. 3:27, RS.
Think also of the many persons yet to be reached by the truth preached by Christian ministers. Why, there is much isolated territory not regularly receiving the witness right in the United States, not to say anything about foreign missionary fields! If we love our neighbor or fellow as ourselves we will see that he also hears of the Kingdom hope and the way to life.
Then, too, consider the shortness of the time. Regarding this present generation Jesus said that it “will by no means pass away until all these things occur.” Bible prophecy also indicates that Satan himself knows that he has but a short period of time before Jehovah destroys him and all those on his side. When Jehovah brings his destructive plagues upon modern Babylon because of its sins it will be too late to urge men of good will: “Get out of her.”—Matt. 24:34; Rev. 18:4; 12:12, NW.
PERSONAL ORGANIZATION NECESSARY
The Christian ministry, above all else, is an expression of love, and for love to be true, genuine, it must express itself in a practical way. To be practical about the ministry so as to be able to engage in it full time requires personal organization. It becomes imperative that we make the best possible use of our resources such as time, health and material assets such as money, clothing, etc.
The full-time ministry demands that we wisely budget our time and discipline ourselves to stick to it; yet not so strictly as not to allow for exceptions when the welfare of others is involved. It requires that we heed Paul’s admonition: “So keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise but as wise persons, buying out the opportune time for yourselves, because the days are wicked.”—Eph. 5:15, 16, NW.
To measure up and continue to meet the requirements of the full-time ministry requires that we keep well in body, and so we must also use the spirit of a sound mind in the way we expend our energies. Like Paul, we must exercise self-control, ‘browbeating our bodies and leading them as slaves.’ We must see to it that we get sufficient sleep, and so must get to bed at a reasonable hour; we must exercise self-control at the table, especially if we are one of those “given to appetite.”—1 Cor. 9:27, NW; Prov. 23:2.
Nor may one neglect self-discipline in the matter of spending money or the use of other material assets, clothes, furniture, auto, or whatever we may have, if we would continue to enjoy the blessings of the full-time ministry. Wisdom and love indicate avoiding both extremes, neither niggardly economizing to the extent of depriving ourselves the necessary food and clothing nor carelessly letting money slip through our fingers.
Consider the deep-seated satisfaction of knowing that one is fully measuring up to one’s dedication vow to do God’s will and to follow in the footsteps of Christ Jesus. And what about the joys that come from seeing the fruits of one’s labors, one’s “letters of recommendation,” men of good will now serving Jehovah and who will enjoy the blessings of the new world throughout eternity, all because you were not content with the part-time ministry but reached out for the full-time service?
There is no more important work than that of the Christian ministry. We should endeavor to engage in it full time, unless we have Scriptural obligations that prevent it. It will require efficient personal organization, but the blessings are certainly worth it.

