A Letter From the Governing Body
“GOD is love.” (1 John 4:16) Yes, Jehovah is the personification of love. How thrilling it is to live in this time when we see the many ways that God’s love is being manifested and the evidence that Jehovah’s loving purpose is moving irresistibly toward fulfillment!
As God’s people, we have the privilege to be witnesses of the Most High. (Isa. 43:10-12) Of his ancient name people, Jehovah said: “Owing to the fact that you have been precious in my eyes, you have been considered honorable, and I myself have loved you.” (Isa. 43:4) These words also apply today to spiritual Israel. Additionally, Jehovah loves all those belonging to the great crowd, who have the hope of living forever on a paradise earth. Just think of it! Jehovah says: “I myself have loved you.” In your mind, can you hear Jehovah saying that with reference to you?
Although we are surrounded by many in the world whose ‘love has cooled off’ and this may tend to discourage us, what a tremendous encouragement comes from constant realization of the fact that we are the object of Jehovah’s love! (Matt. 24:12) As Witnesses of Jehovah, we are also witnesses of his great love because we personally experience his love in our daily lives. Because Jehovah loves us, he blesses our individual and collective activity in preaching the good news. The Governing Body recently lowered the monthly hour requirement for regular pioneers to 70 and for auxiliary pioneers to 50. This has led to an upsurge in the number of pioneers. During the past service year, on an average, 738,343 Witnesses were active as special, regular, or auxiliary pioneers. The combined number constituted an increase of 5.7 percent over the preceding year’s average. As a result of zealous preaching and Jehovah’s blessing, each week, on an average, 45 new congregations were formed. Every weekend baptisms are performed around the world. During the past year, each week 6,220, on an average, were baptized in symbol of their dedication and as an expression of their love for Jehovah. The number worldwide preaching the good news has now reached a peak of 5,912,492.—Matt. 24:14.
Meditating upon God’s love causes us to grow in our love for Jehovah. We can show our love for him by reading the Bible or listening to a recording of the Bible each day. We usually take time for what we love. If we love Jehovah, we will put forth earnest effort to arrange our daily schedule to make room for the reading of a portion of the Bible. At the same time, meditating upon what we read will cause our love for Jehovah to grow. Love and accurate knowledge ought to go hand in hand. It is good to abound in both and neglect neither. Philippians 1:9 says: “This is what I continue praying, that your love may abound yet more and more with accurate knowledge and full discernment.”—See Psalm 119:97.
Our love is directed not only toward Jehovah but also toward all our brothers in the world. We have “love for the whole association of brothers.” (1 Pet. 2:17) Early in the service year, many of you enjoyed loving fellowship with delegates attending international conventions. Others were built up by fellowship at district conventions.
Throughout the past year, tens of thousands of brothers suffered hardships as a result of civil wars and disasters. Relief campaigns were arranged to assist those in need. In many cases such assistance was extended also to neighbors who are not Witnesses. This is part of our showing love for the people in the world. As Christians, we ‘love our neighbor.’ (Matt. 22:39) However, we need to keep in mind that our main responsibility is to share zealously in the lifesaving work of preaching and teaching—a work that is more important than any humanitarian activity.—Matt. 28:19, 20.
Living in a world where violent and immoral entertainment becomes more widespread and the quest for riches is glorified, we need to deepen our love for Jehovah so as to be able to resist enticement from the world. (1 John 2:15) Regular meeting attendance will help us toward this end. The psalmist David ‘loved the dwelling of God’s house’ and desired to bless Jehovah “among the congregated throngs.”—Ps. 26:8, 12.
Deepening our love for Jehovah fortifies us to stand firm in the face of persecution. Similarly, we are strengthened by the conviction that no creation “will be able to separate us from God’s love that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”—Rom. 8:39.
We are pleased to inform you that effective October 1999, four anointed brothers were appointed to serve on the Governing Body with us. This was announced at the annual meeting. The average age of the newly appointed brothers is 57, and their average years in full-time service is 31. Their names are Samuel F. Herd, M. Stephen Lett, Guy H. Pierce, and David H. Splane.
Whether you are aged, in the prime of life, a youth, or a child, be assured that the Governing Body loves you dearly.—1 John 3:23; 2 John 1.
“May mercy and peace and love be increased to you” as you “keep yourselves in God’s love.”—Jude 2, 21.
Your brothers,
Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses

