From Our Readers
Dentistry Developments
I had a ceramic screw implanted in my jaw, the process described in the article “Dramatic Developments in Dentistry,” known as osseointegration. (November 22, 1986) I say, Don’t do it. An expert who examined me in 1985 said that this process is far from perfected, and to avoid severe complications, it should only be used on persons physically and mentally healthy. Medical journals should also allow patients who have had bad experiences to express themselves.
C. L., Federal Republic of Germany
There is always a need for caution when introducing any foreign substance into the body, and there will be a certain percentage of failures. Our item dealt with the use of titanium. According to some 20 years of studies, this procedure has had about a 90-percent success rate. Not only has titanium been used but so have vitreous carbon (glass), sapphire, and ceramic. While not recommending any particular treatment, we published the information for the benefit of our readers. It is good to give careful consideration to possible side effects before agreeing to any treatment.​—ED.
Just a Crush?
I enjoyed your article “Young People Ask . . . Who Says It’s Just a Crush?” (January 8, 1987) It sympathized with young people yet warned that thinking immoral thoughts is wrong. I had a crush on someone in a television series. The sleepless nights and far-out fantasies were all there. But the worst was when I wrote to her and received an autographed photo! I thought I was in love. I can’t wait for the follow-up article.
W. H., England
See our issue of January 22, 1987.​—ED.
Late Night Snacks
I really appreciated the comment in “Watching the World” under the title “Harmful Habit.” (January 8, 1987) It stated that late night snacks can be harmful, especially if a person repeatedly goes to sleep an hour or so after eating. My problem was in having a very disturbed night’s sleep because of indigestion. I had often thought, ‘Could my erratic sleep pattern be due to snacking at night?’ Well, after reading your item, I made up my mind not to do any more snacking after my evening meal. Since then, I have had a good sleep every night, and there is an added bonus: I have lost a few unnecessary pounds.
M. G., United States
Harpy Eagle?
In your issue of November 22, 1986, you featured a story entitled “‘The Snatcher’ Lives Up to Its Name.” The picture on page 20 of the article, which the Zoological Society of San Diego provided, is not a Harpy Eagle. It is a Guiana Crested Eagle. The Harpy Eagle is the world’s largest eagle, and you have disgraced it by showing a picture of a spindly-legged, snake-eating bird.
N. R., United States
We have received from the Zoological Society of San Diego the following: “I’m sorry to report that the photo you ran as a Harpy Eagle is indeed a Crested Eagle, Morphnus guianensis. Apparently, the two birds are very much alike in appearance . . . It would take a very sharp eye to tell the difference . . . [We] apologize for the misidentification. We make the utmost effort to properly identify our photos and we appreciate it being called to our attention if there is a question.”​—ED.

