Permanent Healing Near
MEDICAL science, with its astounding modern advances, may win the battle​—but still it loses the war. Almost as soon as we feel we have developed some skills and experience, infirmities begin to cut us down, and death comes all too soon. Yet God promises that it will not always be that way. Through his prophet Isaiah, God said he will ‘actually swallow up death forever, and will certainly wipe the tears from all faces.’​—Isaiah 25:8.
Does that sound hard to believe? Do you think a life of 80 years is a long time? There are trees that live for thousands of years​—why shouldn’t you? God gave starfish the ability to grow a whole new arm if one is broken off. Couldn’t he restore your body to perfect health and completeness?
Nearly 2,000 years ago Jesus Christ performed astounding miracles on earth. He cured not only leprosy but “every sort of disease and every sort of infirmity among the people.” The inspired record says he cured “people that were lame, maimed, blind, dumb . . . The crowd felt amazement as they saw the dumb speaking and the lame walking and the blind seeing.” Jesus needed no animal donors or organ transplants​—he healed the very organs or body parts that were afflicted. And he healed instantly, sometimes even from a distance.a
Not only did Jesus have the power to cure but he had the will to do so. On one occasion, a leper said to him: “If you just want to, you can make me clean.” Jesus, moved with pity, touchingly replied: “I want to. Be made clean.” He even raised the dead​—in at least one instance after bodily decomposition had set in.​—Mark 1:40-42; John 11:38-44.
What do these amazing examples show? That Jesus, now enthroned as heavenly King, not only has the power but also has the will to bring about real and permanent healing. He will do as the Bible promises.
That book, the Bible, describes an amazing change soon to come in human events​—the intervention of God himself in world affairs and the reestablishment of a paradise earth free of pollution, sickness, crime, hatred, and wars. It tells of real and lasting healing, both spiritual and physical. And Bible prophecy indicates that there are people who were living back during World War I who will still be alive when this worldwide change takes place.​—Matthew 24:3, 14, 34.
True Health
The Bible’s closing chapters tell of a righteous rulership coming “down out of heaven from God”​—to mankind right here on earth. Then God “will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.” (Revelation 21:2-4) In a literal sense as well as in a spiritual one, “the eyes of the blind ones will be opened, and the very ears of the deaf ones will be unstopped. At that time the lame one will climb up just as a stag does, and the tongue of the speechless one will cry out in gladness.” “And no resident will say: ‘I am sick.’”​—Isaiah 35:5, 6; 33:24.
Thus, not just medical aid and healing for a short time, but true health for all is the promise to those who will live under God’s Kingdom on this earth. Certainly that is a worthwhile goal for which to strive!
[Footnotes]
You can read the reliable accounts of these events in the following Bible passages: Matthew 4:23; 15:21-31; Mark 5:25-34; 7:31-37; Luke 7:1-10; 13:11-13; John 9:1-32.

