Question Box
▪ Who should offer prayer at congregation meetings?
Congregational prayer is a vital part of our worship. Representing others before Jehovah is a precious privilege and a weighty responsibility. In view of its importance, elders need to use good judgment when deciding which brothers qualify to offer prayer at meetings. Baptized brothers representing the congregation should be mature Christian ministers who are known as good examples and have the respect of the congregation. Their reverent and respectful prayers should reveal a fine relationship with Jehovah God. The article “Praying Before Others With a Humble Heart” in the May 15, 1986, issue of The Watchtower outlines important principles that are especially helpful for those who pray publicly on behalf of the congregation.
The elders would not have a brother offer prayer if he is known for questionable or frivolous conduct. A brother who tends to be disgruntled or inclined to use public prayer as a means to air personal differences would not be chosen. (1 Tim. 2:8) Even though a teenage brother may be baptized, the elders will have to determine whether he has the spiritual stature to pray on behalf of the congregation.​—Acts 16:1, 2.
Occasionally at meetings for field service, it might be necessary for a baptized sister to offer prayer if there is no qualified brother there to represent the group. She would need to wear an appropriate head covering. If it is likely that a qualified brother will not be present at certain meetings for service, the elders should assign a qualified sister to take the lead.
It is customary for the chairman of the Public Meeting to offer the opening prayer. However, at other congregation meetings, when there are more than a few qualified brothers available, someone other than the brother opening the meeting or the one assigned the final part may be called upon to offer the opening or closing prayers. In any event, the brother who is to be called on to pray at a congregation meeting should be informed beforehand so that he can give thought to what he will say. Then he can offer a coherent, earnest prayer that is appropriate for that particular meeting.
Such prayers need not be long. When a brother offers a public prayer, he will usually be better understood if he stands up, expresses himself with sufficient volume, and speaks distinctly. This will allow all of those assembled to hear the prayer and at the close to say a heartfelt “Amen!”​—1 Chron. 16:36; 1 Cor. 14:16.

