Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting June 12
Song 136
 8 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “Your Labor Is Not in Vain.” Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion. Include comments on experience related in the June 15, 1996, Watchtower, page 32.
22 min: Starting Studies with the Require Brochure. A talk, reviewing article in the January 1999 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 6. Demonstrate the suggested presentation in paragraph 6. Have one or two publishers briefly relate the success they have had in starting studies, telling how they introduced the study and what they did to keep the study going week after week.
Song 209 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 19
Song 14
12 min: Local announcements. Accounts report and announcement of quarterly accounts audit. If the congregation has copies of the Young People Ask or Youth books in stock, demonstrate how they can be used to good advantage in the ministry during the summer months, when we are more likely to find teenagers at home.
 8 min: Question Box. Talk by an elder.
25 min: “How Could I . . . Unless Someone Guided Me?” Question-and-answer discussion conducted by the service overseer. Have each paragraph read aloud, and read the scriptures in paragraphs 3, 4, and 7. When covering paragraph 6, explain the role of the service overseer in determining whether or not personal Bible studies should be revived with baptized people.​—See the November 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry Question Box.
Song 89 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 26
Song 39
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for June. Review literature offer for July. Show the older brochures that are available locally, and briefly point out the purpose of each one. Have a well-prepared demonstration showing how to offer one of them in the ministry.
17 min: “Be Liberal, Ready to Share.” Questions and answers. Include the four reasons “Why We Give” that are outlined in the November 1, 1996, Watchtower, pages 29-30.
18 min: Know How to Give an Answer. (Col. 4:6) Talk and audience discussion. What do you do when you encounter an individual who raises an unscriptural argument? The Reasoning book often comes to the rescue by providing practical suggestions on how to give a tactful answer. For example, although we view death as an enemy that will be conquered through Christ’s ransom, others are convinced that nothing will eliminate this eventuality, even putting faith in the false idea of reincarnation. Discuss the responses that are offered in the Reasoning book in the feature “If Someone Says—” on pages 103-4 and 321. Encourage everyone to carry the book in the field ministry.
Song 44 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 3
Song 213
10 min: Local announcements. Ask publishers who have started studies in the Require brochure to relate how this was accomplished.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: Applying Bible Principles Strengthens Family Life. Discussion between two brothers, based on the eight points covered in the Reasoning book, pages 253-4. Explain the importance of helping Bible students learn that the secret of family happiness lies in understanding and applying the principles in God’s Word. Using lesson 8 in the Require brochure, demonstrate how this can be accomplished. Families who respond to the Bible’s counsel are drawn together and find increased joy in close bonds of love and unity. Relate experience in Family Happiness book, chapter 13, paragraphs 1, 21-2.
Song 51 and concluding prayer.

