“How Could I . . . Unless Someone Guided Me?”
1 When the evangelizer Philip asked the Ethiopian eunuch if he understood what he was reading from God’s Word, the man responded: “Really, how could I ever do so, unless someone guided me?” Philip gladly assisted him to understand the good news about Jesus, resulting in the man’s immediate baptism. (Acts 8:26-38) Philip was obeying the commission from Christ to ‘make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them and teaching them.’​—Matt. 28:19, 20.
2 We must obey the commission to make disciples, just as Philip did. However, the sort of rapid spiritual progress that the Ethiopian eunuch made is not often seen among the people with whom we study the Bible. That man, a Jewish proselyte well versed in the Scriptures, had a receptive heart and only needed to accept that Jesus was the promised Messiah. It is a challenge if those with whom we study are unfamiliar with the Bible, have been misled by false religious teachings, or are burdened by difficult personal problems. What will help us to be successful in guiding Bible students to dedication and baptism?
3 Discern the Bible Student’s Spiritual Needs: The August 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry insert discussed the length of time that we might study with people, using the Require brochure and the Knowledge book. It gave this direction: “It is necessary to gauge the pace of the study according to the circumstances and aptitude of the student. . . . We do not want to sacrifice the student’s having a clear understanding for the sake of speed. Every student needs a solid basis for his newfound faith in God’s Word.” Hence, it is advisable not to rush through the material in the Knowledge book with the thought of trying to finish the book in six months. It may require much more than six months to help some individuals progress to the point of baptism. As you conduct the study week by week, spend whatever time is necessary to help the student understand and accept what he is learning from God’s Word. In some cases, two or three weeks may be needed to cover one chapter in the Knowledge book. This will allow time to read and clarify many of the cited scriptures.​—Rom. 12:2.
4 However, what if upon completion of the Knowledge book, you discern that the student’s understanding of the truth needs to be rounded out or that he is not yet fully motivated to take a stand for the truth and dedicate his life to God? (1 Cor. 14:20) What more can you do to guide him onto the road leading to life?​—Matt. 7:14.
5 Satisfy the Bible Student’s Spiritual Needs: If it is evident that a person is making progress, although slowly, and that he is developing appreciation for what he is learning, then continue the Bible study in a second book after the Require brochure and the Knowledge book are completed. This may not be necessary in every case, but when it is needed, continue the study in the True Peace book, the United in Worship book, or the God’s Word book. Most publishers have personal copies of these books to use if the congregation does not have a supply. The God’s Word book is the only one that can be ordered from Brooklyn. In all cases, the Require brochure and the Knowledge book would be studied first. The Bible study, return visits, and time spent to continue the study should be counted and reported, even if the student gets baptized before completing the second book.
6 Does this mean that those who were recently baptized but who studied only one book should now receive renewed help to study the second book? Not necessarily. However, they may have become inactive or may not have progressed in the truth, and they may feel that they need personal help to make greater application of the truth in their lives. The service overseer should be consulted before a study is revived with a baptized publisher. However, if you know of some who studied the Knowledge book in the past but never progressed to dedication and baptism, you may want to take the initiative to see if they would like to resume their Bible study.
7 It is a mark of Christian love to give close, personal attention to each interested person with whom we study. Our objective is to help the student achieve greater insight into the truth of God’s Word. Then he can take a definite, knowledgeable stand for the truth and dedicate his life to Jehovah, symbolizing that dedication by water baptism.​—Ps. 40:8; Eph. 3:17-19.
8 Do you remember what happened after the Ethiopian eunuch was baptized? “He kept going on his way rejoicing” as a new disciple of Jesus Christ. (Acts 8:39, 40) May we and those whom we successfully guide in the way of the truth find great joy in serving Jehovah God​—now and forever!

