Be Concerned About New Brothers
1 As dedicated servants of Jehovah we are obligated to “work what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to us in the faith.” (Gal. 6:10) To do that, we must know our brothers. In view of the great increases being experienced, this may require putting forth extraordinary effort to ‘widen out’ in our love so that new ones will not feel neglected.​—2 Cor. 6:11.
2 We should give thoughtful consideration to what new ones in our midst might be facing. Some may find themselves in a divided household, perhaps being subjected to ridicule and abuse. Former friends may have turned against them. Because of such things, these new ones may feel discouraged and lonely. If we know what they are up against, we can encourage them and make them feel wanted and appreciated.
3 Jesus Christ said of those who had taken up the yoke of discipleship: “No one has left house or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or fields for my sake and for the sake of the good news who will not get a hundredfold now in this period of time, houses and brothers and sisters and mothers and children and fields.” (Mark 10:29, 30) Individually we might ask ourselves: Am I widening out in my concern for the brothers, including new ones, so that they feel they have gained a loving brother or sister, father or mother, son or daughter? Do I make them welcome in my home as I would my dearest fleshly relatives? To the extent that my circumstances allow, am I becoming more aware of occasions when I might share my assets with those in real need?
4 Of course, being viewed by others as a close brother or sister, father or mother, son or daughter does not come automatically. We must demonstrate that we truly are such, not taking undue advantage of Christian hospitality and not always expecting to be on the receiving end. (2 Thess. 3:10-12) Rather, may all of us continue to “practice giving” of ourselves, our time, energies and assets, and thus experience a happiness greater than that which results from receiving.​—Luke 6:38; Acts 20:35.
[Blurb on page 4]
Look for Ways to Help Your Brothers.

