Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
Have you heard the latest news? Remember, back in July your congregation received a letter about the possibility of the Society’s buying much-needed property to house more members of the Bethel family. Well, the Society bought this property​—the Towers Hotel building—​on January 17. A picture of this large building appears on the first endsheet of the 1975 Yearbook. Eventually it may house some 1,000 members of the Bethel family.
In recent weeks the Bethel family has been delighted with letters from Brother Knorr about his zone visits while on an around-the-world trip with Brother F.W. Franz. In connection with these visits special meetings have been held. In Portugal, for example, the brothers had two large gatherings with a combined attendance of 46,870. Imagine the joy of the brothers there in being able to sing and pray publicly for the first time! Just three days before the first of those meetings, Jehovah’s Christian witnesses were granted legal recognition there.
From Brother Knorr’s reports we have learned that things are really moving ahead in many lands. In Germany, excavation has begun on a new Bethel home, and a recently purchased factory building is being cleaned and remodeled. Arrangements were made to enlarge the branches in Switzerland and Italy. And a new Bethel home, factory and office are being planned for Greece.
The brothers in Greece are very happy now that the government is allowing them to have public meetings. Brothers Franz and Knorr were overjoyed to be able to address a combined audience of 11,644 during five meetings held there.
Several other brothers from Brooklyn Bethel have been making zone visits in Africa and in South and Central America. It has been most encouraging to receive firsthand reports from these areas. During zone visits in January, the Chile branch dedicated a new printery, and the Ecuador branch dedicated a new two-story addition.
Indeed, marvelous things are happening. May all of us continue to be faithful in helping many more people to benefit fully from Jehovah’s mercy.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

