Imitate Our Merciful God
1 How blessed we are to worship and serve a merciful God. (Ps. 145:8, 9) We live because He permitted the human race descended from Adam to come into existence and to benefit from His generous provisions for sustaining life in spite of their sinful condition. (Matt. 5:45; Luke 6:35, 36; Acts 17:24, 25) Jehovah God also mercifully provided the basis for liberating us from sin and death.​—1 John 2:2.
2 He “does not desire any to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.” (2 Pet. 3:9) Our imitating Jehovah’s merciful patience requires that we have real concern for the people in our territory, engaging in preaching, not merely as a routine, but with an earnest desire to give all an opportunity to hear the truth. This is certainly what we want to be doing in the month of March, do we not?
3 One way in which we can show merciful concern for others is by making good use of The Watchtower. That magazine can be instrumental in opening up people’s hearts to respond to the truth. Many need to have their faith in the dependability of God’s Word strengthened. The March 1 Watchtower, with its fine discussion on the inspiration and value of the Bible, is just what they need. Others are discouraged by the injustices they see. Would they not be built up by the March 15 Watchtower article “Life Free from Injustice​—Is It Just a Dream?” You may also find the section “Insight on the News” helpful in arousing interest in what the Bible says about world events. What fine material we can point to in making the subscription offer! Because we deeply care about the people in our territory, we want to help them to see how beneficial it would be for them to receive the magazines on a subscription basis.
4 Because of our merciful concern for others, we should want to keep accurate and complete house-to-house records. This will enable us to make return visits, showing that we really care about those who have shown some interest. When making a return visit, you might start a Scriptural conversation, perhaps based on an article contained in a magazine you placed, and then offer a subscription. Even when no placements were made but interest was shown, on returning you could center your conversation on printed information that may be of interest to the householder and endeavor to start a Bible study.
5 We also want to have in mind encouraging as many as possible to be present for the Memorial of Christ’s death on March 27. It would be spiritually upbuilding for those in the territory to visit the Kingdom Hall that evening and have the opportunity to meditate on Jesus Christ’s role as a ransomer and on Jehovah’s great love for mankind. Being with us on that important occasion, they may be motivated to leave “Babylon the Great” and to show appreciation for God’s mercy toward them. You may wish to spend a day just inviting Bible students and other interested persons to attend the Memorial. And how good it would be if, as a result of your invitation, you would be able to welcome some of these interested persons at the Kingdom Hall.
6 The month of March will end with the timely special public talk “‘Who Is Jehovah,’ so that All Should Worship Him?” This is certainly a subject that should be widely advertised in our territory. Also, we want to be sure to encourage those who attended the Memorial to be present, do we not? If need be, why not arrange to pick them up?
7 With so much activity ahead, could you perhaps arrange to be a temporary pioneer? How many of you who will have school vacation would like to enjoy this privilege of service in March or April? If you can share in temporary pioneer service, talk to the presiding overseer and he will gladly furnish you with an application. Even if you are unable to pioneer, why not put forth a special effort to devote as much time in field service as your circumstances reasonably allow?
8 Jehovah God has truly set an outstanding example in showing mercy. Surely, in the months ahead, we want to be found imitating him. May our depth of concern for people and our faithful efforts in their behalf help many to come to know Jehovah as his obedient servants.
[Blurb on page 1]
Imitate God by Showing Mercy for Mankind.

