Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING MARCH 9
10 min: Song 25. Comment on the merciful attitude of early Christians as shown in the preaching work​—their concern for people and their desire to honor God. (Rom. 9:1-3; 10:9-14; 2 Cor. 5:20; 1 Thess. 2:8)
18 min: “Imitate Our Merciful God.” Questions and answers. (If appropriate to your theme, use daily text.) Demonstrate subscription offer, one publisher using the first article in The Watchtower and another, “Insight on the News.”
22 min: “Jehovah Will Not Desert His People.” Consideration of 1975 Yearbook, p. 71, par. 3, to p. 94, par. 2. Cannot cover every detail. An elder discusses the following material with a prepared panel on the platform. Emphasize points shown here in brackets, and highlight Jehovah’s mercy to his people and our need to imitate him. (1 Sam. 12:22) Can ask: (1) What unfulfilled expectation did some of God’s people have regarding 1914? (Pp. 72-74) (2) Disappointments about going to heaven in 1914 were very minor compared with what fulfilled expectation? (Pp. 74-76) [Jehovah mercifully upholds his people despite disappointments.] (3) How did Brother Russell view the future? (Pp. 76, 77) [Be steadfast.] (4) When and under what circumstances did C. T. Russell die? (Pp. 78, 79) (5) After Brother Russell’s death, what attitude did Brothers Macmillan, Rutherford and Van Amburgh display regarding the Kingdom-preaching work? (Pp. 79-81) [This is not man’s work, but God’s; our dedication is to him.] (6), What was the “Pastoral Work”? (Pp. 85, 86) (7) What was the V.D.M. arrangement, and what purpose did it serve in connection with public speakers? (Pp. 86, 87) [Jehovah always makes adequate spiritual provisions for his people.] (8) What was The Finished Mystery, and how did a few persons react to its initial release? (Pp. 90, 91) (9) How were some congregations affected by the smooth talk of those who had abandoned true worship, but what finally happened to such opposers? (Pp. 92-94) (10) Did many forsake true Christianity during 1917 and 1918? (P. 94) [In the face of intense opposition and persecution, Jehovah never will desert his people.]
10 min: Concluding comments. Share key thoughts from Branch Letter. Point out need to demonstrate mercy by zealous participation in field service. Encourage use of presentations learned. Song 41.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 16
10 min: Song 83. Have audience identify the “faithful and discreet slave” and how that one provides food in due season. (Organization book, pp. 8-10) Illustrate benefits of considering the daily text regularly.
18 min: “The Refreshing Quality of Reasonableness.” Questions and answers. Encourage all to cultivate reasonableness at home, in the congregation and in their daily lives. Conclude with comments on Question Box. Help publishers to have the right attitude toward those publicly reproved. Repentant erring ones are brothers needing help and encouragement. They should not be looked down upon as persons to be shunned by the congregation. Point out that such counsel from “faithful and discreet slave” results in benefits.
20 min: Talk by an elder on “Anointing to a Heavenly Hope​—How Is It Manifest?” (Watchtower, February 15, 1975) Briefly reemphasize point made in introduction of meeting that anointed as a class make up “faithful and discreet slave.”
12 min: Concluding comments. Discuss arrangements for Memorial and special talk; encourage all to review house-to-house records and invite interested persons to attend. Song 97.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 23
Memorial. As to the service meeting, arrange what appears to be best locally.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 30
15 min: Song 117. Stimulating talk based on 1974 Watchtower, p. 121, par. 6; p. 123, par. 14, to p. 125, par. 23. Emphasize being concerned about all sorts of men.
20 min: Reach All Who Will Hear. Use an appropriate item from Theocratic News, also show what has been accomplished locally in preaching. Inform congregation about territory coverage and problems encountered (not-at-homes, dwellings where admittance is refused, limited territory, etc.). Interview capable publishers, asking them how they have been able to reach as many people as possible. (Keeping and following through on house-to-house record; calling at different times of day, including evenings; using phone; writing letters; leaving older magazines; trying to talk to various family members; explaining work to doormen and superintendents. Stress being considerate. [Col. 4:6; 1 Pet. 3:15] Might relate one or two experiences to illustrate good results.)
15 min: Presenting the Good News. Questions and answers. Demonstrate how to lay basis for return visits.
10 min: Concluding comments. Briefly comment on congregation accounts; details may be posted on information board. Stress special distribution of the April 15 Watchtower. Those conducting Bible studies will receive from the Bible study overseer three free copies of that issue for each study reported. These magazines will not be counted as placements by the publisher. Encourage the students to give them, free of charge, to neighbors, relatives, friends or others. Unless already publishing, they need not turn in a field service report. If they desire, they may receive additional magazines at publisher rate. Song 34.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 6
How Can We Help One Another?
10 min: Song 85. Discuss effect of critical days on us. Whether new in the truth or not, all may face economic problems, sickness, discouragement, etc. There is a need to help one another; it is part of our worship. (Jas. 1:27)
15 min: “Be Concerned About New Brothers.” Father reviews article with wife and teen-age children. Applies key points to local congregation. Asks: What problems may new ones face in our congregation? How might each one in the family encourage someone else? Why should we be considerate?
25 min: How Can We Help Our Brothers? Show vital role mercy plays in true worship. When seeing serious need of brothers, more required than merely expressing wish or even the faith that “things will work out all right.” True worship moves us to act on their behalf. Read James 2:14-17 and then consider the following situations with the audience: (1) What could be done if a brother comes into great material need for reasons beyond his control, such as being out of work for an extended period or having to meet unexpected medical expenses? (w 9/15/74, p. 570; Organization book, p. 149, par. 3) Show brothers how to avail themselves of governmental help. (Illustrate with relief measures for Malawian brothers in refugee camps. [yb75, p. 9] After leaving Malawi much of their clothing wore out, and many had no money to buy new things. South African brothers responded, mailing parcels to camps. This proved very costly, but brothers in South Africa were willing to bear cost themselves. Relief funds contributed by brothers world wide were used too. Also, you may relate how brothers in Germany shared scant bread rations, often just crumbs. [yb74, p. 176] Would we be willing to do that?) (2) If one of our brothers is sick, how could we show mercy to him? (w 9/15/74, p. 570) Situations that could come up are: The mother may be in the hospital and the father may be working. Who will care for the children? An elderly sister living by herself may get very sick. (3) In the event a publisher dies, how could members of the congregation assist the rest of the family? (w 9/15/70, p. 576; also show ways to help those who are lonely, in need of work, etc. [Awake! 2/8/69, pp. 11, 12]) (4) When pressure from workmates, relatives or former friends tends to dishearten our brothers, what encouragement could be offered? (w 2/15/68, p. 119, under “Personal Visits.” and w 9/1/68, pp. 529, 530. Might point out briefly how daily text could be used to give encouragement.)
10 min: Concluding comments. Mention benefits of being united and interested in one another. We are living in critical days. (2 Tim. 3:1) Brothers in Rome appreciated need to be concerned about their Christian brothers. (Acts 28:15) Also, we need to keep busy in the field offering subscriptions. Song 64.

