
Audio Recordings—How to Use Them




 1. In addition to written publications, what beneficial provision do we have?
1 Many enjoy using jw.org to read delightful and accurate words of truth. (Eccl. 12:10) However, have you made use of the audio recordings? These make it possible to listen to much of the information on our website. How might audio recordings benefit us?
 2. How may we use audio recordings for our personal or family study?
2 For Our Personal or Family Study: Listening to audio recordings of the Bible, the magazines, or a publication while traveling or engaging in everyday activities may help us to make better use of our time. (Eph. 5:15, 16) We can add variety to our family worship by listening to the reading of material while following along in our copy of the publication. Using audio recordings during personal study is especially helpful if we would like to improve in our reading or if we are learning a language.
 3. Who in our territory may benefit from audio recordings?
3 For the Ministry: People in our territory who feel that they are too busy to read may be willing to listen to audio recordings. Or we may encounter those who speak a different tongue and who are more likely to respond if they hear the Kingdom message in their “own native language.” (Acts 2:6-8) In some areas, listening is an important part of the culture. For example, in the Hmong culture, people traditionally pass on their history to younger generations orally and they do quite well at retaining information that they hear. Many African cultures enjoy learning through storytelling.
 4. What questions might we ask ourselves about helping people in our territory?
4 In your territory, would it be beneficial to play a sample of an audio recording in the householder’s language? Might someone benefit from an audio publication that we send him in an e-mail? Could we download an audio publication onto a CD and give it to an interested householder, perhaps along with the printed version? Every complete electronic book, brochure, magazine, or tract that we give someone in the ministry may be counted as a placement. Audio recordings are designed for us to use in our personal study and also to plant seeds of Kingdom truth.—1 Cor. 3:6.




