
Improving Our Skills in the Ministry—Offering the Bible Teach Book




Why Important: The Bible Teach book is a primary tool in our teaching toolbox. However, before we can use it to study with someone, we must first place it with him. Therefore, all of us should endeavor to become skillful at offering the Bible Teach book in the ministry. (Prov. 22:29) There are many options, and publishers should use what works for them.



How to Do It:
           Raise an interest-arousing question that you can use to direct the householder to a specific chapter in the book. You may even select one of the questions at the beginning of each chapter. After hearing the householder’s response, read an appropriate scripture and then show him a paragraph on that subject and perhaps briefly discuss it together.

            Another option is to use the introductory pages to stimulate interest and then show the householder where the book gives the Bible’s answer. For example, you might refer to a recent tragedy covered in the news and explain that many have wondered about the answers to the questions on page 3. Or you could say that you are visiting your neighbors to share a positive view of the future. Then show the pictures on pages 4-5 and ask, “Which of these promises would you like to see fulfilled?” Another possibility is to say that you are making brief visits to help people find answers to life’s big questions. Then show the householder the questions at the bottom of page 6, and ask which one interests him the most.

            Use the direct approach for starting a Bible study. You might say: “We are showing this Bible study aid to our neighbors. Have you seen it before? [Allow for response.] If you have just a few minutes, I’d like to demonstrate how it can be used with your own copy of the Bible.”




Try This During the Month:
            Have practice sessions during your family worship.

            When in the ministry, share with other publishers what you plan to say. (Prov. 27:17) Change your presentation if it is not effective.





