Follow Up Interest Without Delay
1 “Never put off till tomorrow what you can do today.” Many are familiar with this adage that encourages getting necessary things done promptly. That we can apply this principle in our ministry is shown by the following experience.
2 A sister placed a book with a man and promised to return. By mistake another sister called at the same house an hour later. The man came to the door with the book in his hand and told her: “When you said you would be back, I did not think it would be quite this soon, but come in, I am ready for my study.”
3 While such a quick return visit may not be the usual case, this experience highlights the need to be alert to follow up the interest we find in our ministry without undue delay. During March we will be offering the Revelation Climax book. World events make it evident that this publication, which explains the final book of the Christian Greek Scriptures, is as up-​to-​date as today’s newspaper, radio, and television news reports on world events that bear directly on the lives of all mankind.
4 People Need Additional Help: In order to help people understand the information in this publication and to appreciate that it is relevant to their life and future, we need to arrange for a return visit, preferably within a few days of the initial call. How will we do this? It may be that letting the person know that you will come back will help determine the extent of his interest.
5 Pave the Way for the Return Visit: It is not always easy in today’s world to get a commitment to a certain time, and the householder may not remember to keep the appointment. Nevertheless, if you carefully note the time for such a return visit and then are sure to make the call​—within a few days if at all possible—​you will be carrying out your responsibility to take the appointment seriously. If the person is not at home, be sure to continue trying to contact him. He may be encouraged to take your visit seriously when he sees your determination to find him at home.
6 Since we can never be absolutely sure of the interest manifest on the part of a person when we make the initial contact, make a note to call back even when there appears to be only a minimum of concern. It is beneficial to follow up such interest without delay. You may have stimulated the person’s interest in the Revelation Climax book, and on returning you may be pleasantly surprised at the fine reception you receive. So be sure to follow up interest without delay!

