Make Known Jehovah’s Dealings
1 “Make known among the peoples his dealings. Make mention that his name is put on high . . . , for he has done surpassingly.” (Isa. 12:4, 5) How do you respond to this exhortation? When we reflect on Jehovah’s dealings with us as a people and as individuals, are not our hearts moved to tell others? Some 73 years ago, Jehovah freed his people from Babylonish captivity. Since 1919 true worship has been firmly established and has now spread to all parts of the earth. The extent to which Jehovah has done these things has surpassed our expectations. As an individual, how deeply do you appreciate God’s guidance, protection, and blessing? Can you do more to make known his dealings and put his name on high?
2 The Memorial season brings to mind a divine act for which we will be eternally grateful. The month of April would be an especially appropriate time to show Jehovah our thankfulness and appreciation by enrolling as an auxiliary pioneer. Also, if you auxiliary pioneer during the visit of the circuit overseer, you will profit all the more from his help and encouragement in the ministry.
3 Often, arrangements work out well when groups of publishers enroll as auxiliary pioneers. A good schedule can be worked out so that all will have someone to work with, and sisters with young children can arrange to assist one another. With good planning, many have found that it is not too difficult to reach the 60-​hour requirement. This means devoting an average of just 2 hours a day or 15 hours a week to the ministry. Some auxiliary pioneers witness an hour or two before or after their secular work and have longer periods of service on the weekends.
4 Even if you are unable to auxiliary pioneer, you may be able to increase your field service activity. Also, by assisting with transportation or working with others who are pioneering, you will be an encouragement to them. Whatever we can do to make known Jehovah’s name and his dealings will not go unnoticed by our appreciative God.​—Mal. 3:16.

