Revelation​—Mysteries Unlocked
1 The book of Revelation has long been a mystery. For centuries Bible scholars sought to unlock its secrets, though with little success. But the divinely inspired information in Revelation was not intended to be kept secret forever. It is a part of God’s Word that we need to understand. (2 Tim. 3:16, 17) Happily, God is unlocking Revelation as its exciting prophecies go into fulfillment in our day. Just as Jehovah used John to communicate these visions to his fellow Christians, today He uses ‘the faithful slave’ to unveil the meaning of this thrilling prophecy.​—Matt. 24:45-47; Rev. 1:1-3.
2 The Offer for March: The book Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand! has greatly enlightened and encouraged God’s people. But why should it be of interest to people in your territory? Because this exciting publication deals with climactic events described in the Bible book of Revelation that take place in these last days. Are not thinking persons interested in the future as revealed by God? While the Bible book of Revelation portrays God’s righteous judgments, it also offers promises of marvelous future blessings. (Rev. 21:1-5) Understanding its inspired message helps us to see where we are in the stream of time and impresses upon us the urgency of doing God’s will.
3 Is the Revelation Climax book too deep for the public to understand? Apparently, many have not found it too difficult. Note just a few of the many comments made by readers of the book. One man said: “This information is powerful. But it’s interesting. I love it.” A minister said: “I never knew or read anything more exciting and truthful than this book!” Another person who read the book in less than a week commented: “Now my eyes are wide open to the truth. I want to change my whole life around.” Clearly, many are finding happiness as they read the Bible book of Revelation with understanding for the first time in their life and begin to observe its words.
4 Sincerely Recommend Revelation Climax to Others: As you engage in Scriptural discussions with others during March, do not hesitate to show interested ones the Revelation Climax book. Mention to those who wish to read it that they may mark portions of the book they do not understand, and when you return, you will discuss those points with them. This can be a means of determining the extent of their interest and provide added basis for a return visit.
5 In addition to the door-​to-​door service, many have had success offering the Revelation Climax book informally to relatives, acquaintances, and business contacts. Point out how you have benefited personally from the vivid illustrations, helpful charts, and other marvelous teaching aids in the book. This may encourage others to look into the book of Revelation, although they may have felt that it is too involved to understand.
6 How privileged we are to have knowledge of future events revealed in the book of Revelation and explained through God’s channel today! Entrusted with such knowledge, unlike the scribes of Jesus’ day and the clergy today, let us never fail to make known or unlock the meaning of God’s Word to those who will listen. (Compare Luke 11:52.) As we do so, it is hoped that many more will embrace the hope of everlasting life in God’s new world and join us in doing the will of our Creator.​—Rev. 4:11.

