Service Meetings for March
Week Starting March 2
Song 139
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Illustrate how specific articles in current magazines might be used in magazine work on Saturday.
20 min: “Revelation​—Mysteries Unlocked.” Question-and-answer coverage of article. Highlight a presentation that is practical locally when presenting Revelation Climax book. Include brief demonstrations showing how common objections may be overcome. If householder says: “We have our own religion,” tactfully ask: “Have you had any discussions at church recently on the Bible book of Revelation?” Lead discussion to the reading of Revelation 1:3. Another question that could be asked is: “What is your church’s view on the book of Revelation?”
15 min: “Presentations That Get a Response.” Discussion by experienced elder and two or three pioneers and/​or publishers. Consider different approaches that may be practical in local territory.
Song 15 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 9
Song 101
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage those who plan to auxiliary pioneer in April to obtain an application and turn it in soon.
15 min: “Follow Up Interest Without Delay.” Question-and-answer discussion.
20 min: “What Can I Say to Stimulate Further Interest?” Present two or three well-​rehearsed demonstrations. After each, draw out from audience why they feel presentation would be effective in furthering the householder’s interest.
Song 19 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 16
Song 197
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Include Society’s acknowledgment of donations. Commend the brothers for following the principle at Deuteronomy 16:17.
15 min: “Make Known Jehovah’s Dealings.” Question-and-answer discussion. Warmly encourage all to cooperate in making April a special month of activity.
20 min: Elder conducts discussion with three or four publishers who will be auxiliary pioneering in April or who have done so in the past. Draw out what has motivated them to pioneer, what plans they have made for April, and any experiences they may have had in the past when auxiliary pioneering. Announce names of those thus far approved as auxiliary pioneers for April.
Song 123 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 23
Song 193
15 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Encouragement to consider auxiliary pioneer service in April. Outline arrangements to invite people to special talk on April 5 and to accommodate increased activity in April.
12 min: Local needs or enthusiastic talk based on information in September 15, 1991, Watchtower article “Illustrations​—A Key to Reaching Hearts.” Suggest illustrations that would be appropriate in local territory with current presentations.
18 min: Talk based on November 1, 1991, Watchtower article, “Do You Appreciate Jehovah’s Earthly Organization?” Build up faith and confidence of congregation in the organization.
Song 213 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 30
Song 209
 8 min: Local announcements. Remind all of the Watchtower subscription campaign during April and May. Where a subscription is not obtained, two magazines and a copy of any brochure (except School brochure) may be offered if genuine interest is manifest.
12 min: “Keep Doing This in Remembrance of Me.” Talk by presiding overseer with audience participation. Include material in box.
15 min: Discussion of “Ancestor Worship” from Reasoning book, pages 29-32. While many may contend that ancestors are not worshiped by the majority of people in the Western world, much is done in modern society to honor the dead. Some people are still revered and worshiped as if they were alive. Statues, paintings, and biographies commemorate notable figures. Introduce setting of father talking with teenage child. Parent uses information from Reasoning book, page 30. Highlight material from first two subheadings to show child why there is danger in viewing horror films that promote spiritism or the idea that the dead come back to haunt the living. Explain the condition of the dead and the resurrection hope, and show how this should affect our view of the dead. Child expresses desire to avoid entertainment that promotes spiritism.
10 min: Experiences using the Revelation Climax book during March. Invite publishers to relate selected positive experiences as time allows.
Song 72 and concluding prayer.

