What Can I Say to Stimulate Further Interest?
1 A major part of our purpose in preaching the good news is to make disciples, not simply to leave literature. Therefore, after interest has been located, we need to cultivate and nourish the seeds that have been planted, doing our part to develop a healthy environment in which Jehovah can help the individual grow spiritually. (1 Cor. 3:6) What could you say as a follow-​up to the initial presentations outlined above? Here are some suggestions for various situations you might face.
2 Cultivating Interest Found: “When we talked briefly before, you were very busy, but you took the time to express your concern about the future. As you will recall, we read in the Bible at Revelation 1:3 that ‘the appointed time is near.’ That has a direct impact on the future of all of us. Note what this book has to say about the scripture. [Read from paragraph 11 on page 17 of the Revelation Climax book.] This publication reviews all the prophecies in the Bible book of Revelation and shows how we can benefit personally. Would you be interested in learning more?”
3 Using the Revelation Climax Book to Start a Bible Study: “It’s good to see you again. There is an additional point I want to share that is found in the book I left with you, and it’s very encouraging. The Bible speaks about a ‘scroll of life’ in connection with those who will live forever. Would you like to know what names are on that scroll?” Turn to page 298 of the Revelation Climax book. Read paragraph 11, and then ask the questions on that paragraph. After considering several paragraphs, offer to return and continue the discussion.
4 Using Another Publication to Start a Bible Study: “I am happy to find you at home today. The last time we spoke, we read together the Bible’s promise at Revelation 1:3. [Read again.] Notice that the happiness spoken of does not come automatically. Two things are required: We must read what the Bible says and then observe, or put into practice, what has been written. This brochure ‘Look! I Am Making All Things New’ will make your reading of the literature I left with you more enjoyable because it explains in a simple way just what God’s requirements are. On page 30 there is a list of 12 questions that many people ask. Which one of them would you like to have answered?” After the householder responds, you could turn to the place in the brochure where the question is answered and begin a Bible study.
5 Use Artwork to Stimulate Interest: The Revelation Climax book contains many vivid illustrations. These may be highlighted to stimulate interest. For example, when making a return visit, we could open to page 7. Point to the picture of John on the island of Patmos. Revelation 1:3 highlights that the revelation to John was a happy message. How could this be so when Revelation describes fearsome beasts and destruction? Consider paragraphs 1 and 2 on page 6 of the book. Illustrations on the endsheets may be featured, as well as scenes depicting the Paradise earth on pages 302, 308, and 309.
6 On return visits, we should build on the foundation laid during the initial call. Giving careful attention to this aspect of our ministry will bring rich blessings from Jehovah both for us and for those who listen to us.​—1 Tim. 4:16.

