“Good News”​—Who Wants It?
“GOOD news doesn’t sell!” “The public wants violence and sensationalism.” These have been cited as “stock replies” given to those who advocate the balancing of “good news” with “journalism that constantly suggests we are on the brink of Armageddon.”​—Popular Photography, January 1978.
True, some people seem to desire “bad news” rather than “good news.” But are there not many who would welcome “good news”?
What About the Elderly?
Would not the world’s senior citizens appreciate good news? Are they happy to hear that misfortune has befallen some elderly person? As a case in point, please consider the following incident:
Returning home one afternoon, an 85-year-old woman was unlocking the door of her apartment when three teen-agers rushed up and forced her inside. They tied up the woman, beat her and took $275(U.S.). However, before departing, they put a pillowcase over the aged woman’s head and turned on every gas jet in the apartment. Surely that would have meant her death. But in some way the woman freed herself and called for aid.
Certainly that aged woman​—and many like her—​would be delighted to receive the good news that such assaults are to end for all time. Well, in the Scriptures, Jehovah God has given this assurance: “The future of wicked people will indeed be cut off. And the salvation of the righteous ones is from Jehovah . . . He will provide them with escape from wicked people and save them, because they have taken refuge in him.”​—Ps. 37:38-40.
Consider the Poor and Hungry
Poverty-stricken millions on earth would be glad to receive the good news that they will have adequate housing and plenty of good food. When the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization opened a conference of 136 countries in November 1977, it presented the bad news that 500 million people world wide are victims of the “double scourge”​—hunger and malnutrition.
Would not the hungry poor be comforted if they heard and accepted the good news that God’s heavenly kingdom will eliminate poverty and hunger? What the inspired psalmist said regarding ancient Israel’s wise king Solomon will soon come about under the rule of Jesus Christ, who is greater than Solomon: “He will feel sorry for the lowly one and the poor one, and the souls of the poor ones he will save. There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.”​—Ps. 72:13, 16; Matt. 12:42.
The Ailing Also Need Good News
Disease stalks the earth, and both the afflicted and their family members are well aware of the suffering that it brings. Unquestionably, they are not eager to hear about deaths from cancer, heart disease or other maladies. They would be delighted to receive reliable good news to the effect that disease will be eliminated earth wide.
Jehovah God soon will do this very thing. In fact, he already has demonstrated his ability to remove diseases. God was able to offer his ancient people protection from illness, if only they would obey him. Through the prophet Moses, the Most High declared: “You must serve Jehovah your God, and he will certainly bless your bread and your water; and I shall indeed turn malady away from your midst.” (Ex. 23:25) The Bible penman Isaiah wrote of a time when “no resident will say: ‘I am sick.’” He told about spiritual healing of the blind, deaf, lame and speechless, such prophecies also indicating that physical cure would occur in the future. (Isa. 33:24; 35:5, 6) Moreover, when on earth, Jesus Christ healed people spiritually and physically, thus giving evidence that under Kingdom rule obedient mankind will enjoy permanent release from illness, sin and death traceable to the first man, Adam.​—Matt. 8:14-17; Rom. 5:12; Rev. 21:1-5.
Meaning for Today
Who, then, does not want good news? Is it not heartening to learn that under the rule of God’s heavenly kingdom there will be no more crime to threaten the elderly or others? Are not thinking persons overjoyed to hear that the King Jesus Christ will care for the poor and supply their needs, including wholesome food? And who would not be delighted to live when disease and death are no more?
Bible prophecies indicate that such good news soon will become an earth-wide reality. But how does that knowledge help those now suffering? Why, just the assured hope of seeing these blessed conditions is something that buoys up the weary sufferer!
Repeatedly, Jehovah has demonstrated that he is “the God who gives hope,” not a vain hope but an assured one. (Rom. 15:13) For instance, please consider the situation prevailing among God’s people of ancient times. If, due to some financial troubles, a man had to sell a hereditary possession​—a tract of land—​he and his family were not left without hope of its restoration. Such property would be restored to the family during the Jubilee year, which occurred once every 50 years. (Lev. 25:8-10, 13, 23, 24) So, Jehovah proved to be a hope-giving God, and when the Jubilee law was applied, a family always had a ray of hope.
The same God is holding out hope today. Furthermore, his inspired Word, the Bible, teaches people how to live now so that they may be able to improve their circumstances in life. Interestingly, Worldwatch Institute and the United Nations Environment Program recently sponsored a worldwide study of environment’s impact on human health. In a report thereon written by Erik P. Eckholm, it was said that “the true obstacles to better health . . . are political failures,” that is, the nations’ failing to organize matters in order to minimize environmental threats to health. According to the Detroit Free Press, also involved are “failures of individuals to avoid self-destructive life-styles.” The environmental report said that in affluent lands “major health gains will necessarily involve habit breaking,” the discontinuing of such practices as smoking, overeating and heavy drinking.
But those who respond appreciatively to the “good news of the happy God,” Jehovah, already are benefiting from the counsel of his Word. (1 Tim. 1:11) They follow the admonition: “Do not come to be among heavy drinkers of wine, among those who are gluttonous eaters of flesh. For a drunkard and a glutton will come to poverty, and drowsiness with clothe one with mere rags.” (Prov. 23:20, 21) Also, those heeding the “good news” act to preserve the measure of health they have by shunning such detrimental habits as smoking.​—2 Cor. 7:1.
So, then, who wants good news? Not everyone, to be sure. But if you desire good news, instead of the bad news so widespread today, take advantage of your opportunities to listen to the Bible’s message. It is brought to your home by the Christian witnesses of Jehovah, “the God who gives hope” and the One having the best of news for you.

