What Gives True Peace of Mind?
PEACE of mind. Who can find it in today’s turbulent world? Terrorists often imperil the lives of fellow humans. Refugees resort to flight from one country to another. Nuclear weapons abound and stand as potentially death-dealing sentinels over the whole human race. Inflation rapidly eats up accumulated funds, and often lifelong savings. Add to this the many personal “battles” with health problems, the grief that stems from the death of a loved one​—and the myriads of anxieties common to people everywhere—​and surely true peace of mind is a scarce commodity in present-day society.
But where do many look for security and hoped-for peace of mind? Often to the possession of money and many material things. Yet, does this give true peace of mind?
It may seem to do so. But silently​—almost imperceptibly—​the value of material things will wane with the passing of years. For example, a wealthy man may have many costly garments. But how unwise to place too much value on one’s wardrobe! A four-winged insect​—particularly in its larval stage—​can wreak havoc with prized clothing. Yes, the moth can be a menace and, to a degree at least, can rob a person of his sense of security and his supposed peace of mind. For that matter, even when escaping the ravages of moths, garments do wear out or a thief can steal them.
“A Never-failing Treasure”
God’s prophet Isaiah showed that the final outcome for his wayward antagonists would be comparable to that of a wornout or moth-eaten garment. But in the same context Isaiah pointed to the real source of security and peace of mind, saying: “Look! The Sovereign Lord Jehovah himself will help me. Who is there that can pronounce me wicked? Look! All of them, like a garment, will wear out. A mere moth will eat them up.” (Isa. 50:7-9) Indeed, whereas material things are of only transitory value, a close personal relationship with God is sustaining. It gives true peace of mind.
Jesus Christ took matters a step farther when he said: “Have no fear, little flock, because your Father has approved of giving you the kingdom. Sell the things belonging to you and give gifts of mercy. Make purses for yourselves that do not wear out, a never-failing treasure in the heavens, where a thief does not get near nor moth consumes. For where your treasure is, there your hearts will be also.” (Luke 12:32-34) Jesus then was speaking to his anointed followers who would become his joint heirs in the heavenly kingdom. (Rom. 8:12-17) But the underlying principle is applicable to all Christians. Spiritual things are of excelling value.
Treasured “Intimacy with Jehovah”
Yet, precious beyond all other things is a personal relationship with the Most High God. Regarding this “treasure,” the psalmist David said: “The intimacy with Jehovah belongs to those fearful of him.” (Ps. 25:14) And how grand it is to associate with others enjoying a close personal relationship with God as his people! On another occasion, David happily declared: “I will laud you in the big congregation; among a numerous people I shall praise you.”​—Ps. 35:18.
Important as it is to be with God’s people, however, our service cannot be merely formal and routine if it is to have divine approval. In fact, true peace of mind may be lacking if an individual simply engages in Christian activities without proper motivation. Before dedicating her life to God, one young woman was very pleased to associate with Jehovah’s Witnesses. But she admits:
“. . . I was drawn to the people of this new religion. They were happy, friendly people who enjoyed observing the Bible’s high moral standards. I enjoyed being with them. I went to their meetings and even shared in going from house to house to talk to others about the Bible.
“Then one day a serious question came into my mind. Should a religion be a relationship with other people or should it not rather be a relationship with God? I saw I was becoming active as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses because I so thoroughly enjoyed the people and I also wanted to please my mother-in-law [a Witness], not because I loved God. I went from house to house with the Bible, but I didn’t know why I did it. I quit what I was doing.”
As the months progressed, the young woman evaluated “what it means to have a personal relationship with Jehovah God.” Also, she received Scriptural aid from a certain Christian woman and experienced loving concern on the part of the local congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The result? She “found a living hope in [her] personal relationship with Jehovah.” The young woman was baptized in symbol of her dedication to God and began serving Jehovah happily with his people.
Peace of mind and a real sense of security are enjoyed by those who have an intimate relationship with Jehovah. And despite life’s varied anxieties, they, along with their fellow believers, “serve Jehovah with rejoicing.” (Ps. 100:2) But let us probe more deeply and learn why genuine Christians enjoy true peace of mind and heart in this turbulent world.

