Do It Now!
1 “Could you please stop at our home and help me counsel my son? asked a concerned father of the overseer. “He is getting quite rebellious and no longer wants to study or come to the meetings.” This the overseer gladly did. He is pleased to make such a call or even further calls, when requested, and will do the best he can in offering sound Scriptural counsel.
2 But are such calls by the overseer or other servants the real means of solving the problem? Or is there a better solution that all of us should have in mind and that will accomplish far more? The Bible gives the answer: “Train up a boy according to the way for him; even when he grows old he will not turn aside from it.”​—Prov. 22:6.
3 Time is needed for such training. Cultivating in a son a deep love for Jehovah, as well as aiding him to become a person capable of shouldering responsibility in the congregation and one effective in the field ministry, is not accomplished primarily by a servant’s offering occasional counsel, even though such is entirely appropriate at times and contributes greatly to the training process. Bringing a son to this position is a long-term job, accomplished by persistent application over a period of many years. It is a day-to-day responsibility. (Deut. 6:7) Living in the same home with the child, seeing what he does, hearing what he says, knowing what he is thinking, the parents are in the best position to do the training.
4 Then there is the matter of responsibility. Jehovah has placed this responsibility on the shoulders of the parents, not the servants or others in the congregation. While others can assist, yet they must be careful not to usurp the authority of the parents, circumventing the family arrangement outlined in the Scriptures. (See “Lamp” book, page 185.) In fact, it is best for servants to counsel children in the presence of their parents. Ephesians 6:4 says, “And you, fathers, do not be irritating your children, but go on bringing them up in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.” If the father is not a believer, then the responsibility to teach the children God’s Word falls on the mother. Training should begin in infancy.
5 Are your children receiving these God-ordained benefits? Can you name the evening and the hour when the family study is scheduled? Can your children? If you have not set in motion whatever arrangements are necessary to ensure that your child will get the teaching, training and attention that are needed, then undoubtedly it would be best to DO IT NOW!​—Prov. 19:8.
6 The atmosphere in which the study is conducted is important. Try to cultivate a cheerful, warm, receptive attitude on the part of all. Rather than have a rigid, stern study session, why not have a relaxed, cooperative family gathering where all can helpfully contribute and participate, assisting one another? The family study should be a delightful session that all look forward to.
7 Why is all of this so important now? Satan does not want anyone to serve Jehovah. (1 Pet. 5:8) He has many ways of putting pressure on the young ones in an attempt to make them fall. The things of the world are made to look so enticing. There is the fear of ridicule by classmates, and the desire to be accepted by others. For many hours each week while at school they are a way from godly parental influence and under worldly influence. Only parents who truly appreciate the seriousness of this and who understand that they are engaged in a battle for the minds of their offspring will really succeed.
8 Rearing children today is not an easy matter. It requires a great deal of thought and planning on the part of devoted parents. But the rewards are worth it!
[Blurb on page 4]
Will you start a study in November?

