Those Who Have Not Cooled Off
1 Speaking of our day, Jesus said that “because of the increasing of lawlessness the love of the greater number will cool off.” (Matt. 24:12) Today we see this fulfilled before our very eyes as more and more people world wide actually deny or else doubt the existence of God and commit acts of violence.
2 Jesus did not, however, say that the love of all would cool off. The response world wide proves that there are still persons who have a love of righteousness, and contact with people in our own territories has convinced us that this is so.
3 All of this causes what reaction in us? Well, appreciating our own need to be on guard, we eagerly respond to Jehovah’s loving reminder that will be prominently before us during November: “You must not forget.” (Deut. 25:19) Also, we are glad for other Scriptural urgings, such as those of Paul: “Stir up like a fire the gift of God which is in you.” “Be aglow with the spirit.” (2 Tim. 1:6; Rom. 12:11) The fact that the greater number have cooled off or forgotten God need not affect the warmth we feel toward Jehovah or the zeal we have for his service.
4 This will help us to have the right view of our house-to-house work. That view is not simply to endure the indifference of the greater number in the territory. No, Jesus said we should ‘search out those who are deserving.’ (Matt. 10:11) Later he said, “Make disciples . . . baptizing them . . . teaching them.”​—Matt. 28:19, 20.
5 But what of the one whose love has cooled off? Something you say might help him to learn to love again. Angry opposers have become mild-tempered publishers. Some are even mature overseers now. And, are there inactive ones in your congregation or even in your own family? Cool treatment is not the therapy. What a thrill if they begin to love again through your kind example and encouragement
6 During November we will again have the opportunity to offer the Truth book. We can also add some variety to this offer by using any bound book of our liking. There will be those who already have the Truth book and then we can offer the Evolution, Word of God, “Mystery,” ‘Impossible to Lie’ or Life Everlasting books. A free booklet is given with a 50c publication but not with the 25c publications, which, incidentally, should be offered singly.
7 Having already offered the Truth book a number of times in the house-to-house work, you may have your own favorite method of presenting it. We are happy that we can be flexible and decide personally what we think is best in presenting the message in harmony with our ability and the territory in which we work. One brother who has been working in a big city tells us that he has shortened his preliminary remarks. “I used to tell them my name, the name of my companion, the nature of our work, that we were calling on our neighbors and that the call would be brief,” he said. “I finally decided that, while this might be described as a normal introduction in many territories, it was too wordy for this territory where people are in a big hurry and not inclined to hear you out. Now I smile and get right to the point saying, ‘Good morning. I have been asking people’s opinion regarding the big changes in religion. I would appreciate your thoughts. What do you think is the reason many of the young ones no longer are interested in religion?’ Most people already know I am one of Jehovah’s witnesses. By getting right to the point I have gotten many involved in a conversation where I had not been successful before. Of course, in other instances I go through the introductory formalities that some expect.” Each publisher should decide what is best for him, but we should be alert to adjust our presentations in accord with what is developing in our territory and in the world in general.
8 In addition to the house-to-house work, there will be many other opportunities to present the Truth book. Those who are alert to the opportunities to do incidental witnessing find the Truth book an ideal publication to place.
9 Are you glad that you are one toward whom Jehovah is showing concern and whom he reminds, “You must not forget”? Are you glad that there are still some in your territory whose love of righteousness has not entirely cooled off? Are you glad that even cooled-off ones might still be helped? Of course you are, and the month of November will provide us all with ample opportunities to demonstrate that our answer is Yes.
[Blurb on page 1]
By love and obedience not forgetting Jehovah.

