Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 8
Theme: Searching for Those Who Have Not Cooled Off. (Matt. 24:12) Song 16.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: “Those Who Have Not Cooled Off.” Questions and answers.
14 min: From House to House with the “Truth” Book.
(2 min.) Chairman points out that we have been placing the “Truth” book for two years now and have had much experience. Yet we need to keep improving in our presentations so honest-hearted ones will be attracted to the truth. Don’t want to get stale or in a rut. Good to exchange ideas on what has been found successful in our territory.
(5 min.) Ask audience what they have found especially effective since trying out suggestions given on last week’s service meeting. Does direct presentation of book work best? Have some used a sermon? Has Bible study folder been presented first? What works best in our territory? Let brothers contribute practical suggestions. Chairman might check with certain publishers in advance so they will be stimulated to contribute for the benefit of others. Following thoughts might then be considered. Where brevity is required, some have said, “Have you received your copy of the ‘Truth’ book yet? We leave it on a contribution of only 25c.” Thereafter, further words of description can follow, depending on the response. To get conversation started you might say: “You have probably heard people say, ‘It doesn’t matter what you believe, as long as you lead a clean moral life and deal kindly with your neighbors.’ Here is a book that shows what the Bible says on questions such as that.” If appropriate, turn to page 12, paragraph 4, and read a few sentences.
(5 min.) Have some well-rehearsed demonstrations, possibly including the suggestions given in the article “Those Who Have Not Cooled Off.” Adapt all presentations to what is felt best for local territory.
(2 min.) Chairman concludes by mentioning that each should select his own presentation on the basis of local territory and what publisher personally feels is appropriate. Encourage all to have full share in house-to-house work with “Truth” book this month.
14 min: Starting Studies in the “Truth” Book.
(2 min.) Chairman shows we are interested not only in placing “Truth” book, but in starting studies. Encourage publishers really to make advance preparations for starting studies on initial call. Many publishers say they have difficulty in finding people at home when in back-call work. Thus the more you can accomplish on the initial call, the better it may be. Depending upon your approach, might help to have two separate goals in mind in house-to-house work with “Truth” book: Get book in householder’s hands. Get study started.
(5 min.) Get comments from audience on what has been found effective in starting studies in “Truth” book. Chairman should talk to some capable publishers a week or so ahead of time so they will give thought to this and be prepared to contribute. Get ideas that have worked in local territory.
(5 min.) Have well-rehearsed demonstration or two on starting study in “Truth” book on initial call or return call. Brother who knows what is involved in starting studies should handle this part. Entire assignment should be well prepared so as to be truly helpful to publishers with something they can use immediately thereafter in territory.
(2 min.) Concluding thoughts by chairman. Review major points so they will be remembered by publishers. Highlight need to keep in mind goal of study when in house-to-house work.
 3 min: Accounts report.
9 min: Concluding comments: “How Did We Do in September?” and local report for October. Song 57.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 15
Theme: Help Your Family to Remember Jehovah. (Deut. 25:19) Song 18.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
 8 min: ‘Our Heartfelt Thanks.’ Enthusiastic discussion.
20 min: “Do It Now!” Questions and answers. Consider also “Appreciation for Bible Training by Parents,” in September 8, 1970, “Awake!,” page 7. Also draw out comments from parents and children on joy and benefits they derive from family study. See if some parents have especially effective ideas that make family study interesting and profitable. Talk to parents in advance.
15 min: “The Blessing of a ‘Quiet and Mild Spirit’.” “Watchtower,” May 15, 1970. Talk. Can draw audience into discussion at times. Material applies to all in congregation. Parents can do much to develop these qualities in children during family study and at other times.
 2 min: Concluding comments. Include some appropriate Theocratic News items and Announcements. Song 21.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 22
Theme: Share in the Ingathering. (1 Cor. 3:6, 7) Song 27.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
10 min: Branch Letter. Handle according to material and local needs.
15 min: Presenting the Good News​—“Sharing in the Ingathering.” Questions and answers.
20 min: Joyous Results When All Shared. This should tie in closely with preceding assignment. Discuss and apply a variety of experiences demonstrating how all in the congregation play a vital role in aiding newly interested ones to appreciate the truth and also in strengthening them. Chairman should prepare well the following reports and experiences and discuss them with the audience. Chairman can relate part of experience and read portions. Can have other brothers assist him in this. After each experience has been related to audience, questions should be asked as to what points we can learn from impressions people got of us. Can bring out points such as: All need to be prepared to participate in meetings; old and young should comment; use Bible freely; be friendly and outgoing; best not to have extreme styles and habits; no race or other prejudice. Let audience make these applications. In conclusion chairman shows how all of us share in ingathering work if we watch our conduct wherever we are, attend meetings regularly, participate, take meeting assignments seriously, share regularly in field ministry. References: “Awake!,” 9/8/70, pp. 20-23; 8/22/70, p. 16, especially par. 7; 7/22/70, pp. 15, 23. Remember, purpose of discussion is not to boast concerning good impression we have given others, but to become more aware of our responsibility to help in the ingathering. Then we can rejoice in having had a share.
10 min: Concluding comments. Song 4.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 29
Theme: Teaching All Nationalities with a View to Baptism. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Song 109.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
10 min: “Teaching All Nationalities with a View to Baptism.” See December 1, 1970, “Watchtower.” Capable brother who does well in Bible study work might discuss material with a few publishers who regularly conduct Bible studies.
15 min: “How Wise is the Spirit of Competition?” “Watchtower,” June 15, 1970. Talk. Show that brothers need to be aware of being caught up in the spirit of competition in sports and secular work but must also beware of the same in congregation matters. There should be no spirit of competition in field service, platform assignments, knowledge, personal possessions, dress, etc.
15 min: Offering the “New World Translation” and “Truth” Book.
(2 min.) Chairman talks of privilege we will have to present this offer throughout December. Preparation, however, is necessary. Have been offering “Truth” book in November and now will add “New World Translation.” Fine combination offer.
(8 min.) Discuss with audience some ideas for presenting offer that they feel can be successful in local territory. We have presented Bible number of times in the past. What works for you? Publishers can be encouraged to take notes of what they think will be good for them to use. Then can analyze following presentation, after which it can be demonstrated by capable publisher. Make adjustments and additions according to local territory. “We are stopping at each home just briefly because we want people to have the opportunity to get acquainted with one of the finest Bible translations published today. It uses present-day language that is easy to read and makes the meaning more clear. It can be obtained, in combination with this Bible study aid, for a contribution of just $1.25.”
(5 min.) Discuss with congregation how to emphasize the free home Bible study in connection with the offer. Publishers find that offering to demonstrate the study before offering literature does not cut down on placements but often results in more studies. In conclusion encouragement is given to all to schedule time during December to have generous share in offering “New World Translation” and “Truth” book, teaching with a view to baptism.
 5 min: Question Box.
10 min: Concluding comments. Song 66.

