Questions From Readers
What is “the war . . . of God the Almighty” at Har–Magedon, and what will be the outcome?—Revelation 16:14, 16.
Simply stated, the war of Har–Magedon is the future earth-wide battle in which Jehovah’s appointed King, Jesus Christ, will destroy God’s enemies. The Bible explains that these enemies, “the kings of the entire inhabited earth,” are mobilized by “expressions inspired by demons” and are gathered together “to the war of the great day of God the Almighty . . . to the place that is called in Hebrew Har–Magedon.”—Revelation 16:14, 16.
The place where the warring parties gather is not literal. The name Har–Magedon, rendered “Armageddon” in some Bible translations, means “Mountain of Megiddo.” (Revelation 16:16, footnote) There has never been a mountain that bears that name. Furthermore, “the kings of the earth and their armies” could not literally gather in one place. (Revelation 19:19) Rather, “the place” refers to the condition or situation into which earth’s political rulers and their supporters are led—one of opposition to Jehovah and to “the armies that were in heaven” under the military command of the “King of kings and Lord of lords,” Jesus Christ.—Revelation 19:14, 16.
Significantly, the term “Har–Magedon” is related to the ancient Israelite city of Megiddo. Strategically located to the east of Mount Carmel, Megiddo dominated major trade and military routes of the day. It was also the site of decisive battles. For example, it was “by the waters of Megiddo” that Israelite Judge Barak defeated a mighty Canaanite army led by General Sisera. (Judges 4:12-24; 5:19, 20) In that vicinity too, Judge Gideon routed the Midianites. (Judges 7:1-22) By linking Megiddo to the coming war, the Bible assures us that God, through his Son, will completely conquer all opposing forces.
What will be the outcome? The war of Har–Magedon will rid the earth of all corruption and wickedness. It will open the way for the most glorious era in all human history. (Revelation 21:1-4) Under the loving oversight of God’s Kingdom, the earth will be transformed into a paradise in which righteous ones will live forever.—Psalm 37:29.

