
Improving Our Skills in the Ministry—Developing a Magazine Route




Why Important: Many people who enjoy reading our magazines do not wish to study the Bible with us. Perhaps they are happy with their religion, or they feel that they do not have time to study. However, as they regularly read our magazines, they may form a longing for God’s Word. (1 Pet. 2:2) A particular article may strike a responsive chord, or their circumstances may change. Regular, brief visits will make them more comfortable with us and help us learn what their interests and concerns are. Eventually, a Bible study may be started.



How to Do It:
           Each month, schedule time to bring the individual the latest issues of The Watchtower and Awake! Maybe you can visit at other times during the month to whet his appetite for an article from the magazines you left or to offer the publication being featured that month. Keep good records.—See the January 2014 Our Kingdom Ministry, p. 3.

            Prepare for each visit. Rather than simply dropping the magazines off, engage the householder in conversation and try to build a rapport with him so that you can cultivate his interest.

            Be alert for opportunities to start a study. If someone on your route asks you what the Bible says on a certain topic, bring him a study publication that contains the answer, and discuss it together. Before you leave, raise a related question and consider it on the next visit. If you are regularly and systematically having even brief discussions using the Bible or one of our study publications, you are conducting a Bible study. Have you offered the householder the Good News brochure and demonstrated a short Bible study? Have you shown him the videos Why Study the Bible? and What Happens at a Bible Study? Even if the person has not been receptive to a study in the past, circumstances change. Would it be beneficial for you to try again?




Try This During the Month:
            Make a list of those who could be on a magazine route. Offer them the current issues of the magazines, and tell them that you will bring them the next issue.





