
Use “An Introduction to God’s Word”—To Start a Conversation




 1. What new tool have we received for the ministry?
1 The revised edition of the New World Translation has a section in the beginning called “An Introduction to God’s Word.” How can we use this new tool when preparing presentations for the ministry? Since this section groups scriptures under various Bible topics, similar to the way the Reasoning book does, it can be very useful in starting conversations.
 2. How may we use “An Introduction to God’s Word” in the ministry?
2 You might use question 8 and say: “We are making brief visits in the neighborhood because many people wonder, ‘Is God to blame for human suffering?’ [In some territories, it is more effective to show the question to the householder.] What is your opinion? [Allow for response.] The Bible gives a satisfying answer to that question.” Read and discuss one or more of the cited verses directly from the Bible. If the householder expresses interest, you could show him the 20 questions listed in the introduction and ask him to choose one to discuss on the next visit. Or you could offer one of our study publications that has more information on the subject you just considered.
 3. How may we use “An Introduction to God’s Word” to start conversations in territories where people belong to a non-Christian religion?
3 Questions 4 and 13 through 17 may be especially helpful when preaching in territories where people belong to a non-Christian religion. For example, you might use the information from question 17 and say: “We are making brief visits as a public service to families. Would you agree that families face numerous challenges today? [Allow for response.] Many couples have found these wise words helpful: “The wife should have deep respect for her husband.” [You do not need to mention that this is from Ephesians 5:33. If you are speaking to a woman, you might instead recite the words of Ephesians 5:28.] Do you think that applying that advice would be beneficial in a marriage?”
 4. What might you do at the end of your conversation with someone who belongs to a non-Christian religion?
4 At the end of your conversation, make arrangements to continue the discussion on another occasion. Perhaps you can plan to talk about one of the other scriptures from the question you used. At an appropriate time, let the householder know that the wise sayings you have been sharing with him are from the Bible. Based on your previous discussions and the person’s view of the Bible, offer a publication that you think would appeal to him.—See the insert in the December 2013 Our Kingdom Ministry.




