Death Was My Way of Life
“JUST put me in a wooden box. I don’t care what happens to me after I die.” “Have my body cremated.” These are sayings that I have heard from time to time, mainly in a joking way because of my profession​—that of caring for the dead bodies of friends, relatives and others. Yes, I am a mortician.
You might ask: What is it like to be around death all the time? How do you embalm a body? Why do people go to so much trouble and expense for a dead body?
My Personal Experience
In the United States the care of the dead has been entrusted to professionals known as funeral directors, morticians or undertakers. It was my goal to become a part of this profession. So during my second year of high school, I started laying the groundwork to attain this, choosing courses that would help me in the funeral profession. Upon graduation from high school, I attended a large university in the Midwestern United States and earned a degree in Mortuary Science. I became a licensed mortician. Now I was qualified to embalm dead bodies, direct funerals, inter the remains and assist in making sure that the necessary legal requirements were met.
You might think that being around death all the time would have caused me to become callous, hardened or insensitive to death​—this greatest enemy of man. This was not the case. It was especially hard for me to accept the death of little children and of persons my own age. The death of young people reminded me that life can be very short. Why, we are like “a mist appearing for a little while and then disappearing”!​—James 4:14.
The death of children whose whole life lay ahead of them used to cause tears to well up in my eyes. I gained some comfort by believing these little ones who died were angels in heaven with Jesus. I would, however, wonder, ‘If God is so loving and kind, why would he cause so much unhappiness by allowing a little child to die?’ This question was perplexing until I began a thorough study of the Bible. I learned that death was not a part of God’s original purpose when he created man and so is really unnatural.
Embalming
Embalming has been in existence for thousands of years. In fact, it is mentioned four times in the Bible. (Genesis 50:2, 3, 26) Jacob and his son Joseph were embalmed so that their bodies would not decompose during the long hot trip to the place of their burial. As employed by the Egyptians, embalming consisted of using spices, oils, resins and other materials and then soaking the body in natron (sodium carbonate). This would take several weeks and would preserve the body for years, even centuries.
Arterial embalming, as practiced today, is accomplished by locating an artery near the surface of the body, making an incision in it and injecting a preservative solution. The blood is pushed out of the vein by the arterial fluid. Then the restoration work can begin. This consists of rebuilding body parts that may have been destroyed, as in the case of an accident victim. Waxes, cosmetics and special stitches with needle and thread may be used to camouflage the wound. In school I was taught that this would help the survivors accept the reality of death. I would often spend many hours in restoring the body to a lifelike appearance. This was challenging and I prided myself in being able to restore an emaciated or mutilated body to appear as it did when the person was alive and healthy. For me a sense of satisfaction resulted from my efforts.
Expenses
People today are affected in a number of ways by death. For most, a funeral will be one of their greatest expenses. The amount you spend and the elegance of the funeral are personal family matters and should not be criticized, provided they do not violate Christian principles.
Why are most funerals far more elaborate and expensive than the deceased would have wished? The deceased may not have made his wishes known. Most people will say that they prefer a simple, inexpensive funeral. If there is nothing in writing, however, the burden of choice falls on the survivors. Even in Biblical times, funeral arrangements were made personally. When Jacob was dying, he told his son Joseph: “In my burial place which I have excavated for myself in the land of Canaan is where you are to bury me.”​—Genesis 50:5.
Within certain limits, you and your family are free to choose which funeral services you desire. Some plans can be made before death occurs. Rationally preview the necessary decisions to be made at the time of death.
Is embalming necessary? In the United States federal law requires it if the body is to be transported by common carrier. Some states require it if final disposition does not occur for a specified number of hours or if death was from a communicable disease.
What expenses could be incurred? The caskets, or coffins, I would show a family ranged in price from inexpensive wood to very expensive metal caskets costing thousands of dollars. Other expenses might include transportation, burial plot, flowers, rent of funeral-home facilities, purchase of a tombstone, and so forth.
Should there be a funeral service? Many services I provided for the dead were set forth as customary. Usually no alternatives were offered, but often they were available. Some may want a very simple burial or cremation, perhaps followed by a memorial service, thus eliminating embalming, restoration and display of the body, a hearse and even the expense of a casket and burial vault. Others will want expensive funerals, just as many want expensive cars or expensive homes. Not everyone likes or wants exactly the same things. Morticians know this and therefore offer services and merchandise at various price levels.
What about relatives and others? Take into consideration the personal wishes of the family, but remember that others may have to be thought of. Christians who live in small towns may have to bear in mind the traditions of the community. Personal needs, finances and other circumstances would dictate the type of services obtained. But if Scripturally acceptable customs and traditions are adhered to, a better witness could be given.
Make Wise Decisions
Death does not come very often to any one family. When it does, it can be a very upsetting experience. Eventually death itself will become a thing of the past! (Revelation 21:3, 4) Until that time comes, the laws, mortuaries, cemeteries, morticians and funeral services will continue to exist. But death will be less disconcerting if we familiarize ourselves beforehand with some of the details that have to be taken care of when it occurs.
Just as you would not buy a new house without investigating it first, apply the same common-sense principles when giving thought to how you want your remains to be cared for. Whatever procedures you choose, a reputable funeral home should be willing to assist you in working out the details. Memorial societies, too, can help arrange for a dignified and economical funeral. Giving thought to this subject now is not an exercise in morbidity. Rather, it shows mature foresight and loving concern for the survivors.
Since gaining an accurate knowledge of the Bible and the wonderful hope it holds out​—that of life everlasting—​I have come to have more concern for the living than for the dead. No longer is death my way of life.​—Contributed.

