From Our Readers
Parents to Understand
After reading, “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Get My Parents to Understand Me?” (May 22), I feel the need to share my personal experience with you. My family has problems. My mother was an abused child. My stepfather is an alcoholic. My mother in a sense abandoned my sister and me halfway through our childhood because she was either at work or “too tired” to offer us company. My stepfather showed an interest in our activities when he was sober, but that wasn’t very often. So, while my sister and I always had a roof over our heads and food in the refrigerator, our need for love and maturing went unfulfilled. Whenever I would try to talk to my mother she would (and still does) give me short answers as much as to say, “Don’t bug me.”
I have spent my life searching for love and understanding from my parents. Since I’ve never received this I’ve suffered from feelings of failure and low self-esteem. I’m glad I didn’t read this article when I was growing up (I am 22) because I would probably have tried harder to gain their approval, failed and blamed myself. I do not intend to sound disrespectful. I believe the advice given could be helpful for some children. However, I feel that it can be damaging to the egos of children whose parents aren’t capable of understanding their children’s needs.
D. H., Minnesota
We understand your feelings and thank you for sharing them with us. The article was not designed to show that a problem of communication is one-sided, namely, a lack on the part of children. It was written to help both parents and children to see what they can do to promote better communication in the home. It is true that the information in the article will be most helpful in improving the atmosphere of those homes where both children and parents are willing to apply the counsel. However, we hope that even young people in unfavorable situations such as you describe will be able to bring about some improvement by applying, as far as possible, the principles discussed in the article.​—ED.
I would like to express my grateful appreciation for “How Can I Get My Parents to Understand Me?” I am the mother of two teenage sons. The article seemed like events right out of my home. I have had communication problems with my boys. The article was so forthright, placing the responsibility not only on us as parents but also on our children.
R. W., Alabama
Acrostic Puzzles
I am ten years old. I was off from school with a cold and my mum showed me the latest Awake!, the one with the acrostic puzzle. It was a lot of fun to do. I have also enjoyed the crosswords and word searches you have put in Awake! I have learnt a lot about places, people and things in the Bible. I would love it if there was another acrostic puzzle in a future magazine.
R. C., England
Sharpen your pencil because we plan an acrostic puzzle for a future issue.​—ED.

