Reaching Even More With the Good News
AS I thought about the people in my homeland, I realized that many know Jehovah’s Witnesses only from news reports. These people ought to be contacted, I thought, so that they might learn who Jehovah’s Witnesses are and what they really believe. But how could I help? My husband is a Christian elder, and he provided me with wise guidance and suggestions.
We found a key idea in the article “Magazines That Give Practical Comfort,” published in the January 8, 1995, issue of Awake! magazine. Regarding the activity of a Witness, the article says: “She has been making it a point to collect older copies of certain Awake! magazines that other Witnesses have accumulated at home. Then she visits agencies that she feels might show special interest in some of the topics.”
With the help of my husband, I soon collected several hundred copies of the magazines. From these I was able to select a variety of subjects suitable for people I would try to contact.
Using telephone directories and public records, I compiled a list representing hospitals, youth hostels, and nursing homes. I also listed funeral directors, school supervisors and counselors, medical examiners, and officials of prisons and law courts. My list included directors of institutions for alcoholics and drug addicts, associations for environmental issues, for the disabled and war victims, and for nutritional research. Nor did I overlook heads of offices for welfare, social services, and family affairs.
What Would I Say?
The first thing I did when making a visit was to identify clearly who I was. Then I mentioned that my visit should take just a few minutes.
Once face-to-face with the person in charge, I would say: “I am one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. However, I am not here to have a religious discussion, which might be inappropriate during office hours.” Usually the atmosphere became more relaxed. Then, adapting my comments to the situation, I would continue: “The reason for my visit is twofold. First, I wish to express my appreciation for the work that is being organized by your office. After all, it should not be taken for granted that someone expends his time and energy in behalf of the general public. This is certainly to be commended.” In many cases the person approached in this way was surprised.
By now the person most likely was wondering what the second reason of my visit was. I would continue: “The second reason for my visit is this: From our Awake! magazine, which is published internationally, I have picked out some articles that deal particularly with your type of work and the problems associated with it. I am sure that you would like to know how an international journal views these problems. I will be glad to leave these copies with you.” Often I was told that my efforts were appreciated.
Surprising and Rewarding Results
When I used this approach, most gave me a friendly reception; only one in 17 turned me down. I had numerous experiences that were both surprising and rewarding.
For example, after trying four times and waiting patiently, I succeeded in meeting a district school inspector. He was a very busy man. Yet, he was most friendly and talked to me for a while. When I took my leave, he said: “I really appreciate your effort, and I definitely will read your literature carefully.”
On another occasion, I called at a district court, meeting the principal judge, a middle-aged man. When I entered his office, he looked up from his papers rather irritated.
“Office hours are Tuesday morning only, and then I will be available for any information,” he said gruffly.
“Allow me to apologize for having come at an inappropriate time,” I replied quickly and added, “Of course, I would be happy to come again at another time. But my visit is actually of a private nature.”
Now the judge was curious. He asked, in a much less hostile tone, what I wanted. I repeated that I would call again on Tuesday.
“Please, take a seat,” he insisted, quite to my surprise. “What do you want?”
A lively conversation followed, and he apologized for having been so unfriendly in the beginning because he was really very busy.
“Do you know what I like about Jehovah’s Witnesses?” the judge asked after a while. “They have well-founded principles from which they do not deviate. Hitler tried everything he could, but the Witnesses still did not go to war.”
When two of us entered one office, the secretaries there recognized us. Then the executive secretary spoke up coolly, “The president never receives any parties.”
“But he will receive us,” I replied calmly, “because we are Jehovah’s Witnesses. We are not petitioners, and our visit will not last longer than three minutes.” In my heart I prayed fervently, “O Jehovah, please let this turn out well!”
The secretary responded in an aloof manner, “All right, then, I’ll try.” She walked away. After about two minutes, that seemed like an eternity to me, she reappeared followed by the president himself. Not saying anything, he led the way to his office, passing two other rooms.
As we began to converse, he became more and more friendly. He willingly accepted the special issues of the Awake! magazine when we offered them. We thanked Jehovah for this opportunity to give a good witness about the purpose of our work.
Looking back on the many wonderful experiences, I have come to appreciate more fully what the apostle Peter said: “For a certainty I perceive that God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.” (Acts 10:34, 35) God’s will is that people of all backgrounds, languages, or social positions be given the opportunity to know his purpose for mankind and for the earth.—Contributed.

