Announcements
PROVING TO BE THE RIGHT KIND OF MINISTERS
There are many who claim to be the ministers of God who do not serve as right kind of ministers. How could they be preaching philosophy and psychology rather than the good news of God’s kingdom! Jehovah’s witnesses are interested in the Kingdom above all else and strive to advance the work of the Kingdom in every possible way. They know ‘this good news of the Kingdom must and will be preached in all the inhabited earth for the purpose of a witness’ and delight to prove themselves to be real ministers preaching the Kingdom message as commanded. (1 Tim. 4:6, NW) As a means of aiding others to an appreciation and understanding of the Kingdom, Jehovah’s witnesses use the Watchtower magazine. It is a wonderful Bible study aid available by subscription for only $1 a year. All who subscribe this month will be given three booklets on impelling Bible subjects. Be sure to prove yourself to be the right kind of minister this month by sharing in the preaching work.
1956 MEMORIAL ANNOUNCEMENT
Again the time draws near when Jehovah’s people, remnant and other sheep, will assemble as congregations for the observance of the most significant of all memorials, the one that annually commemorates the victorious death of the Lord Jesus Christ. The date this year is March 26, which corresponds to the original date Nisan 14. The meeting, which will start after 6 p.m., will be opened with song and prayer, after which the discourse will be given by a qualified speaker, one of the remnant if available and capable. Then the emblems will be served separately after Jehovah’s blessing has been prayed for upon first the bread and then the red wine. The meeting will be closed with prayer and song after all present have been invited to have part in special field service arrangements. Each congregation should commence making Memorial arrangements.
AN ITEM FOR EVERY HOME
Every field of human interest in a nutshell—that is the Awake! magazine. Published semimonthly, it is designed to keep all members of the family alert and alive to the significant developments of our times. Its thirty-two pages each issue cover current events and natural wonders for the school-aged, items of social and human interest for the homemaker, science and business issues for the breadwinner, matters of history and government for the oldsters and, for every member of the household, brief Scriptural discussions that lighten the day and provide material for the education that really counts—training for life in God’s new world of righteousness now at hand. One year, one dollar. Send today and receive three timely Bible sermons free.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEK
April 1: Triumphing over Wicked Spirit Forces, ¶1-22. Page 108.
April 8: Triumphing over Wicked Spirit Forces, ¶23-46. Page 114.

