
STUDY ARTICLE 51
Find Peace During a Crisis

“Do not let your hearts be troubled nor let them shrink out of fear.”​—JOHN 14:27.
SONG 112 Jehovah, God of Peace
PREVIEWa



 1. What is “the peace of God,” and how do we benefit from having it? (Philippians 4:6, 7)
THERE is a kind of peace that this world knows nothing about. It is “the peace of God,” the calmness that comes from having a precious relationship with our heavenly Father. When we have the peace of God, we feel secure. (Read Philippians 4:6, 7.) We enjoy close friendships with others who love him. And we enjoy a warm, personal relationship with “the God of peace.” (1 Thess. 5:23) When we know, trust, and obey our Father, the peace of God can calm our anxious heart when we are facing a troubling situation.
 2. Why can we be sure that it is possible to have the peace of God?
2 Is it really possible to find the peace of God when we are faced with a crisis, such as a disease outbreak, a disaster, civil unrest, or persecution? Any one of these crises can fill us with fear. Yet, Jesus counseled his followers: “Do not let your hearts be troubled nor let them shrink out of fear.” (John 14:27) Happily, brothers and sisters have followed Jesus’ advice. With Jehovah’s help, they have been able to find peace while coping with severe trials.



FINDING PEACE DURING DISEASE OUTBREAKS

 3. How might an epidemic or a pandemic disturb our peace?
3 An epidemic or a pandemic can drastically change almost every part of life. Consider the impact COVID-19 had on many. In one study, more than half of the people reported having trouble sleeping during that pandemic. The outbreak contributed to a sharp increase in anxiety, depression, alcohol and drug abuse, domestic violence, and attempted suicide. If there is a disease outbreak where you live, how can you control your anxiety and enjoy the peace of God?
 4. Why does knowing Jesus’ prophecy about the last days bring us peace?
4 Jesus foretold that during the last days, there would be pestilences, or widespread diseases, “in one place after another.” (Luke 21:11) How does knowing that bring us peace? We are not surprised by disease outbreaks. We realize that events are proceeding as Jesus said they would. We thus have reason to follow the advice Jesus gave to those living during the time of the end: “See that you are not alarmed.”​—Matt. 24:6.




Listening to audio recordings of the Bible can help you to have peace of mind during a disease outbreak (See paragraph 5)



 5. (a) In harmony with Philippians 4:8, 9, what should we pray for while facing a disease outbreak? (b) How can listening to audio recordings of the Bible benefit you?
5 A disease outbreak can easily lead to uncertainty and even panic. That happened to a sister named Desi.b After her uncle, cousin, and doctor all died of COVID-19, she was afraid that she would get the virus herself and pass it on to her elderly mother. The pandemic also put her job at risk, so she wondered how she would pay for food and housing. These worries began to fill her mind and keep her awake at night. But Desi regained her peace. How? She prayed specifically that Jehovah help her to be calm and to think positive thoughts. (Read Philippians 4:8, 9.) She listened to Jehovah “speak” to her through audio recordings of the Bible. She says, “The readers’ soothing voices calmed my anxiety and reminded me of Jehovah’s mercy.”​—Ps. 94:19.
 6. How will personal study and congregation meetings help you?
6 A disease outbreak will no doubt disrupt some aspects of your routine, but do not let it interfere with your personal study or meeting attendance. The real-life experiences found in our publications and videos will remind you that your brothers and sisters are keeping their integrity despite similar challenges. (1 Pet. 5:9) Meetings will help you to fill your mind with positive Scriptural thoughts. They will also give you opportunities to encourage others and to be encouraged. (Rom. 1:11, 12) As you reflect on how Jehovah has supported his worshippers when they were ill, fearful, or lonely, your faith will be strengthened and you will be convinced that he will support you too.
 7. What lesson can you learn from the apostle John?
7 Reach out to your brothers and sisters. A disease outbreak may require that we maintain physical distancing even when we are with our fellow worshippers. At a time like that, you might feel as did the apostle John. He wanted to see his friend Gaius face-to-face. (3 John 13, 14) Still, John recognized that for a time, he could not see Gaius. So John did what he could; he wrote Gaius a letter. If it is not always possible for you to visit with your brothers and sisters in person, try to contact them via telephone, video calls, or electronic messaging. When you keep in touch with fellow Christians, you will feel more secure and at peace. Reach out to the elders if you feel especially anxious, and accept their loving encouragement.​—Isa. 32:1, 2.



FINDING PEACE IN THE FACE OF A DISASTER

 8. How might a disaster disturb your peace?
8 If you have ever experienced a flood, an earthquake, or a fire, some intense anxiety may have lingered long after the crisis. If you lost loved ones or your possessions were destroyed, you may have felt a sense of grief, hopelessness, or even anger. This does not mean that you are materialistic or that you lack faith. You went through a difficult trial, and some might expect you to react negatively. (Job 1:11) But despite distressful circumstances, you can find peace. How?
 9. How did Jesus prepare us for catastrophic events?
9 Remember what Jesus prophesied. Unlike some in the world who do not imagine that a disaster will ever affect them personally, we expect an increase in disastrous events, some of which could affect us. Jesus told his followers that “great earthquakes” and other disasters would occur before the end comes. (Luke 21:11) He also prophesied that there would be an “increasing of lawlessness,” which is evident in crime, violence, and terrorist attacks. (Matt. 24:12) Jesus never said that these calamities would impact only those whom Jehovah has abandoned. In fact, many of Jehovah’s faithful servants have been victims of disasters. (Isa. 57:1; 2 Cor. 11:25) Jehovah may not miraculously protect us from all disasters, but he will give us whatever we need to remain calm and at peace.
10. Why is preparing now for a disaster an expression of faith? (Proverbs 22:3)
10 We will find it easier to remain calm in an emergency if we have planned in advance how to respond. But does preparing indicate that we lack faith in Jehovah? Not at all. In fact, preparing for a disaster shows that we do have faith in his ability to care for us. How so? God’s Word advises us to prepare for potential disasters. (Read Proverbs 22:3.) And through magazine articles, congregation meetings, and timely announcements, God’s organization has repeatedly urged us to prepare for an emergency.c Do we trust Jehovah? If so, we will follow that advice now​—before a disaster strikes.




Advance preparation can help you to survive a disaster (See paragraph 11)d



11. What do you learn from Margaret’s example?
11 Consider the experience of a sister named Margaret. She was ordered to evacuate her home after a brush fire broke out in her area. Because so many people were trying to flee all at once, the roads were blocked and traffic came to a halt. The air became thick with black smoke, and Margaret was trapped in her vehicle for a time. However, she survived because she was prepared. In her purse she kept a map that she could consult to find an evacuation route. She had even driven along the route in advance so that she could easily follow it in an emergency. Thanks to her preparation, Margaret survived the experience.
12. Why do we follow safety precautions?
12 To protect us and restore order, the authorities may ask us to obey a curfew, to evacuate, or to take other practical steps. Some people are slow to obey or they procrastinate because they want to hold on to the things they own. How do Christians respond? The Bible tells us: “For the Lord’s sake subject yourselves to every human creation, whether to a king as being superior or to governors as sent by him.” (1 Pet. 2:13, 14) God’s organization also gives us direction to keep us safe. We are regularly reminded to give the elders our current contact information so that they can reach us during an emergency. Have you done so? We may also receive direction about sheltering in place, evacuation, and obtaining relief supplies or about how and when to assist others. If we fail to obey, we could put in jeopardy our life and the lives of the elders. Remember that these faithful men are keeping watch over us. (Heb. 13:17) Margaret commented, “I firmly believe that following the direction of the elders and the organization saved my life.”
13. What has given many displaced Christians joy and peace?
13 Many brothers and sisters who were displaced by a disaster or by war or civil unrest have done their best to adapt to their new situation and become involved right away in theocratic activities. Like the early Christians who were scattered by persecution, they continue “declaring the good news of the word.” (Acts 8:4) Preaching helps them to focus on the Kingdom rather than on difficult circumstances. As a result, they have maintained their joy and peace.



FINDING PEACE WHILE PERSECUTED

14. How can persecution disturb our peace?
14 Persecution can rob us of many things that normally bring peace. We are happy and satisfied when we meet together freely, preach openly, and carry on in our daily routine without fear of being arrested. If those freedoms are taken away, we may become anxious, fearing what will happen next. These feelings are normal. Still, we must be careful. Jesus indicated that persecution could cause his followers to stumble. (John 16:1, 2) So how can we maintain our peace while being persecuted?
15. Why should we not fear persecution? (John 15:20; 16:33)
15 God’s Word tells us: “All those desiring to live with godly devotion in association with Christ Jesus will also be persecuted.” (2 Tim. 3:12) A brother named Andrei struggled to accept that fact after the work was banned in his country. He reasoned: ‘There are too many Witnesses here. How could the authorities arrest all of us?’ But instead of bringing Andrei peace, this thinking made him constantly anxious. Other brothers left the outcome in Jehovah’s hands, not trying to convince themselves that they would escape arrest. They acknowledged that they might be arrested, but they were less anxious than Andrei was. So he decided to adopt their attitude and entrust himself to God. Soon he felt at peace, and he now finds joy despite challenges. The same can be true of us. While Jesus did tell us to expect persecution, he also assured us that we can remain faithful.​—Read John 15:20; 16:33.
16. What direction do we need to obey while under persecution?
16 When our work is banned or greatly restricted, we may receive instructions from the branch office and the elders. These are meant to protect us, to make sure that we keep receiving spiritual food, and to help us continue preaching to the extent possible. Do your best to obey the direction you receive, even if you do not fully understand why it is being given. (Jas. 3:17) Also, never reveal information about our brothers and sisters or about congregation activities to those who are not entitled to it.​—Eccl. 3:7.




What will contribute to your peace even during difficult times? (See paragraph 17)e



17. Like the apostles in the first century, what are we determined to do?
17 One of the primary reasons why Satan wages war against God’s people is that they “have the work of bearing witness concerning Jesus.” (Rev. 12:17) Do not let Satan and his world intimidate you. Preaching and teaching despite opposition brings us joy and peace. In the first century when the Jewish authorities commanded the apostles to stop preaching, those faithful men chose to obey God. They kept preaching, and that work made them happy. (Acts 5:27-29, 41, 42) Of course, when our work is restricted, we must be discreet while preaching. (Matt. 10:16) But if we do our best, we will have the peace that comes from pleasing Jehovah and from sharing a lifesaving message.



“THE GOD OF PEACE WILL BE WITH YOU”

18. What should we remember about the Source of the peace we need?
18 Be confident that even during the most difficult times, we can have peace. At such times, we must remember that the peace we need is the peace of God, that is, the peace that only Jehovah can give. Rely on him when you face a disease outbreak, a disaster, or persecution. Stick close to his organization. Look ahead to the marvelous future that awaits you. As you do, “the God of peace will be with you.” (Phil. 4:9) In the next article, we will consider how we can help fellow Christians who face tribulation to have the peace of God.



HOW CAN YOU FIND PEACE DESPITE . . .
  a disease outbreak?

  a disaster?

  persecution?




SONG 38 He Will Make You Strong
a Jehovah promises to give peace to those who love him. What is the peace that God gives, and how can we find it? How can having “the peace of God” help us when we face disease outbreaks, disasters, or persecution? This article will answer those questions.
b Some names have been changed.
c See the article “When Disaster Strikes​—Steps That Can Save Lives” in Awake! No. 5 2017.

d PICTURE DESCRIPTION: A sister prepared in advance to evacuate her home.
e PICTURE DESCRIPTION: A brother who lives where our preaching work is restricted continues to witness discreetly.

