From Our Readers
Estranged Parents  My parents divorced when I was three years old. For 36 years I’ve tried to figure out where my father, who had been unfaithful to my mother, should fit into my life. Juggling my loyalties has often proved to be more than I can handle. Your article “Young People Ask . . . How Do I Deal With My Parent Who Left Home?” (November 8, 1990) has touched on every aspect of this matter. All my feelings have now fallen into place, and I feel as though Jehovah has put his loving arm around me and said, ‘I understand.’
G. M., United States
Airline Tragedy  I have just finished reading the article “My Agony on Flight 232” (December 22, 1990), and I could not hold back my tears thinking of what Lydia must have gone through, losing her husband. I lost my mother to cancer five months ago. I am infinitely grateful to our loving God for making it possible for us to see our loved ones by means of the resurrection.
C. G., France
Why God Permits Suffering  I have read Awake! from cover to cover since 1985, but never have I seen such an illuminating answer to the question of why God permits suffering as that given in your October 8, 1990, issue. Any thinking person can obtain clear answers by reading these flawlessly written articles.
E. T. V., Brazil
Afterschool Jobs  Your article “Young People Ask . . . Will an Afterschool Job Help Me Grow Up?” (November 22, 1990) gave me some very helpful advice at the right time. It helped me weigh the pros and cons of a job and make a far better decision than I might have made had I done it on my own. Thanks!
M. R., United States
I did indeed enjoy the article. I am 32 years old, have two children, and work two evenings a week at a fast-food restaurant. The kids I work with work hard. Some might therefore take offense at the term “fast-food joint.”
C. B., United States
We can well appreciate the feelings of some readers in this regard. However, the term was quoted as it appeared in “The Wall Street Journal.” In the article, we used the expression “fast-food restaurant.”​—ED.
Eating Disorders  As I am subject to depression and anorexia myself, I really appreciated that the Society dealt with these difficult problems in simple terms, showing that women can break free from eating disorders. (December 22, 1990) Thanks for treating these rarely discussed taboo subjects.
C. L., France
Immune System  I just finished reading the article “Our Immune System​—A Miracle of Creation.” (November 22, 1990) At first, I was a little apprehensive about reading it, but once I started, it opened my eyes as to how awe-inspiring God is!
L. Z., United States
Your article shocked me. To represent the immune system as soldiers with weapons was in bad taste. As Christians, we are against war. Or was the portrayal not to be taken seriously?
D. C., Germany
The comparison made was not at all an endorsement of human conflict. It merely served to help readers understand a very complex subject. Interestingly, the Bible itself uses war as a basis for illustrations, comparing Christians to armed soldiers. (Ephesians 6:10-17)​—ED.

