Africa’s Amazing “Tree of Life”
BY AWAKE! CORRESPONDENT IN TANZANIA
“I DO not believe the like was ever seen in any part of the world.” What was it that the Frenchman Michel Adanson saw when visiting Senegal in 1749? It was a tree! About 65 feet [20 m] high, with an enormously wide trunk, 25 feet [8 m] in diameter. David Livingstone later referred to the tree as a “carrot planted upside down.”
Legend has it that “the devil plucked up [the tree], thrust its branches into the earth, and left its roots in the air.” Thus, many know the tree as “the upside-​down tree.” In Latin it is called Adansonia digitata, named after its discoverer, but most of us call it the baobab, one of the best-​known trees in eastern Africa, although taller cousins can be found in Madagascar and some even in Australia.
The Upside-​Down Tree
We had spent many hours driving through the Tanzanian countryside. It was a delight to see picturesque settlements, dwellings with straw roofs, women carrying firewood on their heads, children playing under mango trees, and some herdsmen looking after their cattle. We finally see what Adanson saw back there in the 18th century.
“There they are!” shouts Margit. Massive, majestic, the baobab appears here and there in the drier parts of tropical Africa. It is native to the savanna, along the coast, and even on the slopes of Mount Kilimanjaro. “It does not resemble any other tree I have ever seen,” adds one of our associates. Grayish and enormous, the baobab is a plant with bark two to four inches [5-10 cm] thick. “It really looks like a tree planted upside down!” Most of the year, during the six to seven months of the dry season, the tree has no leaves whatsoever. How does the tree survive? Why don’t we ask someone who may know.
Making our way in baobab land, we finally get to talk to Shem, a native. “You see,” says the man, “this is a bottle tree.” A bottle tree? “Yes, during the short rainy season, the spongy fibers of the tree suck up a large quantity of water, which is stored in the trunk for the dry season.” The publication Baobab​—Adansonia Digitata notes: “The top of the trunk is usually hollowed, rainwater and dew collect here and may be the only water available for miles around. . . . The trunk has a high water content. It is estimated that a tree of about 200 cubic metres [7,000 cubic feet] will contain up to 140,000 liters [37,000 gallons] of water. . . . Manageable blocks of the trunk can also be cut out and water squeezed out for drinking.” Shem jokes: “It is a huge tree, but the heart is soft.” By now more villagers have approached and are eagerly listening to the conversation. “Did you know that the baobab is the tree of life?” asks Emmanuel.
The “Tree of Life”
To many natives the tree is a gift from God. Why? “First of all it can live very long. Perhaps one thousand years or even longer,” continues a villager. “It serves us with food, water, clothes, roofing material, glue, medicine, shelter, necklaces, and even sweets for the children.” What about firewood? “No, the bark is too moist from the water stored in it. We usually look for other trees for that purpose.” Says young Daniel: “But we use the bark for making our strings and ropes.” Far more than that, it is used for nets, mats, cloth, hats, canoes, trays, boxes, baskets, and paper. Ash from the bark can be used as fertilizer, and many make soap out of it. “The young shoots and leaves are eaten,” adds one of the young mothers, carrying a baby on her back. “We also roast the seeds and use them for coffee. Seed pulp is used in making beer, and oil can be extracted too.”
During the short rainy season, the tree puts forth beautiful white flowers. But they do not smell as good as they look! They begin to open from the late afternoon to soon after sunset and are fully open by the following morning. During the night, the fruit bats are thus invited to pollinate. The natives mix the flower pollen with water and use it as glue. The long (16 inches [40 cm]) fruit hang down on stalks. We touch the greenish fruit, and it feels like velvet. It looks like a monkey’s tail. “Aha, that is why the tree is also called the monkey-​bread tree!” Shall we cut the fruit and look inside? Why not!
“Cream-​of-​Tartar Tree”
The fruit has a white, tart pulp around the seeds, very rich in vitamin C, vitamin B1, and calcium. In baking, the pulp can be used as a substitute for cream of tartar. That is also the reason why some call it the cream-​of-​tartar tree. Shem says: “We sometimes make drinks from the pulp. It tastes like lemon.” That is why other people call it the lemon tree. What else is it used for?
Shem replies: “We use almost all parts of the tree. The shell of the fruit we use as a fishing float, water dipper, and soup bowl, and we also use it to make a good rat trap. When our cattle are troubled by insects, we simply burn the fruit pulp, and the smoke serves as a repellent. Sometimes we mix the pulp flour with milk and get an excellent yogurt.” What about medicine? “Of course, the tree is our pharmacy,” laughs Shem.
The Baobab Pharmacy
What do you use it for? “Everything!” Because of its many uses, no wonder that many local people respect the tree, fear it, yes, even worship it. We find out that nursing mothers mix the powdery pulp with milk and give it to their babies in order to prevent the small ones from getting distended bellies, dysentery, and fever. “Medicine” from the tree is sold in local markets and is said to cure inflammations, toothaches, and other ailments. Locally it is used to treat anemia, diarrhea, influenza, asthma, kidney problems, respiratory problems, and even tumors.
This extraordinary tree is naturally surrounded by myths and legends. Some feel that “the farm on which [the baobab] stands may not be sold, since its presence is believed to be a good omen. . . . Another tale claims that a Lion will devour anyone rash enough to pluck a flower from the tree. These blossoms are believed to be inhabited by spirits. It is also said that the water in which the tree’s seeds have been soaked and stirred acts as protection against crocodile attacks and that he who drinks the bark infusion will grow mighty and strong.”​—Baobab—​Adansonia Digitata.
Sweets for the Children
We have learned many new things from the natives in baobab land. Now, in Dar es Salaam, we see Navina, Suma, and Kevin. Guess what they are chewing and sucking? Baobab seeds! The red-​colored seeds are sold as sweets along the roadside, and it seems these children love them. “Is it sour?” “A little bit, but we like it!” say the children with one voice. “Please have some! Taste!” Yes, why not taste something from Africa’s “tree of life”?
[Picture on page 24]
The baobab, tree of many uses
[Picture on page 24]
Seeds, used as sweets and roasted for coffee
[Picture on page 25]
Its blooms are large
[Picture on page 25]
Leafless during the dry season

