From Our Readers
Toys  I just finished reading the fine article “Parents​—Choose Your Child’s Toys Wisely.” (September 8, 1994) As a parent, I deeply appreciated the information. However, I would like to add a cautionary suggestion. Please warn readers of the potential that small children may drown in pails or buckets in which there is even a small amount of liquid.
E. V., United States
The reminder is appreciated.​—ED.
My son and I were in the middle of a discussion regarding his desire to have me purchase a toy that I felt was inappropriate for him. As a young one, he found it difficult to agree with my reasoning. As we spoke, we opened the mail, which included the latest Awake! We were both surprised to see the title “Do You Know What Your Child Is Playing With?” He was impressed by the articles and began to understand my reasoning.
W. F., United States
Thank you for the articles. I am almost 13 years old and enjoy outdoor activities, arts and crafts, and playing the piano. When I was younger, I created toys of my own. I like doing these things better than video games because they give me a feeling of accomplishment. I hope these articles helped other children realize how much fun these things can be.
C. S., United States
Hippopotamus  Thank you for publishing the item “Hippopotamus to the Rescue!” (October 8, 1994) I was so moved when I read about the way the hippopotamus rescued that impala. Until now, all a hippo was to me was an enormous body in the water that opens an enormous mouth to display enormous teeth. I wouldn’t have said that I liked those beasts, but this article has changed my opinion.
Y. H., Japan
Israeli Soldier’s Story  I have just finished the article “Trained to Kill, Now I Offer Life.” (September 8, 1994) Many times I have been moved to write you to express my appreciation, but never have I felt as compelled to do so as now. Often I have wondered about the Jewish response to the good news of Jehovah’s Kingdom. Now you have provided the exceptionally heartwarming story of Rami Oved. What a joy to read about the triumph of God’s Word over every obstacle!
J. S., United States
The story touched my heart, inasmuch as my family is also of Jewish descent. It is hard on many people when they choose the Bible’s truth over their families, but it seems especially hard on Jews, since their families consider you as being dead to them. My parents’ families mellowed, though, when they realized that my parents wouldn’t give up the truth for anyone!
F. K., United States
Eye Operation  I read the article “Radial Keratotomy​—What Is It?” with great interest. (September 22, 1994) Since I will be undergoing this operation in a few months, I appreciated the clarifying information very much. It was more complete than that supplied by my ophthalmologist.
G. C., Italy
Suffering Children  Your series “What Hope for the Children?” (May 8, 1994) was realistic and very well-​done. Reading of the terrible experiences and the deadly diseases, as well as the terrible living conditions that many children suffer, has made me grieve in my heart. But I was delighted to read about the real hope for the children that is to be realized when God’s Kingdom rules mankind.
D. G., Papua New Guinea

