VOL. XXII. DECEMBER 1, 1901. No. 23. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 

The Czar of Russia and the 
World's Peace 371 

The Troubles of the Scientists 373 

The Universal Meridian 373 

Beloved Son Timothy's Return 374 

The Justice of Our Contention 374 

The Voices of the Three Signs 375 

Christ Our Passover Was 

Sacrificed for Us 380 

Crossing the Red Sea 382 

page 370 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



PILGRIM VISITS ARE FREE OF ALL CHARGES. 

We find that some of the friends have refrained from requesting 
"Pilgrim" visits because they supposed they would 
be expected to contribute for his railway fare and also for his 
support. This is a mistake: the services of the preaching 
"Pilgrims" laboring under the auspices of the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY are absolutely without charge;-nor do 
they take up any collections. The Society pays their railway 



and all other expenses out of its funds, which are all voluntary 
donations, from such as are able and anxious to serve thus. 

All we ask of the friends visited is that they provide a 
parlor, hall, school-house or church building for the meetings 
and that they board and lodge the "Pilgrim" during the two 
or three days of his visit. We attend to all else. 

RENEW REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM-SERVICE, 1902. 

The Pilgrim routes are made out months ahead; so it is too 
late to write us, as some do, when they learn from last page 
that a Pilgrim is coming to their vicinity. If you desire visits 
write us a Postal Card (or on a card of that size) answering the 
following questions: (a) Have you regular meetings now? 
(b) How many usually attend? (c) Who are the chosen leaders 
of the class? (d) Did the class vote its desire for Pilgrim 
visits? (e) Are you able and willing to secure a suitable room 
for private meetings? (f) Could you arrange also for one public 
meeting? and what number could probably be gathered? 

You can answer briefly, thus: (a) Yes. (b) 14. (c) John 
Smith and Amos Brown, (d) Yes. (e) Yes. (f) Yes: 100 to 300. 

When you see a notice of a "Pilgrim Visit" near you and 
do not know the meeting address, enquire of us by Postal card 
immediately. Those arranging for "Pilgrim meetings" will 
please notify us early respecting their arrangements. If off the 
railroad, name nearest station and further conveyance. 



R2914: page 371 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE CZAR OF RUSSIA AND THE WORLD'S PEACE. 



THE FRANKFURTER ZEITUNG, one of 
the most reliable newspapers of Europe, is the 
authority for the following report of an interview 
between the Czar and a German Admiral, while 
the Czar as the guest of Emperor William witnessed 
the maneuvers of the German fleet in the Baltic Sea, 
—the Admiral being in command of the fleet. It is 
important as showing the opposing arguments on the 
preservation of the world's peace, which all men 
agree is desirable— essential. 

We agree with the Czar's line of argument, but 
hold that in the nature of things it is impossible of 
realization. The arming and drilling and building 
of ships will continue until the people of Europe are 
thoroughly awakened, when they will refuse to be 
fought and taxed, and a revolution in favor of Socialism 
will ensue— resulting, however, in Anarchy, as 



the Scriptures indicate, preparing the way for Christ's 
Millennial Kingdom. 

The conversation, as reported by the Zeitung 
follows: 

Admiral— Your Majesty is pleased to confer 
too great an honor upon an old sea dog like me. I am 
delighted to think that your Majesty received a favorable 
impression of our army and navy, for, your Majesty 
may rest assured, we strain every nerve to keep 
the army and navy abreast of the times, which is the 
ideal thing for every good government to do. 

The Czar— There I differ with you, Admiral. 
According to my own views the ideal thing to do 
would be to reduce standing armies and navies instead 
of keeping on increasing their strength. This 
so-called preparedness for war— arming on a great, 
and ever greater, scale is overburdening the peoples 
of Europe. All governments should strive to lessen 
their expenses for the army and navy. As long as 
they do the opposite, they are simply upholding and 
perpetuating an intolerable situation. 

The Admiral— A humane and extremely generous 
thought, your Majesty, but— 

The Czar— (interrupting)— not a thought only, 
Admiral. I am devoting my life to the realization of 
the peace idea. 

The Admiral— Indeed, your Majesty's big-hearted 
endeavors permit of no misinterpretation, but the 
other powers, your Majesty, the other powers. Your 
Majesty won't believe for a moment that the other 
powers will find it to their interest to reduce their armies 
and navies! 

The Czar— I am convinced that a condition such 
as I have outlined will serve the true interest and conform 
to the just aspirations of all the powers. 

The Admiral— May it please your Majesty, don't 
you think that a perfect army and navy, an army and 
navy ready to move against the enemy at a moment's 
notice, so to speak— doesn't your Majesty think that 
such weapons as those constitute the best guarantee 
of peace? 

WAR PREPAREDNESS MUST STOP. 

The Czar— In order to establish true and permanent 
peace it is absolutely necessary that the nations' 

R2915 : page 371 

war-preparedness, as constituted by their armies and 

navies, be limited. The nations durst not go on forever 

increasing their war strength and heaping up 

war material. There should be no further progress, 

so-called, in the art of killing men and animals, destroying 

ships, interfering with commerce, and laying 

waste provinces. All that has to stop. The nations 



want a rest; they have been clamoring for the 

cessation of war scares, produced by the announcement 

that A has better guns than B, or that X is 

building more and better ships than Y can afford to 

do— they have demanded a letup in war preparedness 

for twenty years! On that point the civilized nations 

are fully agreed, and international policy, my dear Admiral, 

will eventually compel the permanent peace. 

Policy, I say, and not armies and navies. 

Admiral— I beg to assure your Majesty that my 
government, like that of St. Petersburg, strives for 
peace most earnestly. To preserve peace is its sincerest 
wish, believe me, your Majesty. But to preserve 
peace our army and navy must be in the best 

R2915 : page 372 

possible shape; we must increase and augment them 
steadily to keep pace with the growth of population 
and the armament of other peoples. Your Majesty 
knows the old saying: Si vis pacem para bellum. God 
forbid that we increase the army and navy with the 
idea of carrying war into our neighbors' land. It's 
all done in the interest of peace. For peace's sake 
we are willing to make any sacrifice. 

PEACE NOT WITHIN REACH. 

The Czar— Yes, I heard this story before. You 
compel your people to bleed itself to death to furnish 
ways and means for keeping up a tremendous force 
on land and sea, and for adding to it constantly in a 
manner heretofore, happily, unknown. Neither Napoleon 
I. nor Frederick the Great, neither Alexander 
nor Peter, neither Louis XIV., nor our own Catherine 
ever dreamt of such armies and navies in war time 
as are now established while Europe enjoys the blessings 
of peace. But all your arming and the whole immense 
apparatus afoot and afloat, eating millions day 
by day, don't amount to a row of pins as an actual 
guarantee of peace. The nations of Europe are today 
as far as ever from declaring the permanency of peace. 
Despite your armies and navies, the blessings of a 
world's peace are not yet within reach. 

Admiral— True enough, your Majesty, armed 
peace demands great sacrifice; we have to pay heavily 
for the maintenance of peace by a grand army and 
navy, but your Majesty, the people are glad to contribute 
to the welfare of Europe even at considerable 
expense. 

PUBLIC WELFARE THREATENED. 

The Czar— Maybe, Admiral, but the thing can't 
go on! The sacrifices demanded of the taxpayer are 
constantly growing, financial troubles, owing to the 



expense of the army and navy, are increasing day by 
day. I tell you, this thing spells disaster. The public 
welfare is threatened at its roots. 

The Admiral— Your Majesty is pleased to leave 
many things, stamping armed preparedness as a 
blessing to the people, out of your calculations. Big 
armies and grand navies compel the nations to work 
and strive; they banish idleness and call for honest 
competition. Nowadays every people in Europe is 
trying to produce the best weapon, the finest ships. 

The Czar— But it's not humanity's business to 
produce means of destruction. We were put upon this 
earth to build up, not to do the other thing. All the 
money spent for the army and navy above a certain 
necessary amount is money diverted from its real 
purpose, money invested in unproductive labor. 

Admiral— Your Majesty was pleased to admire 
our fine quick-firing guns; you have seen those mysteries 
of the sea, boats that travel under water, the 
iron-clads yonder, our incomparable flotilla of torpedo-boats 
—all these wonders of twentieth century 
technique, are they not evidence of marvelous progress? 
Doesn't your Majesty recognize that our people 
give their best thought, their brightest endeavors 
to the fatherland? I repeat it, in my humble opinion 
our army and navy is the best guarantee of peace, 
while the money invested therein pays abundant interest 
by the maintenance of peace. The people's 
money could not be more profitably invested than in 
securing peace as we do. 

BEST TO-DAY, USELESS TO-MORROW. 

The Czar (shaking his head)— Indeed, and what 
about those hundreds of millions you are spending 
for means of destruction, to-day labeled the "best and 
latest," while to-morrow you must admit that they 
are valueless because something new, something to 
offset them, was invented? A fine investment, 
Admiral. 

Admiral— I will not deny that we are frequently 
doomed to disappointment of the sort your Majesty 
referred to. But if your Majesty will permit me, I 
dare say the competitions of inventors benefits our 
home industry and consequently the people that live 
by industry and commerce. 

The Czar— Your argument is illogical, Admiral. 
Powder and guns, torpedoes and sub-marine vessels, 
ships, not destined for commerce— all such things are 
false values; the persons engaged in their manufacture 
contribute neither to the world's betterment nor 
to their own happiness. Ironclads, grapeshot, swords, 
and lances are not agents of progress by any means; 
their wholesale manufacture presupposes a deficit in 
the making of articles that stand for culture and economical 
advancement. Besides, it is easy to prove 



that the system of armed preparedness is largely responsible 

for the financial depressions that crop up 

from time to time in all countries turned into camps. 

The Admiral— But, your Majesty, what has preserved 
peace during the last twenty and more years, 
if it was not our grand army? If we hadn't been so 
well prepared as to number of soldiers and ships, as 
to the latest pattern of guns and other war material, 
hostilities might have broken out on several 
occasions. 

The Czar— Hypothesis, my dear Admiral! There 
isn't an atom of proof for what you say. I am convinced, 
on the other hand, that your grand collection 
of war material is a permanent menace to peace. 

The Admiral— On that point I beg to differ with 
your Majesty, and the people, I am sure, think as I 
do. They love the army and value it for the protection 
it renders the nation. And for these services 
they are willing to pay. 

The Czar— It is unfortunate that you and armed 
war preparedness enthusiasts generally will not see 
things in their proper light. As a matter of fact, 
standing armies and big navies are obstructing national 
development everywhere, and the people, staggering 
under the weight of overtaxation for army purposes, 
hate and loathe the institution, while fearing it 
at the same time. I tell you, Admiral, if things go on 
as they have been going, the catastrophe which you 
hope to avert will occur sooner than you think. The 
disaster will be awful— the thought of it might make 
an honest man shudder. 

The Admiral— I beg your Majesty's pardon. I 
am only an old sea dog trying to do my duty. Now 
duty, as I take it, compels the state to do everything 
in its power to keep the army abreast of the times, 
increasing and equipping it in the best manner possible, 
so that, in the hour of danger— 

MAY INVOLVE THE WORLD. 

The Czar— No, no, no. It's the state's duty to 
avert war by other means than by laying up war material, 
that must necessarily lead to war. Don't you 

R2915 : page 373 

know that the war of the future, of which we stand 
in such dread, may involve the whole world? 

The Admiral— Is your Majesty thoroughly in 
earnest? 

The Czar— Most thoroughly. I regard it as my 
sacred duty to secure permanent peace for the world 
by persuading the nations to disarm. At the same 
time I am not blind to the fact that this grand purpose 
can only be achieved by the co-operation of all 
civilized peoples. 



This ended the conversation, the Czar rising and 
giving the signal for the dismissal of the fleet. 

THE TROUBLES OF THE SCIENTISTS. 



Those who reject the divine revelation, the Bible, 
are continually in trouble— contradicting themselves 
and each other. The following from the Chicago Inter-Ocean 
will trouble evolutionists. Yet the learned 
Professor by the change noted is, however, probably 
no nearer the truth than before. He confuses his 
reason and handicaps it by assuming a false premise, 
rejecting the inspired one. 

The article mentioned follows:— 

MONKEYS WERE MEN, NOT MEN MONKEYS. 

That Professor Ernst Haeckel, the distinguished 
German naturalist, and the world's greatest living 
advocate of the biological theory of evolution, has reversed 
his views of half a century and taken a stand 
with Professor Rudolf Virchow in opposition to Darwinism 
is the startling announcement made in Paris. 

It is stated that during his expedition to Java, 
begun last year, Professor Haeckel has found striking 
evidence in support of the theory, advanced for 
the first time only a few months ago by Virchow, that 
monkeys are descended from man, and not man from 
monkeys. That, in fact, monkeys are nothing less 
than degenerate humans. 

"If Professor Haeckel has made any such discovery," 
said Dr. Edward Grant Conklin, professor 

R2916 : page 373 

of zoology at the University of Pennsylvania, "or if 
he has recanted his former multitudinous writings 
and lecturings sufficiently to make any such statement 
it means that one of the most remarkable revolutions 
in biological science has taken place. 

"I can not credit the announcement. It seems too 
extraordinary to believe that Haeckel, of all men, 
should take this stand. I do not know if he has returned 
from Java, but he went there to study and 
make further researches into the pithecanthropus 
erectus, discovered by Dr. Dubois, with a view to 
further substantiate the theories he laid down in his 
'Phylogeny,' tracing the descent of man. 

"Haeckel may have discovered fresh remains of 
the pithecanthropus; if so, their nature has not been 
announced, and I can not speculate upon them, but 
any fresh finds along that line can not fail to be of the 
utmost interest to scientists." 

To understand thoroughly the revolutionary 



change accredited to Professor Haeckel, it is only necessary 

to review briefly the history of his part in 

the exploitation of Darwin's theory and the causes 

that led to his recent exploring visit to Java. 

Ernst Haeckel, now professor of zoology at Jena 
University, was the first distinguished scientist to fully 
accept Darwin's theory when the "Origin of Species" 
was published. The scientific world was trembling 
on the brink of the revolution he caused later 
by the publication of "The Descent of Man," when 
Haeckel anticipated Darwin in his most far-reaching 
conclusions, and in a measure prepared the world for 
the startling doctrines hinted at in the "Origin of 
Species" and fully promulgated in "The Descent of 
Man." 

Since then Haeckel has been the most advanced 
among the evolutionists. He has long asserted that 
the history of man is complete in all its essential details, 
and that all that now remains to be done is to 
fill in here and there such concrete evidence as zoological 
and paleontological research shall reveal. 

In his "Systematic Phylogeny," a monumental 
work in three volumes, he made a theoretic systematic 
arrangement of the vegetable and animal worlds 
living and extinct on the basis of the law of evolution. 
The work has been called a vast pedigree tree, 
with man at the top and the lowest non-nucleated cell 
at the bottom. In this pedigree there were no empty 
or unaccounted spaces. Haeckel constructed hypothetical 
animals or organisms, and to him, in theory, 
there were no missing links. 

Twenty-five years before the discovery of Dubois' 
pithecanthropus Haeckel had forseen in his 
phylogeny such a creature, and he had christened it 
"pithecanthropus alius," or the apelike man before 
language. He gave to it a place midway in the order 
of life between the highest ape and the lowest human. 

In every library, in every language devoted to 
zoological works, there are books by the shelf-full 
bearing the name of Haeckel. They stand beside and 
support the "Origin of the Species" and "Descent of 
Man" and "Man's Place in Nature" (Huxley). 
Haeckel has been the apostle of Darwinism, the most 
trenchant fighter in the years when the theory was 
battling for a right to existence in the scientific world. 
Virchow, the world-famous pathologist, found 
Haeckel in his fight against Darwinism, and now that 
the champion should go to the other extreme is incomprehensible 
to those who have followed his 
career. 

Professor Ernst Haeckel is now sixty-seven 
years old, and is a native of Potsdam. For thirty-five 
years he made his home in the quiet, sleepy little 
town at Jena, except for occasional expeditions and 
trips to scientific congresses. He has been a prolific 
writer, and is a most accomplished artist. All the 



drawings and illustrations for his works have been 
made by himself, and their marvelous accuracy has 
made his books of two-fold value. The extravagance 
to which he has carried some of his theories and the 
imagination he has infused into his driest and most 
scientific dissertations have in a measure cut him off 
from absolute confidence on the part of his followers, 
but no naturalist has earned fame by harder work or 
deeper study.— Chicago Inter-Ocean. 

THE UNIVERSAL MERIDIAN. 



The meridian of Greenwich, England, is everywhere 
accepted as the starting line from which to 
reckon longitude and time all over the earth, and all 
our maps and astronomical calculations are made accordingly. 
Suggestions have been made from time 
to time, however, that a better starting-line might be 

R2916 : page 374 

found. Some of the Italian scientists, for example, 
have seriously objected to Greenwich, on account of 
the clouds and bad weather that frequently interfere 
with astronomical observations there. They recommend 
that the civilized world adopt Jerusalem as the 
standard meridian, because the skies are clearer there, 
and the possibility of making Palestine neutral territory 
would eliminate political objections. 



R2916 : page 374 

"BELOVED SON TIMOTHY'S RETURN; 



WE HAVE PLEASURE in announcing the 
safe return of dear Brother E. C. Henninges 
(and his faithful helpmate) via the steamer 
"Etruria," on November 16. During his absence, of 
nearly two years, his energy on behalf of the harvest 
work in Great Britain has been greatly blessed by the 
Master, as reports from the British Branch from time 
to time have abundantly demonstrated. The work 
there is on a far better footing than it has ever been in 
the past; and under the care of our new representative 
there, Brother Jesse Hemmery, it will, we doubt 
not, continue to prosper and gather much ripe 
"wheat" into the Lord's "garner." 

As for Brother and Sister Henninges, we can 
readily find room for them in the Allegheny office. 
Indeed the general work is spreading grandly (and 



we expect it to expand much more during the next six 
years) and the addition of these efficient helpers to 
our present force is quite opportune. We trust it will 
give the editor an opportunity to proceed with the 
preparation of the VI and VII Volumes of Millennial 
Dawn, from which he has been greatly hindered 
by the expansion of the various departments of the 
work during the past two years. 

The dear friends in Great Britain will miss our 
dear Brother and his untiring energy on their behalf; 
but we trust they will find in dear Brother Hemmery 
a faithful and good substitute. We commend him 
to them all. We have every confidence in respect to 
his character and ability— else we would not have esteemed 
him the Lord's choice for the position he now 
occupies. We urge that the British friends support 
him by their prayers and co-operation accordingly. 



R2916 : page 374 

THE JUSTICE OF OUR CONTENTION. 



WE TRUST that hundreds of our subscribers 
in all parts of these United States have 
written letters or postal cards (or gotten up petitions) 
for the protection of the public's rights under the laws 
as they are, and as they have existed for thirty years. 
Each one is responsible in this matter. Let each do 
his duty, and then be content with the results whatever 
they may be. We urge all who appreciate the 
present law, and who have not already done so, to 
send a letter or card at once. See page 367 of last 
issue. We give below our Appeal, which has been 
unjustly refused. 

Allegheny, Pa., U.S.A., October 11, 1901. 
James A. Grier, Esq., Postmaster, Allegheny, Pa. 
Dear Sir:— 

Your favor of the 4th is at hand, enclosing a 
copy of the Hon. E. C. Madden's instructions to your 
office, citing us to show cause, as the publishers "why 
the Millennial Dawn series should not be excluded 
from second-class rates of postage, on the 
ground that it has the characteristics of a book." 

To this we reply: That the term "book" is a very 
broad one. In legal usage a "paper book" is a pamphlet 
which may vary in size from five to five hundred 
pages. In the usage of the United States Patent 
Office the term "book" is applied to any pamphlet 
or printed matter of one page or upwards. In 
the usage of the United States Post Office, ever since 
the establishment of the second-class, the term 
"book" has been applied only to printed matter substantially 



bound— in cloth or leather. 

A reference to Webster's Unabridged Dictionary 
and the Standard Dictionary shows the original distinction 
between the terms "pamphlet" and "book" 
to have been that a pamphlet consisted of a number 
of sheets of paper stitched together, not substantially 
bound, nor too cumbersome to be held in the 
hand; while the term "book" applied to literature in 
substantial binding, and particularly to such as was 
too heavy for use in the hand. 

In modern usage the rulings of the United States 
Post Office during the past thirty years, that any 

R2917 : page 374 

printed document in substantial binding, whether of 
few or of many pages, constitutes a book, while the 
same pages unbound constitute a pamphlet, have become 
practically a law. Nor can we conceive of a 
better method of distinction between books and pamphlets 
than this. Under this law, as it has been interpreted, 
we think wisely, justly, the binding, and 
not the number of pages, decided the matter. To 
change this arrangement, and to deny that the binding 
distinguishes what is a book from what is a pamphlet, 
and to arbitrarily decree that a certain number 
of pages should constitute a book, while a less number 
would constitute a pamphlet, would involve the 
Department in an inconsistency, should it attempt to 
decide as heretofore that pamphlets could not be such 
if put up in substantial binding, though acceptable as 
to number of pages. 

Respecting the issues of our journal, known as 
the "Millennial Dawn" series of special issues. 
These have been issued under the present laws 
of the United States since 1886. They are of different-sized 
pages from our regular issues, and were put 
into this form for the greater convenience of our readers. 
They each represented several issues of our semi-monthly, 
Post Office rulings to the effect that one 
issue could not bear date as representing several having 
been promulgated since any of these pamphlets 
issued. 

We hold that these pamphlets are entirely within 
our rights under the law; that nothing in the law in 
any sense of the word restricts us, either as respects 
the number of pages or the size of the page. These 
back numbers of our journal are constantly in demand 
amongst our subscribers and their friends, and 

R2917 : page 375 

any restriction of our rights and privileges as heretofore 
construed and as defined under the law will 
make serious hardship and righteous indignation 
amongst these over twenty-five thousand intelligent 



adults whose case we represent in this paper. 

The fact that these special issues of our journal 
have a colored cover, while our regular issues have 
not, should not be construed as a violation of the 
law, because there is no law governing the subject, 
except the restriction that the cover should not be 
a substantial one. As a matter of fact, the leading 
journals of this and every land are in the habit of issuing, 
especially in the holiday season, special numbers, 
which usually have colored covers, as well as 
other features distinguishing them from the regular 
issues. 

Moreover, the Post Office Department has for 
years recognized as second-class matter what is known 
as the "Official Postal Guide," issued monthly under 
various colored covers, and ranging in pages from 
32 to 1 132. It will not do to say that this is a Government 
publication, for that would not be true; the 
most that can be said for it is that it is a publication 
very convenient to the Post Office Department, one 
which saves the Government from getting out a publication 
of its own. But even if it were a Government 
publication, what jurist would undertake to say 
that the Government is superior to its own laws, and 
that the law governing the meanest citizen does not 
govern also the highest one, and every official and 
every act of the Government? If the annual issues 
of the "Postal Guide" are not books, but pamphlets, 
then surely the Millennial Dawn series of special 
issues of our journal, less than half the size of 
the annual "Postal Guide," are also pamphlets and 
not books. 

Are we told that the Post Office Department 
could frank the "Postal Guide," and thus send it 
through the mails free? We reply that it can not; 
because there is no law of the United States permitting 
them so to do. Before this could be done it 
would be necessary that Congress should pass a law 
to that effect. Likewise, of course, Congress could 
pass a law permitting all religious matter to go 
through the mails free, but we do not anticipate that 
Congress will ever pass either of these laws. The publishers 
of the "Postal Guide" can as well afford to pay 
postage as can other publishers throughout the 
United States. 

Further, we submit that no law-making power 
claims to enact retroactive laws, that will go back 
of the time of their making, and take hold upon legal 
transactions of the past. If, therefore, the United 
States Post Office Department should now or at any 
time conclude that it has the right and the power to 
make new laws and regulations these, in all justice, 
must take hold as for the future, and can not in any 
sense of the word affect our vested rights as represented 
in electroplates and large editions of our special 
issues published under the full sanction of the 



law and of the Post Office Department. At very 
most, the new law or regulation could forbid us from 
henceforth publishing such special editions of our 
journal, or otherwise regulating as respects the number 
of pages, whether they shall be cut or uncut, and 
whether they must be of uniform color as to cover. 

In the above plea we have made no claim for 
preference of consideration on the ground of our publications 
being strictly religious, because, although we 
believe that this plea would have weight in the minds 
of all moral and well-intentioned people, we prefer to 
stand strictly upon the basis of our rights under the 
law. 

We understand that under the new law the Post 
Office Department intends henceforth to restrict 
lodge and society publications to literature or news, 
prohibiting the publication of advertisements. We 
wish to call the attention of the Department to the 
fact that our journal and its special issues would all 
come under this head also. Our subscribers are recognized 
as members of our Society— the Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society, chartered by State 
of Pennsylvania, and our publications contain no advertisements 
whatever, but are strictly confined to 
Biblical exegesis, cultivation of good morals, and in 
general the publication of the Gospel— "good news," 
"good tidings"— the message which is new every 
morning and fresh every evening, and which more 
than any other news in the world is helpful to, not 
only the Lord's people, but in general to civilization— 
"Good tidings [news] of great joy, which shall be 
unto all people." 

Trusting for a just and generous consideration of 
our plea foregoing, we remain, Respectfully yours, 
Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society. 



R2917 : page 375 

THE VOICES OF THE THREE SIGNS. 



WHEN PREPARING the Sunday School lessons 

relating to Moses and his two presentations 

of himself to the Israelites, as their deliverer 

from Egyptian bondage, we noted the fact 

that "these things were written aforetime for our admonition 

upon whom the ends of the ages are come." 

(1 Cor. 10:11.) And, considering the matter from this 

standpoint, we perceived, as we had never done before, 

that the three signs by which the Israelites were 

convinced that God's deliverance of them was at hand, 

at Moses' second presentation, must have been intended 

to typify some corresponding three signs or 



testimonies at the second advent of Christ; testimonies 
which will be convincing to the true spiritual Israelites. 
In the type these three signs or testimonies 
preceded the plagues upon the Egyptians; and this 
in the anti-type, must mean that the three signs or 
testimonies to spiritual Israel respecting the second 
advent of our Lord, and respecting the great deliverance 
which he is to accomplish, must precede the 
plagues, the great time of trouble, coming upon the 
world in general shortly. 

At first we were perplexed, and said to ourself: 
"The Scriptures clearly show us that we are now 'in 
the days of the Son of Man;' our journal has borne 
as its sub-title, Herald of Christ's Presence, since its 
institution, 1879; yet where are these three signs? 
Already twenty-seven years of the forty-year harvest 

R2917 : page 376 

have passed, and but thirteen remain, in the last four 
of which we confidently expect the plagues upon the 
world— anti-typical Egypt. Where are these signs 
or testimonies, which the type teaches us we should 
expect at this time, to convince all the true 
Israelites?" 

For a time we were inclined to look for miraculous 
tokens, but subsequently realized that this would be 
out of the Lord's order, as the anti-type is always on 
a higher and grander scale than the type: as for instance 
the typical Passover lamb but feebly foreshadowed 
the Lamb of God, and the great things accomplished 
through his sacrifice. Feeling confident of 
the times in which we are living, "in the parousia of the 
Son of Man," we concluded that in all probability 
these signs had already been given, or were in process 
of giving at the present time. Still we could not recognize 
them, and feeling that the matter must now be to 
the Lord's household "meat in due season," we besought 
the Lord earnestly and repeatedly for light 
upon the subject, while continuing our studies. No 
light coming, we mentioned the matter to the Bible 
House family at the dinner table, requesting the prayers 
of all upon the subject, and that if any had 
suggestions to offer they would feel free to present 
them. Seemingly it was in line with the divine 
purpose that we should thus come to the point of 
making confession of inability to solve the riddle, 
and that our reliance for wisdom was wholly upon 
the Lord: for within two hours after this acknowledgment 
the entire matter became clear and lucid to our 
mind, as we shall endeavor now to lay it before you 
all. 

(1) Our Lord declares Moses to have been, in 
some particulars, in some of his transactions, a type 
of himself, saying, "Moses wrote of me." Moses 
himself declared, "A prophet [teacher] shall the Lord 



your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like 
unto me." Peter quotes this last expression in his 
sermon, and emphasizes it. (John 5:46; Deut. 18:15; 
Acts 3:22.) Moses did not typify Christ in all of his 
doings, however, nor was his life as a whole a type 
of the life of Christ. For instance, in his smiting of 
the rock, contrary to the divine command, he became 
a type of those of Christ's followers who put him to an 
open shame, and who, in consequence, will die the 
Second Death; and as a type of these Moses was not 
permitted to enter into the land of promise. (Num. 20:11; 
Deut. 32:5 1,52; Heb. 10:29.) He typified Jehovah 
at times also; but in the present instance we 
are specially interested in considering his conduct 
with the Israelites in connection with their deliverance 
from the bondage of Egypt. In this type we 
see him distinctly as a representative of Christ Jesus. 
Moses was rich, a prince in high honor, learned in 
all the learning of his times, but for Israel's sake he 
renounced these, left them all, and they being bondmen, 
he took his place amongst them, to be their leader 
and deliverer. How like this is to the description 
given us in the Scriptures of our Lord's course! He 
left the glory of the heavenly condition and spiritual 
plane of being; he took a bondman's form and was 
found in fashion as a man. He came to deliver his 
brethren from bondage.— Phil. 2:6-8, Diaglott. 

When Moses came to his own people they rejected 
him, and he fled for his life to the land of Midian, 
from whence he came to them a second time. 
So Christ came to his own, and his own received him 
not (John 1:12); and he went into a far country, even 
heaven itself, from whence he has now, a second time, 
come, and will deliver all who are true Israelites indeed 
from the bondage of sin and death. Moses was 
forty years in coming to the point where he offered 
himself to Israel the first time; then he was absent 
from them an equal period of time, forty years, and 
came again and delivered them. There is a type or 
parallel in this time feature also; it illustrates the 
length of the Jewish and the Gospel ages, as being 
equal. From the time of the beginning of typical Israel 
as a nation, waiting for the coming of Messiah, 
down to the time when Jesus actually presented himself, 
was a period of 1845 years, and from that time, 
when he died and left them, until the period which 
the Scriptures show us marked his second coming 
(October, 1874) was a like period of 1845 years,— corresponding 
exactly to the two periods at which Moses 
offered himself in the type.* 

THE VOICE OF THE FIRST SIGN. 



(2) At Moses' second presentation to Israel he 



did not address them personally and directly, as at the 
first, God having said to him, "Aaron shall be thy 
prophet or mouthpiece, and thou shalt be a god unto 
Aaron." This item of the type would seem to imply 
just what we see to be the fact of the case now, viz., 
that the Lord Jesus does not address himself to the 
true Israelites in person now, as at the first advent, 
but through his agent, through a mouth-piece. 
Aaron, the mouth-piece or agent of the Lord, we 
would understand to represent the Royal Priesthood 
—those of the Lord's consecrated people still in the 
flesh, still sacrificing,— who have not yet passed beyond 
the vail into glory. The type, then, seems to 
say that the signs or testimonies which will convince 
all true Israelites now living respecting the presence 
of the Lord and his mighty power to deliver, his ultimate 
victory over Satan, sin and death, will be of 
or from our present Lord, but by or through the living 
members of his body, his brethren, represented in 
Aaron. 

(3) The first sign or testimony to Israel was the 
casting of the rod upon the ground, and its becoming 
a serpent, and the taking of the serpent by the tail, 
and its becoming a rod again in the hands of Aaron. 
It was Moses' rod, and Aaron was merely his representative 
in every act. The natural Israelite merely 
saw this as a miracle, and discerned in it no teaching; 
but the spiritual Israelite is not to expect a larger 
rod and a larger serpent, as the anti-type, but 
should expect to comprehend the meaning of the rod 
and of the serpent as an anti-typical instruction or 
testimony today. 

A rod symbolizes authority. Moses' rod was 
frequently used in connection with the plagues, as 
well as in connection with the signs, as signifying divine 
authority. A serpent is a symbol of evil— of sin 
and all its consequences, evil in general. The lesson 
for the spiritual Israelite today is that he is now 
to understand that all the evil there is in the world is 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II. CHAP. VII. 

R2917 : page 377 

the result, directly or indirectly, of God's having let 
go of his rod or authority; and they are to understand 
further that it is God's intention or purpose, as it is 
also his promise, to take hold upon the present evil 
conditions, which have lasted now more than six 
thousand years, and to bring order out of confusion: 
—to re-establish his authority in his own hand. 

These acts or signs are said to have "voices" or 
to be testimonies. (Exod. 4:8,9.) Hence our query 
must be, Is this sign or testimony now being given to 



God's people throughout the world? We answer, 

Yes. Has it been always recognized and presented 

thus? We answer, No. Was it ever thus presented 

before this harvest-time? We answer, No. Heretofore 

it has been a matter of speculation amongst peoples 

and theologians of all classes and shades of Christian 

belief, but a question without an answer,— Why 

did God permit evil in the world? Some have blasphemously 

held that God has caused the evil, that 

good might follow; but this God himself most emphatically 

denies, and everything pertaining to his 

character refutes it. He declares that every good and 

every perfect gift is of him, with whom is no changeableness 

or variableness. "His work is perfect." 

Others have claimed that a conflict is in operation, 

between God and Satan, between good and evil, and 

that each side is doing its utmost to conquer the other 

—with evil and Satan predominant in the world, on 

account of which it is spoken of as "the present evil 

world," in which there is "none righteous, no, not 

one." But whatever the standpoint of view, it has 

been confusion only, until the harvest-time, when the 

true light upon the subject began to shine forth, 

showing that when sin entered the world God gave 

mankind over, let them take their course, let the rod 

of divine authority drop, "rested from his own work," 

permitting sin and evil to flourish— not, however, intending 

that it should flourish forever as a serpent, 

but fully intending, predestinating, and even foretelling, 

that in due time he would set up his Kingdom in 

the person of the Messiah, who should lay hold upon 

that old Serpent, the devil and Satan, and restrain 

his power. Showing, too, that he will ultimately 

bring all evil conditions back to subjection and harmony 

with the divine authority and law,— destroying 

the evil connected therewith. This teaching, then, 

is the sign whose "voice" or testimony was typified by 

Aaron casting the rod upon the ground, its becoming 

a serpent, and his taking it back into his hand 

again. How much grander the anti-typical teaching 

than the typical sign! How much more forceful! 

Who of the true Israelites who has heard this testimony 

is any longer in doubt respecting the speedy deliverance 

of all of God's people from the power of 

Satan, sin and death? 

We would avoid personality as far as possible, 
but believe it to be in the interest of the truth and of 
the true Israelites that we point out that this sign has 
already been given. Zion's Watch Tower and Herald 
of Christ's Presence was founded in 1879, and the 
"voice" therefrom, to the true Israel of God, announced 
that the second advent of our Lord, as the deliverer 
of the world, had already taken place— that he was 
present but invisible, a spirit being not possible to be 
seen by any, even his Church, until they should be 
"changed" and made like him in the first resurrection. 



The message further declared that he was present for 
the purpose of establishing his Kingdom, and delivering 
his saints and the whole groaning creation from 
the bondage of corruption,— as many as will obey 
him. And it is very remarkable that very shortly a 
special number of this journal was issued, bearing the 
significant title, "Food for Thinking Christians, 
WHY EVIL WAS PERMITTED."* This voice 
or testimony was spread abroad amongst the spiritual 
Israelites in an extraordinary manner,— over a 
million and a half copies being circulated through 
the mails and at church-doors in the United States, 
Canada and Great Britain. And the voice or testimony 
of this first sign, token, teaching, is still being 
repeated from one to another of the Lord's people 
throughout the world, and now in various languages. 
In that pamphlet for the first time, so far as we know, 
was shown that the evil in the world, the bondage to 
sin and death, and the reign of iniquity and the various 
oppressions to which the whole groaning creation 
is subject, are the results of God's having let go 
his authority (rod), and not the result of his inability 
to hold the authority, nor in any sense the outworking 
of the authority in his hand. It showed also how 
complete will be the restraint of evil and its complete 
annihilation when again the Lord shall take unto 
himself his great power and reign. Could there possibly 
be a greater or a grander anti-type for the sign 
which Moses and Aaron presented to Israel through 
the rod and the serpent? Is not the truth on this 
subject much more convincing to the spiritual Israelite 
today than any natural signs or wonders or miracles 
could possibly be? Does not the knowledge 
now granted the Lord's people respecting the divine 
plan of the ages, and its purpose, and the result, satisfy 
our longings as nothing else could do, and assure 
our hearts that deliverance is nigh? 

THE VOICE OF THE SECOND SIGN. 



(4) The second sign to be given to the Israelites 
was that of the leprous hand. Hidden in the bosom, 
when revealed it was leprous; but when hidden 
again, and revealed a second time, it was whole. 
Again we say that the natural Israelite discerned nothing 
but the natural sign, but it was intended of God 
that the spiritual Israelite should discern a much 
grander lesson, and that a testimony through this 
grander lesson would be still more convincing to him 
than was the typical sign to the typical Israelite. A 
hand is a symbol of power. In this case the hand 
represented divine power. Leprosy is a symbol of 
sin. The teaching, therefore, would seem to be that 
divine power was first manifested without sin or imperfection 



or blemish; secondly, that the same divine 
power, hidden for a time, was afterward manifest in 
sin and imperfection; and thirdly, that the same divine 
power, hidden again for a time, will subsequently be 
manifest without sin. 

What teaching or testimony is this? We answer 
that it is in harmony with the previous teaching respecting 
the permission of evil, but does not apply 



*Since this publication two other tracts have been issued, 
bearing portions of the same title; No. 12, "The Divine 
Plan of the Ages: Why Evil was Permitted," No. 52, "Food 
for Thinking Christians: Our Lord's Return," etc. 

R2917 : page 378 

to evil in general, but rather to sin in particular; does 

not apply to the world in general, but specially applies 

to the people of God,— to those whom God uses as his 

agents or representatives, his hand, his power in the 

world. God's power originally was manifested unblemished. 

But during this Gospel age he has been 

represented by his consecrated people, the members 

of the body of Christ, who are his ambassadors and 

representatives; but they are leprous, actually imperfect, 

though reckonedly perfect in Christ. As the 

world sees them they are blemished, but from the 

divine standpoint their blemishes are all hidden, covered 

with the merit of Christ's righteousness. 

Nevertheless, these have been the hand or power 

of God in the world for more than eighteen centuries; 

but by and by they are to be received into his bosom 

again, and "changed" in the first resurrection, so that 

when manifest again in the future they will be without 

sin, "without spot or wrinkle or any such thing," 

and will again be used of the Lord as his agent in 

stretching forth his rod and bringing the plagues 

upon Egypt, and delivering the residue of God's people 

from the bondage of sin and death. 

And is this also a sign or a testimony peculiar to 
this time in which we live, and was this subject never 
clearly seen before? We answer, it is peculiar to our 
day, and was never clearly seen before. In the past 
many have seen something of justification, something 
of sanctification, something of a coming deliverer; 
but never before have these subjects been seen in the 
clear light in which they are now seen as related to 
each other. Never before was the relationship distinctly 
seen between justification and sanctification 
and deliverance; that justification is of divine grace, 
accepted through faith; that sanctification implies 
works and sacrifice, based upon justification; and that 
to these justified and consecrated ones, who faithfully 
overcome, by the grace of God in Christ, shall be 



granted a share in the "glory, honor and immortality" 
of the divine nature in the first resurrection. 

But has the voice or sign of this testimony gone 
forth in any particular channel, as did the preceding 
voice or testimony? We answer, Yes: in the Millennial 
Dawn series of volumes, the first of which 
was published in 1886. The united testimony 
of these relates to the Church, showing original sin, 
the first step out of it into justification, through faith 
in Christ, the second step of sanctification, and sacrifice, 
and the ultimate change, in the first resurrection 
to the divine nature, and glory and join t-heirship. 
These volumes deal specially with this subject from 
its various standpoints, the ransom-sacrifice of our 
Lord, on account of which the cleansing will come to 
us in due time, being everywhere prominently set 
forth; and also the fact that no absolute purity is to 
be expected until the Lord shall take us to himself 
in our "change." 

Supplemental to the teaching of the Dawns on 
this subject, and to assist in emphasizing their "voice" 
and making clear their testimony, the Pilgrim service 
has been instituted under which various brethren 
travel from place to place explaining and demonstrating 
the lesson taught by the leprous hand and 
its healing, and all of our readers, having heard the 
testimony are daily giving it forth to others. 

THE VOICE OF THE THIRD SIGN. 



(5) Another sign was to be given, the Lord 
clearly intimating that it would be necessary, and that 
all of his true people would not hear or heed the 
"voice" of the first two testimonies. To natural Israel 
the third sign was the taking of the water from 
the river, and pouring it upon the earth, where it became 
blood. They saw merely the sign, the miracle; 
they read not its meaning, as the spiritual Israelite 
must seek to do. In explanation of the symbolical 
teaching of this type we suggest that water is here, 
as elsewhere, a symbol of the truth; and that the earth 
is here, as elsewhere, a symbol of society.* The pouring 
of the water upon the earth would ordinarily mean 
the refreshment of the earth, a blessing; and the pouring 
of the truth upon society would ordinarily be expected 
to mean a blessing to society; but in the symbol 
the water turned to blood, repulsive, abhorrent, 
symbolizing death; and this, in the anti-type, would 
signify that in the present time the pouring out of the 
truth upon society will produce an effect contrary to 
what might ordinarily have been expected. Society, 
civilization, has been claiming, especially within the 
past century, to be searching high and low for the 
truth. But this type says that the time has come 



when these professed truth-seekers (the word science 

signifies truth) will reject the truth, disdain it, and 

to them it will seem obnoxious, loathsome, intolerable. 

Our readers will here possibly call to mind our 

Lord's words respecting this present time, "The sun 

shall be darkened and the moon shall be turned into 

blood." We have elsewhere shown the significance 

of this:+ that the moon is the symbol of the Jewish 

Law, as the sun is the symbol of the Gospel message; 

and that the Gospel message will become darkness 

to the eyes of society in general, through the sophistries, 

higher criticism, evolution theories, etc., of this 

boastful day; while the Law, represented by the moon, 

will be viewed as bloody— that its sacrifices will not 

be esteemed as types, nor appreciated as such, but be 

regarded as the work of misguided Jews, who 

slaughtered their animals by the thousands because 

of their ignorance and superstition, and that the commands 

which they obeyed were not of God, but of 

their own conjecture and of priestly connivance. The 

same thought attaches to this sign or testimony of 

the water of truth being poured upon the social earth. 

It will be resented, as bloody, instead of being absorbed 

as truth. 

Is there any thing corresponding to this sign now 
in progress in the world, that could be esteemed a 
sign or testimony to the true Israelites, such as never 
was before given? We answer, Yes, there is. A very 
remarkable movement has been in progress amongst 
us during the past ten years, during which the Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society has supplied tracts free 
in any quantity to those who would promise to use 
them judiciously. You have the annual reports, 
showing the millions of pages which have thus been 
circulated— the truth being thus poured upon the 
symbolical earth, society, liberally in many lands and 
in many languages. But especially has this pouring 



*Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., pp.66-71. 
+Millennial Dawn, Vol. IV., pp.590-594. 

R2917 : page 379 

out of the water, truth, progressed wonderfully during 
the past three years, under what we have designated 
the "Volunteer" work, in which hundreds of the 
Lord's consecrated people have systematically, season 
after season, distributed to Christian people 
tracts and booklets which our Society has supplied 
freely— the donations covering the expense coming 
in without urging or even request. 

But what is the effect of this pouring out of the 
water upon the most enlightened peoples of the 
world, professed truth-seekers? Is it gladly received, 



joyfully absorbed? Only by the few,— the vast majority 

seem to be angered, as the scribes and Pharisees 

and doctors of divinity at the first advent were angered 

when they perceived that the Lord and the apostles 

were teaching the people, and that without money 

and without price. (Acts 4:2.) Nothing can be more 

evident than that the professed teachers of Christendom 

do not want to be taught themselves and do not 

want their people to be taught the truth. They bitterly 

oppose it, and persecute and speak evil of those 

who in this way are seeking to do good. More and 

more they are getting so changed from the simplicity 

of the Gospel of Christ to the theory of evolution and 

higher criticism and sectarian pride and worldliness 

that the truth seems repulsive to them, undesirable, 

bloody. They not only view the typical sacrifices as 

bloody, but they resent the thought that the anti-typical 

sacrifice for sins was the death of Christ— they resent 

the thought that divine justice required this sacrifice, 

and that "without the shedding of blood there 

is no remission of sins," as the Apostle declared. 

(Heb. 9:22.) It does not fit with their theories. According 

to their theories man was created next to the 

monkey, and has been evolving as a race grandly up 

to the present time, and will continue to evolve and 

develop until he becomes a god, and hence needs only 

to be let alone, needs no Savior, no deliverer from 

the present condition of things, which are not seen to 

be evil. They put evil for good, and good for evil, 

darkness for light and light for darkness. To these 

the truth of God's Word respecting the fall, respecting 

the ransom, respecting the coming deliverance 

and restitution blessings which God has provided in 

Christ, through the Millennial Kingdom for all the 

families of the earth,— these are all objectionable, contradictory 

to their theories, hateful, bloody. 

As the "voice" of the third sign or testimony was 
to bring conviction to all of the true typical Israelites, 
so in the anti-type this last testimony or evidence 
will ultimately bring conviction to all of the Lord's 
true people today in the world. They will discern 
that the systems and theologians in whom they have 
trusted are going further and further, day by day, 
away from the appreciation of the true Gospel— the 
truth as it is in Christ Jesus— into the outer darkness 
of the world. All who are loyal to the Lord, as they 
perceive this condition of things, as they recognize the 
cleavage between belief and unbelief, from the Scriptural 
standpoint, will thus be helped, convinced, and 
enabled to take their stand for the truth accordingly. 

It will be remembered that when Moses and 
Aaron presented themselves before Pharaoh they performed 
the first of these signs in his presence— the 
rod turned into a serpent and being reclaimed was a 
rod. Pharaoh called for his magicians (types of theologians 
of today, whose minds— not morals— have become 



corrupted, and who are reprobates, not morally, 
but as respects the faith— 2 Tim. 3:8), he explained 
to them that Moses and Aaron claimed that this sign 
was an evidence of divine power and favor, and asked 
them if they could not show the same evidences. 
They replied, Yes, and cast their rods upon the 
ground, and their rods also became serpents; but 
Aaron's rod-serpent swallowed up all of these. What 
would this signify? It might mean that so far as the 
world is concerned the first sign or testimony which 
convinced the Hebrews will be claimed to be nothing 
new; it will be claimed that theologians all along have 
declared and thought that God blesses evil things, so 
that they result in good. But we answer that the 
view of this subject which God has now displayed to 
his people is so much more complete that it quite 
swallows up all these suggestions and theories of the 
past. What the Lord is now showing proves to his 
people conclusively, not only that some accidents are 
overruled of the Lord for good, but that all evil of 
every kind is the result of absence of the divine control, 
and that when the Lord shortly shall put forth 
his hand, and again take control of earth's affairs, its 
evil conditions will give place to conditions in accord 
with the divine character and authority. 

It will be remembered, also, that the first plague 
which came upon the Egyptians was the turning of 
all the water of Egypt into blood— the river, ponds, 
etc.— so that the Egyptians could not drink of the 
water, but digged for themselves wells near the river. 
As the water represents truth, the thought here conveyed 
would be that from the worldly standpoint very 
soon all truth will become repulsive— every feature of 
truth connected with the divine plan, as represented 
in the Word of God, will become abhorrent; and the 
digging of wells would seem to imply that, rejecting 
the Word of God, the world (Christendom— Churchianity) 
will seek for truth in various ways of their own. 

WHAT SHALL WE SAY TO THESE THINGS? 



It should be a great encouragement to us all to 
find so clearly expressed in the type what we had 
vaguely and indistinctly hoped for, viz., that the 
Lord's people of the Royal Priesthood on this side 
the vail are being used of him in various ways in the 
accomplishment of his purpose of separating the people 
of God from others,— the wheat from the tares. 
It is remarkable in this connection that none but the 
consecrated have ever been successful in connection 
with the circulation of any of these testimonies. Of 
the more than a million copies of Millennial Dawn 
now in circulation remarkably few have been circulated 
by any but those who are believers in their 



testimony, and who have circulated them through 
a desire to be instruments and mouthpieces of the 
Lord in giving forth his word,— even as was Aaron to 
Moses. 

Let us, then, dear brethren and sisters, feel encouraged, 
as, looking into the type, we see so clear a 
fulfillment in our day of the things written aforetime 
for our admonition. Let us with fresh courage show 
forth to all whom we have any reason to believe are 
Israelites indeed the secret of the divine plan— Why 

R2917 : page 380 

Evil Was Permitted. Let us prosecute also the work 

of showing them respecting the hand, the instrumentalities 

which God has used during this Gospel age in 

this service; respecting the justification which covers, 

in God's sight, though it does not transform us in the 

sight of men, pointing out also the final victory of 

the consecrated. Let us persuade the first-born of 

Israel to faithfulness until our "change" comes, when 

we shall be made like the Lord and fit to be his servants 

and representatives. Let us continue also to 

pour out the water of truth; whether others hear or 

whether they forbear. The Lord's assurance is that 

this sign, this testimony and its contrary results ultimately 

shall influence all Israelites indeed. Let us 

remember that the opposition of the worldly, even, 

will prove to be co-operative influence, in deciding 

the Israelites indeed that the deliverer and the deliverance 

are at hand. And finally let us apply to ourselves 

the Lord's assurance to Moses respecting himself 

and Aaron, "Certainly I will be with thee." 

R2917 : page 380 



"CHRIST OUR PASSOVER WAS SACRIFICED FOR US. 

-EXOD. 12:1-17.-DEC. 15.- 

PHARAOH'S heart seemed to grow harder and 
harder under divine mercies, as one plague 
after another was stayed at his request, 
through Moses. The goodness of God, instead of 
leading him to repentance, would seem to have made 
him only the more determined, as God had foreseen 
and foretold. God, however, informed Moses that 
the tenth and final plague would be sufficient to break 
down the opposition of this hard man, and compel 
his acquiescence with the requirement that Israel 
should go free. Before the infliction of this plague 
Moses enquired whether or not Pharaoh were willing 
to let Israel go, and upon receiving the negative response 
he warned Pharaoh that in consequence a dire 



calamity would befall the Egyptians. Apparently he 
immediately departed for the land of Goshen, there to 
put the people in readiness for the exodus. Their 
Egyptian neighbors gave them liberally jewels of gold 
and of silver and various articles of value, evidently 
anxious to have them go, and regretful that their 
ruler was so stubborn. They realized also, no doubt, 
that in some sense God was with the Israelites, and 
against the Egyptians, a matter which it seemed difficult 
for Pharaoh, their king, to discern. 

How much time they may have consumed in 
preparation for the journey we know not, but we may 
well suppose that this was a time of suspense upon 
Pharaoh and all who knew of the last threat presented 
to him by Moses and Aaron. We are certain that the 
preparations required several days, if not weeks, because 
amongst other instructions each family was 
to select for itself a representative male lamb of the 
first year, unblemished, as the foundation for the religious 
ceremony, known as the Passover, ever since 
observed by that nation. The lamb was to be selected, 
accepted, separated from others, and cared for 
specially from the tenth day of that month, Abib (later 
known as Nisan), and on the fourteenth day of the 
month it was to be killed between evenings (between 
six o'clock the one evening and six o'clock the next 
evening— the usual Jewish day). Its flesh was to be 
roasted for eating the following evening, and its blood 
was to be preserved for sprinkling upon the lintels 

R2918 : page 380 

and door-posts,— the door frame, above and at either 
side. It was in the night following the fourteenth 
day that the roast lamb was to be eaten, with bitter 
herbs, the eaters being gathered in family groups, and 
all in expectation for the journey, sandals on their 
feet, and staff in hand, etc., ready to depart out of 
Egypt early in the morning of the fifteenth. 

The story, as recorded in Exodus, is an interesting 
one, and has ever been one precious to the Hebrews, 
the law concerning it serving as one of the 
most prominent landmarks in the history of that nation. 
But to the Christian the meaning of this incident 
is of still greater importance. To him, as the 
anti-typical Israelite, the whole transaction speaks of 
the anti-typical deliverance at the hands of the anti-typical 
Moses at the close of the anti-typical night, 
and at the opening of the anti-typical Passover day. 
Our Golden Text, "Christ, our Passover, is slain for 
us" (1 Cor. 5:7), identifies the Lord Jesus as the anti-typical 
Lamb, and identifies the sacrifices which he 
gave with the deliverance which we are now hoping 
for, as near, even at the door. This fact is recognized 
by Christians of all denominations, and our Lord's 
Supper is recognized as the commemoration of the 



anti-type of the Passover supper, especially by the 
Catholic Churches and the older denominations of 
Protestants. As the Hebrews celebrate the Passover 
annually, so these churches celebrate annually "Good 
Friday," by an emblematic supper known as the 
Eucharist or Lord's Supper, commemorative of the 
death of "the Lamb of God" and the divine mercy 
consequently extended to "the Church of the first 
born." 

Let us go backward, and look at some of the 
minutia, and the meaning of these to us, the spiritual 
anti-typical Israelites. The taking up of the lamb 
on the tenth day of the month found its correspondency 
at the first advent of our Lord Jesus, when he 
presented himself to Israel at the close of his ministry, 
as their King, riding upon the ass, exactly on the 
10th of Nisan. It was then that that nation should 
have accepted him, should have received him; but instead 
"they hid, as it were, their faces from him," and 
saw not in him the beauty for which they were seeking, 
as a nation. It was on the fourteenth day of 
Nisan that our Lord partook of the Passover with his 
disciples, early in the evening. Later on in the same 
night he was betrayed. The next morning of the 
same day he was condemned and crucified. Later in 
the same day he was buried. All this was on the 
fourteenth day between evenings, between six p.m., 
where the day began, and the next six p.m., where 
it ended, and it was on the next day, the 15th, in the 
evening, that the Passover feast of the Jews was celebrated. 
We celebrate that feast anti-typically, continuously 
feasting and rejoicing in the grace of God 
toward us. But the Lord's Supper belongs to the 
14th of Nisan and commemorates the killing of the 
Lamb of God. That night in which the Passover 
feast was eaten represents this Gospel age— a dark 
time, in which sin and evil still triumph, and darkness 

R2918 : page 381 

is abroad, and in which the Lord's people feed upon 
the merit of Christ, our Passover Lamb, slain for us, 
and realize that his "flesh is meat indeed." 

Along with the Lamb the Jew partook of unleavened 
bread, pure, unadulterated, figuratively separate 
from sin; it symbolized the precious promises which 
come to us from the Heavenly Father through our 
Lord Jesus Christ. "This is the bread that came 
down from heaven, whereof if a man eat he shall never 
die." (John 6:50.) And, as the Hebrews ate their 
bread and lamb, so the anti-typical spiritual Israelite 
partakes of Christ's merits and graces freely, but 
with them receives also the bitterness of persecution, 
trials, difficulties, misrepresentation and suffering 
symbolized by the "bitter herbs." As the Hebrews 
ate shod and ready for their journey in the morning, 



so the true Israelites of this Gospel age partake of 
these spiritual favors, feeling the while that we are still 
in Egypt, and longing for the promised land; and they 
indicate by the conduct of life that they are pilgrims 
and strangers in this country, the world, and that 
they are seeking the heavenly country. But the deliverance 
did not come in the night in which the Passover 
was eaten, but in the morning which followed it. 
And so the deliverance of the spiritual Israelite does 
not come during the night of sin and trouble in which 
the god of this world reigns. It comes in the Millennial 
morning, for which we wait and hope and pray, 
"Thy Kingdom come." "God shall help her, early in 
the morning."— Psa. 46:5. 

It is the mistake of some to suppose that the 
Passover refers, either directly or indirectly, to the 
passing of the children of Israel across the Red Sea. 
Nothing of the kind. The name was given with reference 
to the passing over or sparing of the first-born 
of Israel during that night in which the lamb was 
being eaten, and during which the blood was on the 
door-post without. The death-messenger was abroad 
throughout the land of Egypt, and the first-born of all 
Egypt were smitten, and the first-born of Israel were 
saved only upon condition that the blood should be 
sprinkled upon the door-posts and lintels of the houses 
in which they were. Any Israelite who did not respect 
the divine command, and place the blood-marks 
upon the front of his door, as directed of the Lord 
through Moses, would suffer, just in the same manner 
and just as surely as the Egyptians— the blood was the 
mark of distinction between those who were the 
Lord's people and those who were not his people. 

What does this signify now, to the spiritual Israelites? 
We answer that the sprinkling of the blood 
symbolizes an acknowledgment of faith in the redemptive 
merit of our Lord Jesus' sacrifice, as our 
Passover Lamb. Whoever recognizes the Lord's word 
in respect to this matter realizes that without the 
shedding of blood there is no remission of sins, and he 
who thus realizes the importance of the death of our 
Savior is expected to confess it, as symbolized by the 
sprinkling of the blood upon the outside of the dwelling. 
And its being upon the door signifies that all who 
were within that door were trusting in the blood, were 
under its efficacious merit. It is remarkable that 
while this doctrine of the redemption through the 
blood of Christ has been held with more or less clearness 
for centuries, it is now, in the close of this age, 
being called in question by some who are still naming 
the name of Christ, and by some who profess to be advanced 
teachers, and higher critics. All such are, 
from the Lord's standpoint, Egyptians, not Israelites. 
All whom he will recognize as his people, Israelites indeed, 
will be such as will recognize him, his Word, and 
the work which he has accomplished for them through 



the shedding of the precious blood of our Passover 
Lamb, Christ Jesus. 

The doctrine of substitution is made most emphatic 
in this type. As the blood represents life while in the 
veins, so it represents death when shed; and so, as the 
sentence of death was against our race, it was needful 
that Christ should die for our sins. Hence also 
the Lord has made it incumbent throughout this age 
that each one whom he would recognize must be one 
who would trust in and confess the atonement, the 
redemption which is in Christ Jesus. The blood was 
to be for a token, for a witness, for a sign, as evidence 
of the faith of those who were in the house on which 
it was sprinkled. It was not God's token, but man's 
token. God would do the sparing, but every Israelite 
who would be spared must see to it that his part of 
the program was carried out. 

Let it not be overlooked that not all of the Israelites 
were in danger of death, but only the first-born; for 
this is a striking and prominent feature of the type. 
It teaches that while the deliverance that is to be accomplished 
in the morning will be deliverance for all 
who love the Lord and love righteousness, the first-born 
as well as all the rest, yet a special trial or testing 
comes during the night— before the Millennial 
morning— and this special testing or trial will affect 
only the first-born ones. Who are these first-born 
ones? We answer, they typified "the Church of the 
First-born, whose names are written in heaven," the 
"little flock," begotten to a newness of nature, and to 
joint-heirship with our Lord Jesus in the coming 
Kingdom. Others will be delivered from the power 
of Satan and the oppression of sin, as represented in 
the deliverance of all Israel from Pharaoh and his 
power and bondage, but the only ones who will be in 
danger during this night, the only ones who will be 
passed over or spared, during this Gospel age, will be 
the little flock, the Church of the First-born. This 
is distinctly the language of the type, nor can it be 
otherwise accounted for. It will be remembered that 
after the Passover, in the new order of things, the 
first-born ones spared in this Passover became representatively 
the Levites, amongst whom, in turn, 
were the priests, a little flock; and even so the Apostle 
declares of the Church of the First-born, "Ye are a 
Royal Priesthood."- 1 Pet. 2:5,9. 

As already remarked, this Passover lamb found 
its anti-type in Christ, our Passover Lamb, who was 
slain for us, and of whom we partake. Our Lord instituted 
for us, the spiritual Israel, a commemorative 
service to take the place of the type observed by fleshly 
Israel. It was instituted on the same night in 
which he was betrayed, the same night in which he ate 
the Passover supper, as a Jew, and after the eating 
of the Passover supper. He took bread and wine to 
represent himself, as the true, anti-typical Lamb of 



God, who taketh away the sin of the world, and he 
enjoined upon all who were truly his followers that 

R2919 : page 382 

they henceforth, instead of any longer, as the Jews, 
celebrating the typical Passover, should henceforth 
celebrate the anti-typical Passover. "As often as ye 
do this [celebrate the Passover] do it in remembrance 
of me [and not any longer in remembrance of the typical 
deliverance]." And from year to year this celebration 
has been handed down to the present time, 
and is still commemorated. 

Some of God's people, however, having become 
confused upon the subject, and having lost sight of 
the fact that it is a commemoration of the anti-type of 
the Jewish Passover, feel quite at liberty to set for its 
observance times and seasons of their own, without 
any authority from the Lord. They are excusable to 
a considerable extent, because, during the eighteen 
centuries since the institution of the ordinance the 
great Adversary introduced many doctrines and false 
practices amongst the followers of Jesus— amongst 
others, the doctrine of the Mass, which purports to 
be a repetition of Christ's sacrifice, performed by 
the priests, re-creating Christ in the flesh, they claim, 
and sacrificing him afresh in the Mass, for the sins of 
those for whom it is performed. Protestants, coming 
out from Papacy, have rejected the doctrine of the 
Mass, but because the Mass had come to be frequently 
performed they imagined that the Lord's Supper, 
as they celebrate it, is also without any limitation as 
to time and season. Moreover, even those old 
churches which still observe the Passover date for the 
Lord's Supper have adopted a new method of reckoning 
it, contrary to the method in use by the Jews— one 
in which the memorial day always falls upon the Friday 
which is nearest to the true date, so that the Sunday 
following, Easter, will symbolize our Lord's resurrection 
on the first day of the week. 

The next proper anniversary of the celebration of 
the Passover, according to the Jewish reckoning of 
time, as used by our Lord and the apostles, and by 
some of the Lord's people since and today, will be 
after sundown, April 20th, 1902. 



R2919 : page 382 

CROSSING THE RED SEA. 

-EXOD. 14:13-27.-DEC. 22.- 

"I will sing unto the Lord for he hath 
triumphed gloriously."— Exod. 15:1. 



SKEPTICS have railed greatly against the 
truthfulness of the Bible record of Israel's deliverance 
—crossing the Red Sea, etc. They 

object that so rapid an exodus of from one to two million 
people, with their flocks and herds, would be an 
impossibility; and they object, secondly, to the testimony 
that God miraculously delivered them by making 
a path for them through the sea. As to the first 
objection: We can readily see that if the Egyptians 
had been opposed to their going the difficulties would 
have been much greater. We are to remember, on 
the contrary, that after suffering the chastisement of 
the plagues they were willing, nay, anxious, for their 
departure, Pharaoh himself sending a message to 
Moses, even in the night in which the first-born were 
slain, saying, "Rise up, and get you forth from among 
my people, both ye and the children of Israel; and go 
and serve the Lord, as ye have said; also take your 
flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be gone; 
and bless me also." 

We are to remember that the Israelites were in a 
measure organized; their tribal and family relationship 
having been maintained. The narrative shows 
that they went forth in military order,— either five 
abreast or in five companies. (Exod. 13:18, margin.) 
Evidently all were under the command of the heads 
of the tribes, "the elders of the people." Several days 
elapsed before their journey brought them to the Red 
Sea. The great wall of Egypt, called Shur (somewhat 
similar to the great wall of China), is supposed 
to have hindered their making a more direct route. 
Besides, this wall was in the midst of a sandy desert, 
where there would be no sustenance, either for themselves 
or for their cattle; while the route taken, passing 
through the borders of Egypt to the head of the 
Red Sea, was evidently the most favorable one as respects 
pasturage, etc. 

Various comparatively shallow places in the Red 
Sea, near its head, are suggested as possible ones by 
which the crossing may have been effected, and the 
description given would indicate that the passage was 
made on such a sandbar, which perhaps ordinarily 
would have from five to twelve feet of water upon it, 
according to the condition of the tides. The presumption 
is that the strong east wind spoken of, operating 
with the tides, laid bare this sandbar, and thus gave 
the Israelites a passage. 

But while Pharaoh, under the sting of the last 
plague, was anxious for the departure of the Hebrews, 
nevertheless, as his grief assuaged and he considered 
the loss his empire was sustaining in the departure 
of over a million subjects, intelligent and ingenious 
and docile, and when he considered further that they 
were an unarmed host, and impeded in traveling by 
their flocks and herds, he evidently felt that he had 



been too generous in permitting them to go, and concluded 
that in the few days' march they had already 
experienced something of the difficulties and trials 
of the journey, and that by this time they were not 
only discouraged, but hemmed in by the northern 
tongue of the Red Sea, and the Egyptian wall, while 
on either side were mountains. He concluded that 
they could be easily retaken, and would feel that they 
had had enough of their "outing" and perhaps would 
return to their labor more docile than ever. Consequently 
the Egyptian troops of the capital were 
started in pursuit. 

The Israelites, who for years had learned to dread 
their Egyptian masters, heard of the pursuit, and 
cried unto Moses despairingly, Moses in turn crying 
unto the Lord on behalf of the people. The Lord's 
response to Moses' prayer is a striking one, from 
which spiritual Israelites may also take a lesson. It 
was, "Wherefore criest thou unto me? Speak unto 
the children of Israel, that they go forward." (Exod. 14:15.) 
There is a time to pray and also a time to act 
and thus to co-operate with God who is answering our 
prayers. When the Lord's time for answering our 
prayers has come and we know it, it is for us to manifest 
our faith in him by going forward. Too many 

R2919 : page 383 

spiritual Israelites, after hearing the Lord's message, 
instead of going forward in obedience are disposed 
to tarry and pray to the Lord that he give them some 
special message not common to others. Such 
through weakness of faith are in danger of losing 
their standing. "Without faith it is impossible to 
please God;" and obedience is merely a demonstration 
of faith. 

Apparently the Israelites got a glimpse of the 
Egyptians in the distance, before sundown. This is 
implied in Moses' statement, "The Egyptians whom 
ye have seen this day ye shall see again no more forever." 
The account declares that the pillar of fire, 
by which the Israelites were miraculously led, removed 
to their rearward, so as to be between them and the 
Egyptians,— a pillar of cloud and darkness to the latter, 
and a pillar of fire or light to the former. Apparently 
there was a great storm that night, the east 
wind blowing furiously; outside narratives, such as 
that of Josephus, declaring that it rained, thundered 
and lightened appallingly. But whether this was 
merely upon the Egyptians, from the pillar of cloud, 
or whether it was also upon the Israelites, would be 
merely surmise. What we do know is that during 
that night the windstorm blew across that upper neck 
of the Red Sea in such a manner as to leave the sandbar 
bare for a considerable breadth, so as to permit 
the rapid passage of so large a body of people. The 



Israelites knew, through Moses and their elders, what 
miracle had been performed, and hastened to escape 
from their pursuers. The latter probably were totally 
unaware of the miracle, and perhaps unaware that 
they were crossing the ordinary bed of the sea, and 
therefore, without trepidation, hastened onward in 
pursuit, impeded, however, by various accidents to 
their chariots, which sank into the comparatively soft 
sand of the sea bottom. They, no doubt, concluded 
that where the Israelites had gone they could go. 
Nevertheless, ere they had crossed they became so 
discouraged with the opposition, of what they probably 
at first considered accidents, but afterward recognized 
as divine providences on Israel's behalf, that 
they resolved on a return— to give up the pursuit, 
saying that the God of the Hebrews fought for them. 
By this time it was nearly daybreak, and Israel having 
crossed over Moses stretched forth his rod over the 
sea, and winds and tide, etc., being favorable, the waters 
came again upon the Egyptians, that they were 
drowned. It is said that wonderful storms, somewhat 
analogous to this one, frequently occur in this vicinity, 
and that Napoleon and a troop of soldiers were 
very nearly overtaken at about the same place that 
Pharaoh's chariots were lost, by a sudden cessation 
of storm and rising of the tides. 

A critical writer suggests that Pharaoh's charioteers 
were probably intent upon heading off the Israelites, 
and thus turning them backward, and that the sea 
waters were a wall on either hand, in the sense of being 
a flank protection, hindering the troops from getting 
ahead of the Israelites, turning their flank. He 

R2920 : page 383 

says, "The wall would not, by any Oriental, be supposed 
to be an actual wall rising up beside them, any 
more than 'the wooden walls of Great Britain' are 
board fences about the island; or 'the hedge about the 
law,' which the rabbis built by their precepts, was a 
growth of vegetation." 

There are numerous lessons connected with this 
narrative, profitable to the spiritual Israelites. As 
already suggested, the experience of the Israelites 
and the Egyptians at this time represented the experience 
of the world in the close of this Gospel age, 
and in the dawn of the new dispensation— the period 
of deliverance of God's people, too, from bondage to 
sin and death, which will be accomplished at the dawn 
of the Millennial age. We may reasonably understand 
that the last or tenth plague upon Egypt symbolizes 
the bitter experience of the world at the close 
of the present age, and that these experiences will be 
favorable to the Lord's people, and unfavorable to 
others, down to a certain point where the contest will 
be abandoned, and those in authority in the world will 



agree to the full liberty of all who love righteousness 

and who desire to walk in the Lord's way. Quite possibly 

"the powers that be" may concede for a time the 

demands of the weak and the helpless, and subsequently 

repent, and attempt their re-capture under 

the slavery of selfishness, and so through a Red Sea 

of trouble the Lord will then administer a final chastisement 

upon all those who oppose his deliverance 

of the poor and the needy and they that have no helper, 

and who cry for righteousness, and follow the leadings 

of his representative, Messiah. 

Surely, when the new dispensation has been 
opened up, and the silver trumpets of the Jubilee 
shall sound release and restitution throughout all 
the world, there will be great rejoicing amongst all 
who love righteousness, and, in the language of our 
Golden Text, they may say, "I will sing unto the Lord, 
for he hath triumphed gloriously." And already 
the spiritual Israelite can by faith thus rejoice and 
realize his release from sin and death. 

Another thought we may draw from this narrative 
is the unlimited power of God, who has promised 
us that if we are his, and will follow the leadings of 
our Master, the anti-type of Moses, all things 
shall work together for good to us. We are to learn 
that nothing is too wonderful for our God to accomplish, 
and in proportion as faith increases our joys 
will increase, and we will have the full assurance of 
faith, the full assurance of victory, for "This is the victory 
that overcometh the world, even our faith." We 
are to learn that while the wicked may triumph for 
a time the Lord is against them. He is on the side 
of the poor and oppressed, who are seeking to know 
his will and to do it, and though he bear long with 
them, as represented in the parable, yet, finally he will 
avenge them of their Adversary: their enemies shall 
then become the enemies of the Lord, and the enemies 
of the Lord shall bite the dust— be destroyed.— Luke 18:7; 
Micah7:17. 



page 383 

REVIEW OF THE QUARTER. 

-DEC. 29TH.- 

GOLDEN TEXT: "If God be for us, who can be against us. 
-Rom. 8:31. 

A review of the year, its blessings and its trials, 
will be in order, on this the closing Sunday of the 
year. We trust that all our readers may be able to 
apply the Golden Text to themselves with confidence 
and rejoicing. 



page 385 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 