Announcements
TO KNOW JOB’S HAPPINESS AIDS ENDURANCE
When considering the experience of Job the emphasis is often placed on the dark side of the picture. Yet the outcome Jehovah gave is the thing to stress. Job did not maintain his integrity in vain. He did not trust Jehovah only to come off disappointed. In his case, as well as in the case of Jehovah’s witnesses always, the words at James 5:11 will be found true: “We pronounce happy those who have endured.” With this thought in mind, witnesses of Jehovah will continue to exert themselves, carrying the good news of the Kingdom to all persons they can contact. During November they will offer householders valuable truths in book form, on a contribution of 50 cents each. Share in the happy service of Jehovah.
“YOUR WILL BE DONE ON EARTH”
A gripping and revealing look at the current world situation, “Your Will Be Done on Earth” will hold your interest from the first of its 384 pages. It brings to life the world powers of past generations and clearly identifies their motivating force with that of our own day. It details the activity of the “king of the north” and the “king of the south” in the prophecy of Daniel (chapter 11) and points with unerring accuracy to their counterparts in today’s struggle for world control. It outlines the prospects for the future and holds out to you the only real hope you can have for survival. If you value your life and that of your family you will obtain this striking and stimulating book and read it with your Bible. It contains absolute assurance that God’s will will be done on earth in our generation. Send 50c today.
ISAIAH AND JEREMIAH
The prophecies of Isaiah and Jeremiah, as well as the book of Lamentations, are now available as Volume IV of the New World Translation of the Hebrew Scriptures. Add this volume to those you already possess of this modern translation. It is only $1.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
November 9: God’s Kingdom Rules—Is the World’s End Near? ¶1-15. Page 625.
November 16: God’s Kingdom Rules—Is the World’s End Near? ¶16-33. Page 629.
November 23: God’s Kingdom Rules—Is the World’s End Near? ¶34-53. Page 634.

