From Our Readers
Grandparents  Thank you for the loving way you dealt with the subject “Grandparents—Their Joys, Their Challenges.” (March 22, 1999) I am a single grandparent raising two grandsons. Their mother was and still is a drug abuser. As the article brought out, I had the boys’ anger to contend with. I had no concept of what it felt like to be abandoned by both parents. But just last year my younger grandson said to me, “Thank you for taking us in.” Those words made all the struggles and tears worthwhile.
D. B., United States
Thanks to the love and faithfulness of our dear grandmother, my brothers and I survived years of parental neglect and abuse. The Bible truths she inculcated in our hearts gave us the strength to carry on. Today, her three grandchildren and seven great-grandchildren are all dedicated Christians.
B. L. B., Brazil
I have a 17-month-old baby, and there has been tension between my mother-in-law and me over his care. I was so jealous that I got to the point where I couldn’t even enjoy Christian meetings. This article, though, helped me to see that she is not malicious and that she is not trying to take possession of him. I thank Jehovah that I received this information when I most needed it.
M. Z. C., Mexico
Five Sons  I found the article “I Thank Jehovah for My Five Sons” (March 22, 1999) to be interesting, as there were several similarities between Helen Saulsbery and my mother. Both were baptized the same year. Like Helen, my mother stayed home and cared for us when our family was financially strained—my father’s company went bankrupt. She likewise served as a pioneer, a full-time evangelizer, and always told us interesting experiences from the field. This made the pioneer service very appealing to me. Now that I have two daughters myself, I can understand how much effort my mother put forth for us.
M. S., Japan
A special thank-you for the article. As a father, I try to follow the Bible’s counsel, but I often feel inadequate. The Saulsbery family’s experience strengthened me to carry on.
R. M. R., Brazil
Wanting Things  I am a 12-year-old girl. I want to thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Can’t I Have the Things I Want?” (March 22, 1999) There are things I want—like a bicycle and a guitar. But my father is not able to provide them for me. This disappoints me. Nevertheless, your article really encouraged me. Thank you for publishing this fatherly advice.
C. U., Nigeria
Muscles  After I finished exercising this morning, I sat down to read the article “Muscles—Masterpieces of Design.” (April 8, 1999) I started to think about my eye muscles moving as I read each page, my arm muscles contracting and relaxing as I sipped from my coffee mug, my leg muscles working as I shifted around in my seat. Wow! What a marvel of design!
N. T., Belize
Our muscles reveal just a small part of the vast wisdom and intelligence of our Grand Creator, Jehovah God. Reading about the human body has always fascinated me. But this is the first time I have read such an article that was so well written and easy to understand.
P. J. O. S., Brazil

