Kidnapping—Is There a Solution?
“THE abductions have reached a point intolerable to the whole nation, and the entire society must fight this evil,” exclaimed the prime minister of Chechnya when promising to eradicate the scourge from his kidnap-plagued republic in Russia.
Eradicate kidnappings? The goal is laudable, but the question is, How?
Efforts Being Made
Colombian authorities have appointed 2,000 secret agents, 24 public prosecutors, and even a special antikidnap coordinator just to fight kidnappings. In Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, a public march protesting the city’s numerous kidnappings drew about 100,000 marchers. In Brazil and Colombia, paramilitary groups have counterattacked by kidnapping relatives of kidnappers. And some Filipinos have resorted to vigilante justice—they have lynched kidnappers!
Guatemalan authorities introduced the death penalty for kidnappers, and the president mobilized the army to halt the kidnapping epidemic. In Italy the government adopted strong measures to prevent kidnappings, by making ransom payments illegal and seizing money and property to stop relatives from paying. Italian officials boast that these measures have contributed to a decrease in kidnappings. Critics, however, suggest that as a result, families try to resolve cases in secrecy and that this reduces the official number of kidnappings. Private security consultants estimate that the number of kidnappings in Italy has actually doubled since the 1980’s.
Many Suggestions—Few Solutions
For many families of kidnap victims, only one solution seems viable—to bail out their loved ones as quickly as possible. But experts warn that if the ransom is high and is paid too quickly, kidnappers might consider the family an easy target and come back a second time. Or they might ask for a second ransom before releasing the victim.
Some families have paid high ransoms only to find that the victim was already dead. So experts say that one should never pay a ransom or engage in negotiations before proof is obtained that the victim is alive. Such proof could be in the form of the answer to a question that only the victim would be able to provide. Some families ask for a photo of the victim holding a recent newspaper.
What about rescue actions? They are often associated with great risk. “Seventy-nine percent of all hostages are killed during rescue attempts in Latin America,” says Brian Jenkins, an expert on kidnappings. Sometimes, however, rescue attempts are successful.
Not surprisingly, many solutions focus on kidnap prevention. It is not only government authorities that are engaged in attempts to prevent kidnappings. Newspapers teach people how to avoid being kidnapped, how to throw themselves from a moving car, and how to outwit kidnappers psychologically. Martial arts centers give courses in defense against kidnapping. Companies sell $15,000 ultra microtransmitters, which can be planted in children’s teeth to help police track the children down if they are kidnapped. For those who can afford them, car manufacturers produce “kidnap-proof” cars with tear-gas dispensers, gun ports, bulletproof windows, slash-proof tires, and oil slick dispensers.
Some of the wealthy see bodyguards as a solution. However, concerning the situation in Mexico, security expert Francisco Gomez Lerma says: ‘Bodyguards are no help because they attract attention and may be in cahoots with kidnappers.’
The kidnapping problem is so complex and its roots are so deep that nothing mankind can do seems adequate to eliminate it. Is there, then, no real solution?
A Solution Available
This magazine has repeatedly pointed to the only real solution to all such problems facing humans. That solution is the one to which God’s Son, Jesus Christ, pointed when he taught his followers to pray: “Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.”—Matthew 6:10.
Clearly, we need a righteous world government to manage the affairs of earth’s vast diversity of people—yes, the Kingdom of God that Jesus spoke about. Since humans have been unable to establish such a government, we are wise to look to our Creator, Jehovah God. His Word, the Bible, says that he purposed to do this very thing.—Psalm 83:18.
The prophet Daniel recorded Jehovah’s purpose, writing: “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. . . . It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.” (Daniel 2:44) The Bible describes how this government of God would take progressive steps to eradicate all criminal activity, including kidnapping.
Proper Education Essential
No doubt you will agree that instilling a sound set of values in people is essential to solving the problem of kidnapping. Consider, for example, the effect it would have on human society if all heeded the following admonition in the Bible: “Let your manner of life be free of the love of money, while you are content with the present things.” (Hebrews 13:5) “Do not you people be owing anybody a single thing, except to love one another.”—Romans 13:8.
You can get a glimpse of what life could be like by considering the educational program being conducted by Jehovah’s Witnesses in over 230 lands throughout the earth. This program has had a wholesome effect on many people who were formerly greedy or were dangerous criminals. One former kidnapper said: “In time, I realized that to please God I needed to strip off my old personality and put on a new one—one that was meek and similar to that of Christ Jesus.”
Yet, even a fine educational program will not reform all criminals, perhaps not even the majority. What will happen to those refusing to change?
Removal of Wrongdoers
Willful wrongdoers will not be permitted to be subjects of God’s Kingdom. The Bible says: “Do you not know that unrighteous persons will not inherit God’s kingdom? Do not be misled. Neither fornicators, . . . nor greedy persons, . . . nor extortioners will inherit God’s kingdom.” (1 Corinthians 6:9, 10) “The upright are the ones that will reside in the earth . . . As regards the wicked, they will be cut off from the very earth.”—Proverbs 2:21, 22.
According to God’s Law in ancient times, an unrepentant kidnapper was to be put to death. (Deuteronomy 24:7) Greedy persons, such as kidnappers, will not have any place in the Kingdom of God. Today’s criminals might elude human justice, but they will not be able to elude God’s justice. Any wrongdoers will have to change their ways if they are to live under Jehovah’s righteous Kingdom rule.
Obviously, if conditions that breed criminal activity remain, so will the crime. Yet, God’s Kingdom will not allow that, for the Bible promises: “The kingdom itself . . . will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms,” including all people who practice wrongdoing. This Bible prophecy continues by saying that God’s Kingdom will stand to times indefinite. (Daniel 2:44) Just imagine the changes that will occur!
A New World of Righteousness
Consider another Bible prophecy. It is one that beautifully describes the future in these words: “They will certainly build houses and have occupancy; and they will certainly plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. They will not build and someone else have occupancy; they will not plant and someone else do the eating. For like the days of a tree will the days of my people be; and the work of their own hands my chosen ones will use to the full.”—Isaiah 65:21, 22.
The Kingdom of God will transform the entire planet. All alive will be able to enjoy life to the full, developing their natural abilities by engaging in satisfying work and wholesome recreation. Conditions worldwide will be such that no one will ever even think of kidnapping his neighbor. The sense of security will be total. (Micah 4:4) Thus, God’s Kingdom will have reduced kidnapping from a present-day global threat to a chapter of history that no one will even think of anymore.—Isaiah 65:17.
[Picture on page 10]
“There will be no one making them tremble.”—Micah 4:4

