“We Enjoy Our Work!”
By “Awake!” correspondent in Japan
I WOULD like to tell you about a most unusual construction project in Japan. It is located at a place called Ebina, not far from Tokyo. What makes it so unusual? For one thing, all the several hundred workers on the project are unsalaried, volunteer help.
In spite of the hardships of living on a construction site and the heavy work load, these workers obviously find their work satisfying. When I interviewed them, time and again the comment was made: “I enjoy my work!”
For example, I said to one worker: “My, you’re working hard, and such tedious work too! You must be glad when the day is done.” He responded: “It’s true that I’m tired, and I do look forward to my rest at night. But I enjoy my work here. And so do all the 342 people you see here who have volunteered to work on this project.”
Another worker said: “Yes, we work long hours, in all kinds of weather, and receive no paycheck, just our room, board and a small allowance. Yet we really do find a great deal of delight in what we are doing.”
As I interviewed the workers, it became immediately apparent that their joy was related to the purpose of the work. Said one worker: “My enjoyment stems from the fact that the work is directly related to my purpose in life. Knowing that what you do each day is contributing to that overall purpose is very satisfying.”
To get a clear view of what is involved here, I asked the following questions, and these are some of the answers the workers gave:
Q. “Why did you volunteer to work on this project?”
A. (Yoshinobu Futakuchi): “When I heard that Jehovah’s Witnesses were going to build a printing factory in Ebina, Japan, I was thrilled. It was announced that a factory, an office building and living quarters for over 300 workers were planned. This was necessary in order to handle the increased printing in Japan of the Awake! and Watchtower magazines, which now have a total printing of over 1,700,000 copies each month in Japan alone. Also, hardbound books explaining the Bible will be produced in the new plant. All this literature will be used by the 55,872 of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Japan, who spent over 20 million hours last year in their public ministry.
“It was stated that the entire building project would be carried out with volunteer help. This made me recall how in ancient times willing workers shared in the construction of the tabernacle. (Ex. 35:1, 2) I felt that I wanted to have a part in the Ebina project, too, because of the fine purpose to which the factory will be put, that is, producing literature that helps people to learn about God and his purposes. My fellow workers feel the same way.”
Q. “Would you like to tell us why you enjoy your work so much?”
A. (Haruyuki Zenetani): “Well, until two years ago I worked for a firm where it was normal to pursue a dog-eat-dog course. Everyone was interested in getting ahead, and to do so they stepped on people to make themselves look good.
“I see the greatest of contrasts here. All work together as a family. The work, not the individual’s advancement, is of utmost importance. There is a unity of purpose. No one pushes himself forward. People here don’t worry about their position being endangered by an up-and-coming rival.
“It’s evident to me that the Bible principle ‘love does not look for its own interests’ is a practical one. (1 Cor. 13:4, 5) The fact that we have peace and harmony, plus high productivity, shows how effective it is.”
I noticed that much training of newer ones was going on. But I wondered how those who had not yet developed skills to high efficiency were viewed. So I asked a former policeman about it.
Q. “What appeals to you about the working relationships among the workers here?”
A. (Katsuyuki Kamakura): “In particular I appreciate the operation of a system based on the principle of love. In the world of law enforcement, everything from training to position is oriented toward the strong. That is probably necessary due to the nature of law enforcement, but under a system based on love we all benefit in two ways.
“For example, those not so strong are given consideration, and as a result of their efforts they benefit the entire organization. If a person is not so quick to learn, he is not left behind to feel miserable. He is patiently taught, and often becomes the more industrious worker.
“Many of the workers were unskilled when they came here. The fact that now, after two years, there are many skilled carpenters, plumbers, electricians and draftsmen where there were few before says a lot for the willingness of those who are experienced to teach the inexperienced, doesn’t it?”
Another thing that impressed me was that I did not notice a lot of “bosses” shouting orders all the time. I asked a cook about this.
Q. “What kind of supervision do the worker have?”
A. (Keiichi Nakamura): “Let me give you an example. There are 20 of us cooking for 550 persons every day. That includes the construction workers, and those from the former branch office in Numazu who have already moved in. And it seems that all of them have healthy appetites!
“Well, as anyone who has ever worked in a kitchen knows, it can be pretty hectic around mealtime. We’re under pressure. But the fact that we’re all trying to practice Christian principles in our speech and conduct adds to our unity. Too, it helps that we are well organized.
“The overseers work as hard as anyone else or harder. No one just gives orders. The principle of overseers taking the lead in the work is one of the things that attracted me to Jehovah’s Witnesses in the first place.”
Q. “In what way?”
A. “Let me explain. Before I studied the Bible, my thinking was very anarchistic. I felt that mankind would be better off without any organized governments or social groups. That’s one reason I became a cook, so I wouldn’t have to work in organized business. I felt that mankind was on a course of self-destruction and that the organizations of the world were just helping them along that road.
“Through my study of the Bible, I recognized that it is necessary to have organized activity for accomplishing God’s purpose. But it was after coming to work here that I have come to appreciate more deeply how really different this organization is. Because it has unselfish motives and kind and hardworking overseers, it certainly works for the good of people.”
The age of the workers ranged from 18 to 67, with many young men in their 20’s benefiting from on-the-job training. But what about those older workers who could be retired instead of working so hard? I asked:
Q. “Why would someone over 65 volunteer to do construction work?”
A. (Takeo Tsuji): “I have to admit that some thought that I was too old to volunteer for this project. At 65, I was retired and could have taken life easy. But I wanted to do something useful for my fellowman. I had experience in plumbing, so I volunteered, thinking my experience might be a help.
“For a while I worked in plumbing, but now I’m on the reception desk. That has really been a privilege for me. Many people my age have nothing to do, but my life is filled with rewarding activity.
“I’m a widower with no family responsibilities. But being able to work with young men who could be my grandchildren has helped to keep me young. Oh, to be sure, I’ve got my aches and pains, but I’d have them even if I were at home.”
Thinking about the older workers, I inquired as to how many men were here with their families. I learned that there were 17. So I wondered what kind of adjustments these families had to make to come here to work on this project.
Q. “Being here with your family takes some adjusting of life-style, doesn’t it? How did you manage that?”
A. (Motomu Kamata): “Since I had my own architect’s office, I could arrange my own affairs. However, when I saw the huge scope of the Ebina project I knew that it would require my full time if I were to accept a work assignment.
“I talked the prospect over with my family. They all decided to cooperate so that I could volunteer. Although my wife was pregnant with our fourth child, she didn’t hesitate to encourage me. It was her spirit of self-sacrifice that enabled me to come.
“I informed my clients that I would be closing down my office temporarily. At first, they didn’t believe me! But when they realized that I ‘meant business,’ they made it known that when I reopened they wanted me to work with them again.
“Also, we had to move out of our home and into a less expensive place near the construction site. But everyone in the family was happy to make these sacrifices. One benefit has been our appreciating more that material things are not what really make people happy, so we have been able to keep them in their relative place. We don’t want to lose that appreciation even after we go back to our previous life-style.”
I then sought out another family man and asked him similar questions.
Q. “You have a family to support, too, don’t you? Did you have any problems making the needed adjustments to move here?”
A. (Masahito Sato): “I had worked for 25 years in sewage processing and pollution control, so I thought I might be of use to the project. I resigned my position at my company with the idea that I’d even continue full time as a Bible instructor when the building project at Ebina was completed.
“My wife was happy for me to volunteer, but she didn’t want to leave our home and move our son from school. She liked her associations, and had an active share in helping neighbors to study the Bible. So for about a year, I commuted to the construction site. But it was just too far.
“So I suggested to my wife that we move here to the site. She agreed, and wouldn’t you know, she now likes it so much here that she hates the thought of leaving. It’s because we have learned what it means to serve others and gain the happiness that comes from that service. As Jesus said: ‘There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.’​—Acts 20:35.
“Others have found this to be the case. And they come from many walks of life and different family situations, but all have made the needed adjustments. For instance, among the workers we have a former motorcycle test-driver who serves as a plasterer, a chemical engineer who now works on the rod bender, and we also have a cartoonist, a former boxer, farmers, cooks, an atomic scientist and an ex-rock musician, to name a few. It’s a varied group, and our associations add to our knowledge of people and enrich our lives. So we surely have benefited by making the needed adjustments to come here.”
It has been enlightening to see the concept of building displayed here. On other jobs where the main objective is financial gain, many of the workers do not really put their heart into their jobs. When possible they will take shortcuts to lighten their own work load, and they often waste materials. Or if in a managerial position, some will cut down on quality work and materials to make their profits higher.
But that is not the case here at Ebina. The workers are encouraged to get good materials even if they cost a little more, and not to take shortcuts or to waste materials. The purpose is to erect a building complex that will be strong, durable and easy to maintain. So the equipment has to be good and well installed. That is why, as one worker said: “We can take pride in our work.”
I then asked another worker:
Q. “Speaking of the work itself, I’ve heard some of the workers here talk about ‘tests’ they face in connection with their work. Would you explain?”
A. (Takaaki Kato): “I come from an affluent family, and had a position of management in the family business before I volunteered. But I didn’t get a ‘glamour’ job here. I’m one of the 23 assigned to take care of the living quarters of the workers. We do all kinds of jobs, from delivering linen to cleaning toilets. I wasn’t used to such type of work before, and it created its own kind of test.
“Recently, however, I had a lesson in humility from a worker who was waiting for his visa to go to Taiwan as a missionary. He was assigned to work with me, and I had to give the instructions. Now, he had been working at our branch office here in Japan for many years, and had done just about everything in the line of home organization. Yet he followed my directions faithfully, even in the lowliest of tasks, though he had had much more experience than I. It was a humbling experience for me.”
Former rock musician Haruhisa Miyashita added these comments: “Many of us have had tests of one kind or another. But they benefit us. For example, I had ruined my health in a pleasure-seeking course when I was formerly in the world of rock music. I thought I was well enough when I volunteered for this work, but I wasn’t at all prepared for the physical rigors of construction work. But I kept an optimistic viewpoint and followed the suggested schedule for maintaining health. As a result, I’ve gained 6 kilos [13 pounds], learned balance, and have satisfaction I never had when seeking just pleasure.”
Thus, it is apparent that many lessons have been learned by the workers on this extraordinary building project. They have learned new trades, have made many enduring friendships and have seen examples of Christian conduct and humility. Too, their needs have been provided for abundantly both spiritually and materially.
The president of a local construction company summed up the feeling of the workers here when he visited recently. He made this observation: “Seeing over 300, for the most part inexperienced young people, working in harmony, with smiling faces and clearly having a good time, makes me wish everyone could enjoy his work like that.”
I thought to myself: Someday, in God’s new order, everyone living will do just that.​—Ps. 37:11; Isa. 65:21, 22.
[Picture on page 16]
Aerial view of the new Japanese facilities of the Watch Tower Society at Ebina, not far from Tokyo

