R63 : page 1 

VOL. I. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JANUARY, 1880. 

NO. 7. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
H. B. RICE, . . . W. OAKLAND, CAL. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R63 : page 1 



DIALOGUE. Rev. 13. 

B. I am here again Bro. A., anxious as ever to enjoy whatever 
light may be due the church; I know that you believe the word of 
God to be a lamp, whose oil is the spirit, which sheds its light 
upon the path of the just as fast as the light is due, in order that 
at each step we may not be in darkness. Have you seen anything 
fresh or new lately? 

A. God's word is "new every morning and fresh every evening." 
In this respect it differs from all other books and, undoubtedly it 
is a fountain of living waters (truths) from the fact that it 
contains special dispensational truths, as well as general truth. 
Thus it is a great storehouse from which the Lord's servants are 
to bring forth "things new and old," that the household of faith 
may have meat in due season. " I seem to see in a clearer light 
than ever before, the present condition of the nominal church 
and its future. We talked some of this subject at a previous 
interview, when we considered the text- "Babylon is fallen." 
The subject in general and the Bible teaching concerning it, 
seems daily to open up more clearly. I think too, that it is— the 
meat due here. Many saints in "Babylon" are ignorant of the 
fact, and therefore do not obey the call- "Come out from her my 
people, so that you may have no fellowship with her sins and 
that you receive not of her plagues." Would this subject be 
agreeable to you this evening? 

B. It would, and profitable too I hope. I was much interested in 
our last conversation on The Antichrist and its picture in Rev. 
12. 

A. Then we will consider the "Two horned beast" of the next 
chapter now. It seems to follow connectedly, our last topic. 

B. Suppose you use the Emphatic Diaglott; it is so much clearer. 
Then I can have the advantage of both translations. 

A. The first ten verses of this chapter describe the Papal-Roman 
dominion. It is the Leopard; its spots showing mixture, or 
church and empire combined. It receives its power &c, from the 
"Dragon" (Pagan Rome.) Let me here explain that in symbol, 
"Heavens," signify the higher or ruling powers, "Earth," 
represents the people obedient to those ruling powers. When the 
Dragon gave its place to Papacy, it (Papacy) became "the 
heavens" and those who were obedient to it (the church) were 
"the earth." "The sea" represents the general masses of the 
world, without religious restraints. 

The "Leopard" arose from the sea— from among the masses of 
the people-received its power and dominion etc. "And the 
whole earth wondered after the beast. " And they did homage to 
the Dragon (Paganism) because he gave the authority to the 
Beast. And they worshiped the Beast saying: Who is like to the 
Beast? Thus we see that the people honored both the empire and 



the ecclesiastical or church power, finally concluding that the 
Beast (ecclesiastical power) was the stronger, and saying— "Who 
is able to make war (to contend) with the Beast. The 
"blasphemies and the great swelling words" of this power, we 
talked of at our last interview. Its time for speaking is not 
limited; it still speaks, but not so its time for acting. It had 
"power to act forty and two months." This is the same period 
referred to in chap. 12 as "twelve hundred and sixty days," and 
three and a half times (3-1/2 years) extending from A.D. 538 to 
1798, when its "power to act" or put to death seems to have 
ceased. 

THE TWO HORNED BEAST 

Vs. 11. "And I saw another wild beast, ascending from the 
earth. " If the previous beast was an ecclesiastical power, this 
beast called another would also be an ecclesiastical, or church 
power. As the first beast had ten horns, or powers, which gave to 
it their support, strength and protection, so this beast has "two 
horns." The first beast received a deadly wound from the sword. 
(Vs. 14.) The sword is the word of God and Papacy received 
such a wound during the reformation. The preaching of the word 
of God by Luther, Zwingle and others, showing it to be the 
"mystery of iniquity," "The man of Sin," "The Antichrist," &c, 
took away much of its power and almost took its life. 

B. I see then that the second beast with two horns, you regard as 
another ecclesiastical power arising since the reformation. Can it 
be possible that it refers to or symbolizes Protestantism? 

A. I think it does. As Papacy became a beast by the union of 
church and empire, so with Protestantism. It is not called a beast 
until it unites with the empires represented by the two horns- 
two powers, England and Germany. Notice that this beast does 
not come out of the Sea (the irreligious masses) but from the 
"Earth" (the people who had been obedient to Papacy). It has not 
the fierce, aggressive character of the "Leopard," but "two horns 
like a lamb." It used its horns only as a means of defense and 
protection. 

B. The next statement that it "spake as a dragon" does not seem 
to fit Protestantism. It would seem to imply that the second beast 
taught the same things as the dragon, i.e. Paganism &c. 

A. By no means, the two beasts are being contrasted. We have 
already been told what were the claims of the Leopard or Papal 
ecclesiasticism, how it spake great swelling words and 
blasphemies, how it claimed the right to "rule all nations with a 
rod of iron" by virtue of its other claim that it was "The kingdom 
of God. " Protestantism, though it associated itself with earthly 
empire and became a beast made no such boast. It spake no such 
swelling words and made no such pretentious claims. It does not 



speak as the dragon, as a dragon-Its claims are the same as any 
civil or dragon power. 

B. O I see! I thought that its speaking as a dragon, would 
indicate that it was worse than Papacy but I see that it really 
marks it as being better and is the distinguishing feature between 
it and "The man of Sin. " It does seem that the Spirit clothed the 
matter in such symbols as would be difficult or impossible to 
understand until it should become meat due to the church. 

A. Notice further that although the two-horned beast claimed 
less, its greater humility did not operate against it, for "All the 
authority of the first beast he executes in his presence. " 

B. That is the Protestant Beast [the state churches of England 
and Germany.] was able to exert as much influence and power 
as Papacy could by its greater claims. But what is meant by "in 
his presence?" 

A. This is thrown in to show us that the rise of the second, did 
not destroy the first one. They continue to exist 
contemporaneous ly . 

"And he makes The Earth and those who dwell in it to worship 
the first beast whose mortal wound was healed. " Papacy's 
wound began 

R64 : page 1 

to heal from the time the Reformation Church united to worldly 
empires, for how could the Reformers any longer use the Sword 
of the Spirit against Papacy as a church- state organization 
when they themselves were the same. 

And not only did this cause them to cease to wound and injure 
Papacy, but when they justified their own church and empire 
organization and demanded for it the respect and reverence of 
the people, they virtually caused all, both papists and protestants 
to worship, respect and honor the Papal Church. To such an 
extent is this true, that to-day the Papal Church is recognized 
among Christians as one of the churches of Christ, instead of, in 
its true character as the "Antichrist," that the Lord recognizes as 
"The Abomination of the Earth. " The utterance of early 
reformers against this church, if made to-day would be 
denounced by both Christians and the world. 

Vs. 13. "And he does great signs 

R64 : page 2 

so that fire he makes to come down from heaven to the earth in 
the presence of men. " Remember that both beasts are now, in 
"heaven, " or in authority. The second beast displays its power 
over "the earth," or those who are under its authority by 
occasionally sending down fire [symbol of judgment and 
punishments] upon them— declaring certain judgments and 



punishments upon those who oppose it— heretics. Such fire was 
sent down upon the Dissenters- Baptists, Puritans and others. 

Vs. 14. "And he deceives those who dwell on the earth by the 
signs which it was given him to do in the presence of the beast. " 
Those who dwell on the earth (not "the earth" itself-i.e. the 
people who acknowledge and obey these two beasts) probably 
refers to independent Christians not allied to worldly 
organizations. These were deceived by the pretentious claims of 
divine right and appointment etc. 

They claim as the Papal church did and does that they are the 
only church of Christ and that none but their ministers and 
bishops have right to preach since they and the Roman Catholic 
clergy alone are rightly "ordained of God." They claim that the 
right to ordain (set apart and install in office) was originally 
possessed only by the Apostles, who through "laying on of 
hands," conferred the gifts of the Spirit. This last we know is 
true, but they also claim that those so ordained, could, in 
ordaining others, confer the same spiritual gifts and powers. 
This was probably first promulgated to give power and seeming 
authority to the clergy, and to create between them and the 
balance of the church, a gulf of awe so wide that few would dare 
leap over. Thus priest-craft obtained a mighty hold upon the 
minds of the people. It is the carrying out of this same principle 
that sanctions the teaching, that none are qualified to understand 
the Bible aright except those consecrated by the imposition of 
holy orders by the Apostolic succession. This claim of both 
beasts we deny, and assert that the laying on of hands by all the 
Bishops and Popes, could not add to the spiritual gifts of any, 
saint or sinner. We challenge both churches to produce a single 
case in which "the gifts of the Spirit" (as they are explained in 1 
Cor.) ever followed the ordination of their ministers. 

It was in this way that the second beast deceived or led into error 
(bondage) the various independent companies of protestant 
Christians, telling them ("those who dwell on the earth") to 
make an image to the (first) beast, who has the wound of the 
sword and lives." 

B. We understand then that these two churches, the church of 
England and the church of Germany by their claims and 
organizations similar to Papacy, said to smaller companies of 
Independent Protestant Christians by example etc. : You will also 
find it necessary to have an ecclesiastical fence to separate your 
clergy from the common people of the church, that their 
utterances, by seeming authority may have the greater weight, 
even as the word of God with the people— thus preventing the 
exercise of individual thought and study. 

A. Yes, they demonstrated to them that they required an 
organized government &c, of the clergy over the common 
people like to Papacy in form, in fact an "Image of that beast. " 



This each denomination, Presbyterian, Methodist, Baptist and 
legion besides, did, as they gained power, i.e. While they 
denounced priest-craft and advocated individual study of the 
Bible, yet, they claimed the authority of their clergy to interpret 
the scriptures. And while they freely placed the Bible in the 
hands of the people, they handed them along with it, the 
catechism and creed of the church. They concede the right of the 
individual to be a member of the church and to study the word if 
they will agree to believe neither more nor less than the clergy 
who formed the creed. Strange liberty! Thus each denomination 
did make an image; but there is a sense in which they have all 
united to make one grand image, the one referred to in this 
fourteenth verse. 

B. I notice that the Sinaitic MSS. adds the word also in this 
verse— "That they also should make an image. " —Would not this 
seem to indicate that Protestantism as represented in this beast, 
is an image of the first beast also? 

A. Yes, the thought is there even without the word also, since 
they are both beasts, but also, does add to the force. Well, they 
took the advice of example and did organize such an image. In 
London, Aug. 19th, 1846, there assembled representatives of all 
the leading Protestant denominations of Europe and America, 
who there organized under the name— "Evangelical Alliance." 
That was a church organization in many respects similar in form 
("an image") to Papacy. Its design is to increase the power and 
authority of Protestantism, just as the formation of the Leopard 
beast was the result of a desire to increase the power and 
authority of Papacy. 

B. Surely you do not mean to say that the "Evangelical 
Alliance," which seemingly has been for the cementing of all 
Protestant Christians into one organization is an evil thing. 

A. The union of believers is one of the things for which we long 
and pray, but it is brought about, not by the organization of 
societies, but by the Holy Spirit. It is a union of hearts bound 
together by the golden chord of truth; not a union of church 
societies bound by creeds. 

If the Evangelical Alliance were the coming together of 
Christians, saying-We realize that there is "One Lord, one faith, 
one baptism," and that all truth is in harmony, and therefore, as 
we who profess to be God's children differ widely on various 
subjects and our various creeds in many particulars contradict 
each other, we desire to lay aside all written creeds and we unite 
in this manner as Christians, with no rule nor creed but the 
Bible. We will henceforth strive to be taught of God and seek to 
come to harmony in the understanding of His word. 

I say if this were the object, I could rejoice at such an 
organization. But it is not; no, each denomination stands as 
firmly as ever by its creed. And this Alliance is designed only as 



a protection to those creeds. The Alliance has a creed of nine 
articles, and none can be considered as within the pale of 
Orthodoxy, except by subscribing to this creed. It is, I repeat, an 
organization in form and purpose, similar to Papacy and is here 
properly termed the "Image of the beast." 

Vs. 15. "And it was given him to give breath to the image of the 
beast, that the image of the beast should both speak, and cause 
that as many as would not worship the image of the beast, 
should be killed."- That is, the Protestant beast gave vital power 
and authority to the image (The united sects— Evangelical 
Alliance). It has done this by joining with them in the 
organization. The church of England and the church of Germany 
were both represented at several of the late meetings of the 
Alliance. This is contrary to the Spirit of their creeds, as all 
know who are conversant with them. The English and German 
churches each claim, as the Papal has always done, that theirs is 
THE CHURCH founded by the Apostles and that their ministers 
and bishops have the special unction for teaching by the "laying 
on of hands," or what is known as ordination and Apostolic 
succession. These claim that the Papacy was an apostacy from 
their church, and that the various other denominations are 
schisms from their church and heretical, in that they hold 
doctrines differing from theirs. 

They have departed from the real ground of their creed when 
they take part with other denominations in forming, and 
recognizing (giving life to) "the image. " 

And even the Papal Church went so far as to acknowledge the 
Image, for during the session (in Europe) two months since, she 
sent her GREETINGS to the "Evangelical Alliance." The 
recognition by these beasts gives force and power to the image, 
so that it can command the reverence of all; and woe be to the 
one who dares refuse to worship "Orthodoxy." He is 
symbolically "killed" -cut off, as a heretic, and is no longer 
recognized as a Christian. 

Vs. 16. "And he causes all, the little and great, and the rich and 
the poor, and the freemen and the bondmen, that they should 
give themselves a mark on the right hand or in their forehead;" 
i.e., the Image causes all who would be its followers and 
worshipers to commit themselves either by a public profession 
(mark in forehead), or by giving able support with their might, 
power and means (mark in right hand). A mark is a seal or sign 
of allegiance. 

B. How do the various denominational churches constituting the 
Image follow Papacy? 

A. In many ways. For instance: Papacy established the clerical 
hierarchy, who lord it over God's heritage instead of serving 
their brethren as Jesus explained- "One is your Master and all ye 
are brethren," and as Paul said- "We are to speak the 



R65 : page 2 

truth in love and grow up into Him in all things who is the head, 
even Christ; from whom the whole body fitly joined together 
(not by creeds of men, but by love begotten by the one Spirit of 
truth) and compacted by that which every joint supplieth (every 
joint is every member, not the clergy only) making increase of 
the body unto the edifying of itself in love. " Thus coming "to the 
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God. " 
Eph. 4. 

As Papacy established the priesthood over the church, so 
Protestantism has established almost the same, and there is no 
opportunity for the body to edify itself, every joint taking part. 
True, there is a seeming show of liberty at prayer meetings, &c, 
but it is only upon the surface, for the ordained pastor is to 
watch zealously lest anything contrary to the teachings of his 
church should be expressed, and if so to silence the audacious 
member at once, for the church creed is the rule, not the Word of 
God. If this is not sufficient, they must have a sort of church trial 
and excommunicate him ["kill him"]. The trial, by the way, 
gives evidence of another likeness to the beast, namely, the 
exaltation of the teachings of the organization above the Word 
of God, for all such are tried according to "the authorities" of 
their church. 

Another mark is the ordination or apostolic succession. This is 
claimed by Methodists and others, who go through the same 
form of consecrating their ministers as do the Episcopal and 
Roman Catholic churches, and without scriptural authority. 

B. Do you not think it right that fellow servants should pray over 
and in the name of God set apart a fellow member for the Lord's 
service? 

A. O yes ! What I object to is the idea held, that some 
supernatural power and wisdom is conveyed, and that it is 
particular that the blessing come in a direct descent from the 
first Apostles. Another prominent mark of the beast copied 



[Continued on seventh page.] 

R65 : page 7 

[Continued from second page.] 



by the image is the honoring of the special class, the clergy, with 
special honors and titles. They are known as Revs., Divines, 
etc., but Jesus, the divine, said: "Ye call me Lord and Master, 
and ye say well, for so I am." "Be not ye called Rabbi, neither be 
ye called Masters, for one is your Master, even Christ, and all ye 
are brethren (Matt. 23:8). These titles are assumptions fashioned 
after those of Papacy. 



When the various denominations began their existence, more 
full of the spirit of Christ, they claimed no such high-sounding 

titles. The Reformers were not known as Rev. , 

D.D., &c, but as John Knox, Martin Luther, John Wesley, &c. 
Unpretentious, like Jesus and the Apostles, they were intent 
upon serving God and therefore became the servants (ministers) 
of the church. These had marks of God's approval, and as a 
result, their ministry was wonderfully blest. But now the clergy 
are far from being servants, they are Lords. They have itching 
ears, loving the approval of men. As pride and worldliness have 
come in, vital godliness and power have gradually departed. 

For the very same reason they are losing all power to expound 
the Word of God-the gift of teaching -because "God abhoreth 
the proud but giveth grace (favor) to the humble. " The early 
reformers were humble, and God led them into much knowledge 
of His Word, and although we are much farther along "the path 
of the just," and the servants should have more light and bring 
things new as well as old from the Word, yet we find ministers 
of all denominations ready to confess their ignorance of the 
Word. They appeal for their information back to the early 
reformers, and thus confess that they have less light than they. 
Pride always has hindered growth in grace and does now. " 
"How can ye believe who receive honor one of another, and 
seek not the honor which cometh from God, only?" That their 
light should grow dim and their spiritual life become dwarfed is 
the natural result of their joining the image and subscribing to 
creeds made in the fifteenth century, which, like the iron shoe of 
China, will not admit of any growth. It is a shoe a little larger 
than Papacy put upon its followers but of the same sort. 

Another mark received by nearly all is 

SPRINKLING INSTEAD OF BAPTISM. 

This has been handed down through the Church of Rome to the 
Churches of England and Germany, and through the influence of 
these to the allied Evangelical churches. 

The word baptize is not a translated word, but a transferred 
Greek word, and means to dip, immerse, wash, as is abundantly 
proven by its use in hundreds of instances in profane Greek 
literature. Its use in scripture seems also to teach the same thing, 
as well as the admitted fact that all Christians for nearly three 
centuries practiced immersion. The Church of Rome (the only 
one which has a history) admits that the word signifies, to 
immerse, and that it was so practiced by early Christians, but 
claims that SHE changed it. She claims that she, through her 
head, the Pope, (the vicar of Christ), had authority to change any 
ordinance. This is in harmony with the spirit of Papacy as 
illustrated in the quotation at our last meeting from Pope Martin: 
"Wherefore no marvel if it be in my power to change time and 
times, to alter and abrogate laws, to dispense with all things, 



yea, with the precepts of Christ." Can you wonder that I should 
feel aggrieved to see fellow Christians ignore the precepts of 
Christ and exalt instead the teachings of men, claiming that it 
makes no difference? 

B. Certainly if these are marks of the beast, it is time that all 
Christians should realize it. Also, that all who are worshiping 
any church organization should be warned. "See thou do it not." 
These are thy fellow servants. "Worship God." Rev. 22:9. 

A. The image worship is hindering hundreds from seeing the 
beauties of the Word of God. They may perhaps glance at it and 
for a moment think for themselves, but that is all. The church 
discipline is so strict and they reverence it so much that a look or 
frown is sufficient to warn them that independent thought is a 
dangerous thing and must not be indulged in, lest they be 
regarded as infidels. Would that all could see that these local 
organizations called churches are not THE CHURCH, but that 
the Church of God includes all Christians, all whose names are 
written in Heaven, and that when these local organizations 
attempt to come between them as children, and God their Father, 
or to put their creed instead of the Word of God, their assumed 
authority is not to be recognized, nor tolerated; and that it is our 
duty to rebuke it as sinful. 

Vs. 17. "So that no one may be able to buy or sell unless he who 
has the mark, the name of the beast, or the number of his name. " 
The buying and selling here are doubtless symbolic, and refer to 
trading, or exchanging of spiritual things- truths. None are 
recognized as having a right to teach or preach unless they have 
these marks; i.e., he must have a theological examination to see 
whether he bears all the marks and reverences the authority of 
the image. He must either be a part of the beast itself, or of the 
number of his name— many denominations. 

B. Our meeting has been profitable to me, I hope. I will watch 
the closer that I do not worship men nor men's opinions and 
creeds. Man worship in some form seems to be a failing of very 
many. 

A. If you feel interested enough in these topics, and will call 
again, we may take up some of the subsequent chapters of this 
interesting but in times past sealed book. Farewell. 



R65 : page 3 



"As Unknown and Yet Well Known." 

Strangers here- 
Not a link with earth unbroken, 
Not a farewell to be spoken; 
Waiting for their Lord to take them 
To Himself, and like Him make them. 

Strangers here- 
with their hearts upon a treasure 
That has dimmed for them earth's pleasure, 
Lamps well trimmed, and brightly burning, 
Eyes forever upward turning. 

Strangers here- 
Earthly rank and riches losing. 
Worldly ties and claims refusing. 
On to Christ in glory passing. 
All things there in Him possessing. 

Strangers here- 

But in Him their hearts are resting, 
Faith looks up in days of testing, 
Follows Him with true allegiance, 
Loves to walk in His obedience. 

Well know there - 
Oh, what joy for Christ to take them 
To the Father, who will make them 
Welcome in His mansions yonder, 
Strangers here-to be no longer. 



R66 : page 3 



-Selected. 



The Old and New. 



The natural and the spiritual, both, are elements of God's plan. 
Some make too much of the one and some too much of the 
other. If we would keep balanced we should carefully avoid 
extremes. First the natural and afterward the spiritual, is God's 
law of development, both of dispensations and persons; and the 
natural is first also in the sense that the spiritual grows out of it- 
not developed by the power of the natural itself, but by the 
power of the spiritual, with which the natural is impregnated. In 
God's order there can be no spiritual without first the natural, 
hence the spiritual is in one sense dependent on the natural. This 
gives us a clear application of the principles: "The elder shall 
serve the younger," spoken concerning Esau (the elder) and 
Jacob (the younger). Gen. 25:23. They were twins; and thus 
intimately related, clearly represent the relation between the 



natural and the spiritual, Esau, as the natural, first, and afterward 
Jacob. 

The Jewish and Gospel dispensations stand so related to each 
other. As Esau for pottage sold Jacob his birthright and Jacob 
received the blessing of the firstborn, so natural Israel by 
desiring only the things adapted to an earthly condition, lost the 
kingdom, and it is given to another nation— the Gospel church- 
the true Israel of God. But the Gospel church grew out of the 
Jewish; the remnant saved being the nucleus around which the 
Gospel church was gathered. Christ, his apostles and all the 
remnant were Jews, they received the Holy Spirit and became 
the light beams to the Gentiles: "Salvation is of the Jews." John 
4:22. The natural is the elder, but the elder serves the younger. 

The natural and the spiritual are related thus to each other in the 
person of our Lord Jesus Christ, reckoning from the beginning 
of his earthly life. As one born of the flesh (the natural) he was 
natural, but when he was born from the dead by the Spirit he 
was spiritual, and he is our Leader in the order of development. 
This order, in Christ is the key to the whole plan, and is the basis 
of Paul's statement concerning our resurrection. "It is sown a 
natural body; it is raised a spiritual body." 1 Cor. 15:44,46. The 
natural could not of itself become spiritual, neither could there 
be the spiritual, in God's order without "First the natural. " The 
natural or "vile body" changed becomes the glorious body; 
changed by the power of the Spirit indwelling. Rom. 8:11 and 
Phil. 3:21. 

The relation of the grub and the butterfly is a good illustration of 
the Christian in his two stages of existence. It is first the grub 
and afterward the butterfly, the grub changing into a butterfly on 
account of the butterfly nature which the grub possesses. So 
when a man has the Divine or spiritual nature, in due time he 
will "bear the image of the heavenly," a glorious form, (1 Cor. 
15:49). But a mere natural man has no germ of the spiritual, and 
hence he needs a Savior-he needs the life giving power of the 
Second Adam. 

Adam was a mere natural man and in harmony with this fact 
was on trial only for natural life, which the typical tree could 
prolong. There is no intimation in the Bible that spirituality or 
immortality was placed before him as of possible attainment. If 
it be said, "God's plan cannot change, and therefore God 
intended from the first that man should develop from the natural 
to the spiritual." I answer by admitting the premises, and urging 
in consequence that God intended that man should receive 
spiritual life by the Second Adam. As man had only natural life 
when created, a redeemed or ransomed life can only be natural; 
and as a naturally dead man can not develop into spiritual life, 
man needs a Redeemer, and must either be actually redeemed if 
dead, or counted redeemed if under sentence, in order to receive 
the spiritual life. We may thus be able to see great light and 



beauty in the fact that in Christ are combined both the natural 
and the spiritual, for man needs a Redeemer from the curse 
"Dying thou shalt die, " and also a spiritual Life-giver. We are 
compelled to believe that Christ is man's Redeemer from natural 
death, because He gave his natural life (Gr. psuchee) a ransom 
for the many; and natural life could not redeem spiritual life nor 
spiritual redeem the natural, as the law requires "An eye for an 
eye and a tooth for a tooth. " But we are asked was it not God's 
plan to raise man from natural death? We answer, yes; but it was 
as much his plan to raise them by a Redeemer, as to raise them 
at all, or as it was his plan to give men spiritual life by the 
Second Adam. It is evidently a part of the plan to save or deliver 
man from the natural death, and so far at least God saves the old 
man. It seems to us a misapprehension of the relation between 
the natural and the spiritual, that leads to the idea that there is no 
provisions for the salvation of the old man. If God raises the 
dead "distinct from Christ," or without a Redeemer, he saves 
them without a provision; but even with this view, the recovery 
of the natural man from natural death in order to give him 
spiritual life is as much a necessity as in our view, that God 
saves men by a Redeemer. It seems strange that any one should 
say that God has made no provision to save the natural man. 
Pray tell us who needs saving if not poor lost, sinful mortal man. 
The spiritual man needs no Savior; he is the saved man. To 
restore is to save from death; in this sense he saves all mankind. 
To give spiritual life is to save by preventing the second death. 
"On such the second death hath no power." "Neither can they 
die any more." Rev. 20:6 and Luke 20:36. 

This is the great, the special salvation and is to believers only; 
and the principle involved is, THE OLD MADE NEW. If God 
does not save the old man he saves nobody. And if the new 
creation does not consist in making the old man new, by the 
power of the spirit, then our glorified Savior is not the man 
Christ Jesus who went about doing good; who learned to 
sympathize with his brethren, because "he was tried in all points 
like as we are;" and who gave himself a ransom for all, by his 
obedience unto death; and was therefore highly exalted. Phil. 
2:8,9. If he does not save the old man by making him new, then 
there is neither resurrection nor change-the putting on of 
immortality. The butterfly may or may not remember his grub 
life, but as he flutters in the air with his beautiful form and 
gaudy dress, he is the very same creature that once wallowed in 
the soil of earth. 

Our change will indeed be great, well may it be called a "New 
Creation;" (to form anew or give a new form.) "It doth not yet 
appear what we shall be; but we know that when he shall appear, 
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is." 1 John 3:2. 
We would doubtless be greatly surprised could we in vision see 
ourselves in glory: these vile bodies changed, and fashioned like 
unto his glorious body; but no one need be afraid of losing his 



identity. When we look back, and realize what God hath 
wrought in redeeming out of every kindred, and in making us 
Kings and Priests, well may we then exclaim: "Oh death where 
is thy sting, Oh grave where is thy victory. Thanks be unto God 
that giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. " And as 
Jesus by the memory of his suffering can sympathize with the 
sorrowing and the tempted, so will we by the trials which we 
have overcome, be prepared with him to share in the 
administration of power, to succor and bless the nations of Earth 
in the millennial day. 

All hail, to our mighty Redeemer and Friend; 
Who saves the redeemed to a life without end. 
In thy kingdom of glory, may we share with the few 
In bringing mankind from the old to the new. 



J. H. P. 



R66 : page 3 



Into All Truth. 



"Howbeit when he, the spirit of truth is come, he will guide 
you into all truth." -John 16:13. 

To whom was that promise made by the Savior, to the 
Apostles, or to the church? And if to the church, does it belong 
to each individual of the church? We believe there is a sense in 
which it was designed for the Apostles, and was fulfilled in 
them. Revelation has two phases, one of which is fulfilled in the 
word being spoken or written, the other in its being understood. 
This is especially true of prophecy, which though spoken or 
written by men inspired by the spirit, was not understood, nor 
intended to be understood by them, (1 Pet. 1:11,12.) but was for 
the church. Prophecy can only be fully understood when 
fulfilled, and a truth is not fully revealed until it is understood. 
To reveal is to make known, and in a very important sense the 
promise of the Spirit was fulfilled when the inspired writings 
were complete and given to the church. We do not believe that 
new truths, not contained in the Bible, have been given to men, 
and when men come to us claiming to have new revelations, we 
beware. But we have no doubt that in the application and 
understanding of the word, the Spirit's help is as necessary as in 
writing it. The prophets and apostles had inspiration to write and 
the church have the same Spirit's help to understand. 

The Apostles are as the twelve foundation stones of the church, 
(when complete and glorified the New Jerusalem. -Rev. 21:14,) 
and as such, represent the whole church, and for this reason, the 
terms "ye" and "you" addressed to them, refer to the whole 
church. In this way we believe the promise of the Spirit 



R67 : page 3 

belongs to the whole church. "Go ye into all the world," is our 
commission, to preach the gospel, as well as their's, though 
addressed to them. "Lo I am with you alway even unto the end 
of the world," is a precious promise to us and could refer to 
them only in the sense that they were a part of the one family 
addressed, and in their time, received by the Spirit all needed 
help. The church is one body, Christ being its head, and the 
Apostles important members of it, but the body would be 
incomplete without the toes, and the same Spirit animates the 
toes that animates the Head. "There is one body and one Spirit, 
even as ye 

R67 : page 4 

are called in one hope of your calling." Eph 4:4. 

The living generation of believers in Christ represents the 
church now as at any time in the past, but it requires the whole 
number, dead and living, to constitute the church, that body 
which when complete and filled with glory, will shine as the sun 
in the Father's kingdom. Now, we do not and cannot believe that 
Christ, in any sense, intended the promise of which we are 
speaking, for any one individual, now, or at any time in the past; 
hence we do not believe that any one person ever had, or ever 
will have the truth concerning Christ and his plans this side of 
the kingdom or immortal state. "Now we see through a glass, 
darkly, but then face to face. Now I know in part, but then shall I 
know even as also I am known." 1 Cor. 13:12. Whoever expects 
all the truth while in a mortal state will, doubtless, be 
disappointed, but this need not stand in the way of any ones 
applying himself faithfully, with the assurance that his work 
shall be richly rewarded. He who searches will find. There can 
be no doubt, that, in consequence of the promise of the leading 
of the Spirit, the living generation of Christians has, at all times, 
had all the truth due at that time, and therefore that the church 
now living has all the truth due in our day; and because of the 
progress of truth in the "path that shines more and more even 
unto the perfect day," we may reasonably claim that the present 
generation of Christians know more of prophecy and God's plan 
than any generation preceding. We have the advantage of the 
aggregate progress of the past, besides the fulfillment of the 
prophecies which clearly indicate our position on the verge of 
the glory of the kingdom. But it is just as true now as it ever 
was, that there is variety of power and intellect in the church. 
There are babes, young men and fathers, now as at all times in 
the past, and yet, it is as much a fact that the babe with its 
undeveloped capacity for knowledge or work, belongs to the 
family as that the father belongs to the family. The existence of 
life by the Divine Spirit is what constitutes any individual a 
member of the body, and the degree of strength or knowledge 
the members possess depends upon circumstances. The growth 



in grace and knowledge is of members in the family and does 
not constitute them members, and however young, ignorant or 
feeble a member is, he is certain of a place in the kingdom, 
unless for some reason he is disinherited and cut off. If the 
branch bear no fruit it is cut off and withers, but every branch 
that beareth fruit, be it ever so little, he purgeth it that it may 
bring forth more fruit. John 15:2. If each individual now, on the 
strength of the promise, may claim perfect knowledge, so might 
each individual at any other time, and we know that even in the 
apostle's day, no one had all the help the Spirit gave, but God 
divided to each man severally according to his own will.— 1 Cor. 
12:1 1. If a knowledge of all the truth is necessary in order to fit 
a man for the kingdom, then admitting that the last generation 
could get it all, only these could be the heirs and all the dead are 
shut out. True, they were not expected to know as much as 
Christians now, neither was each one expected to know all that 
they all knew, but they were expected to bring forth fruit unto 
holiness, and that they each could do. It is no more reasonable to 
expect each one to know now, all that all know than it would 
have been at any time in the past. The bride is evidently chosen 
with reference to her union with Christ by his spirit and her 
loyalty to him rather than her degree of knowledge. She is called 
out under circumstances peculiarly dark in some respects, and it 
is not until after the bride is complete and Zion is brought back 
that even the "Watchman shall see eye to eye."— Isa. 52:8. 
Though we cannot know all until the perfect is come, we can 
grow in grace and in knowledge, and the Spirit will help our 
infirmities. 

J. H. P. 



R68 : page 4 

The Completeness of the Body. 

"The Church is the 'one body' of Christ, and all Christians are 
individual members of that body. No one liveth to himself, no 
one dieth to himself; when one member suffers all members 
suffer with it. It is one of the sins of a self-sufficient age to deny 
the unity and completeness of Christ's body, and to set up tests 
of unity other than those which he has appointed. In the natural 
body each member united with the head has vital union with 
every other member connected with the same head. The basis of 
true Christian unity is union with Jesus Christ who is the head of 
the body. Men lay down as the basis of their unity, union with 
some human leaders through the doctrines which he has 
proclaimed or the forms which he has instituted. They are united 
by external observances, by laws, forms, rites and bands. Their 
union is the union of staves in a barrel; Christ's union is the 
union of branches in a vine. Their union is that of bones in a 



skeleton, joined and wired together, but destitute of vital energy; 
the union of Christ and his people is the union of the members 
of a body, joined together by those ligaments which every joint 
supplieth, and pervaded by the energy of a common life. The 
unity which Christ inaugurated embraces the whole family of 
God. It includes every man who has vital connection with the 
great Head of the Church. Men's schemes are too narrow for 
this, and include only those persons who coincide in opinions, 
who agree in forms, who are trimmed according to a certain 
pattern, or shaped in conformity to certain human standards. 
Christ bids us to receive one another as he has received us. The 
fact that we have passed from death unto life, and that we are 
united to Christ the living Head, is proof that we are united to 
his people. If our fellowship is with the Father and with the Son 
Jesus Christ, it is also with one another. Men, however, restrict 
their fellowship; and hence, while Christ's Church is inclusive 
and wide-reaching, their churches are narrow, and shut out more 
Christians than they shut in. The results of this are grievous to 
God's people who are thus excluded from union with saints, but 
still more grievous to those who exclude them. How often we 
see churches crippled and helpless for lack of the labor and 
sympathy of Christian brethren who stand by their side ready 
and willing to be helpers in their toils, but are excluded by some 
party Shibboleth, or by some unscriptural name or form. How 
often we see men shut away from their proper field of Christian 
effort, simply because they cannot accept the unscriptural 
statements and arrangements, which men presume to impose 
before they will receive them to their fellowship. Men toil in 
weariness, and bring themselves to the borders of the grave, that 
they may do work which others would willingly and wisely do, 
who are not permitted to participate in the labor. Thus men 
virtually say to God's children, 'You may be members of Christ's 
body, but we have no need of you or your services.' 

The apostle has taught us that no member of the body can be 
spared from its place and its proper work, without serious injury. 
No man can separate himself from the body of Christ without 
harm; nor can any portion of Christians separate themselves 
from others who love the Lord, or exclude other Christians from 
their fellowship, without doing themselves great injury. 

The union of true Christians springs from a higher than human 
source; and their adaptation to each other for mutual helpfulness 
is so complete and perfect that any separation must work harm 
both to those who cause it and to those who endure it. The feet 
may say, We are strong, we have no need of the eyes, we carry 
the body, and the eyes are mere useless gazers, but when the 
eyes are gone, and the feet are groping and floundering in the 
ditch, the folly of this decision is most manifest. So whenever 
any of the Lord's children in their inexperience and self- 
sufficiency think themselves able to dispense with the presence, 
the service, and the loving fellowship of others of the children of 



the Lord, they may find sooner or later, by their weakness, 
inefficiency, and a thousand calamities and troubles that may 
come upon them, they have over-estimated their own powers, 
and have put away from them those members which God hath 
set in the body, that they might abide together in the unity of 
love and in mutual helpfulness. All down through the ages 
comes our Savior's parting prayer for his disciples, that "they all 
may be one," and the hearts of the truly regenerate yearn and 
long for this unity. Deeper than the names and forms and creeds 
of men, throbs that inward, divine and universal life which 
Christ imparted, and which makes his children one.— The 
Armory. 



R67 : page 4 

Type and Antitype. 

In searching for the true relation between the natural and the 
spiritual, we are called to look again at the types and allegories. 
It has been seen and is a familiar fact to most of our readers, that 
the Lord uses natural things to represent spiritual things. This 
method of teaching is doubtless more common in the Bible than 
is generally supposed. We have long been convinced that the 
writings of Moses are largely allegorical; but we would guard 
against extremes. Some deny the literal meaning, because of the 
allegorical and typical, but our view is that in addition to the 
literal they have a superior value, on account of their 
representing the great plan of salvation. They mean all they say, 
but they mean much more than they say. 

What they say is the letter, but the deeper meaning is the Spirit. 
To the Jew and to many Christians, the letter is as the veil which 
hides or obscures the real and deeper truth. Paul treats of this 
subject in 2 Cor. 3, and we might truly say still, as he said of the 
Jew: "Even unto this day, when Moses is read, the veil is upon 
their heart."-(Ver. 15.) The tendency of seeing only the letter is 
killing, but the Spirit, appreciated, tends to liberty and life. "The 
letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life." -(Ver. 6.) "Now the 
Lord is that Spirit; and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is 
liberty. "-(Ver. 17.) Combining the teachings of Paul and the 
Savior himself (John 5:45-47,) we draw the conclusion that the 
writings of Moses contain the gospel of the Son of God, as a 
shell contains a kernel; that both are real and each is valuable in 
its own place and for the purpose designed; but the kernel is 
more valuable than the shell. We regard the whole Bible as none 
too large, and all teaching directly or indirectly the gospel of 
Christ. The Lord is the Golden Thread of revelation, as he is the 
soul of the plan of salvation. From all who can see the fullness 
and harmony of the writings of the Old Testament with the 
gospel of Christ, 



R67 : page 5 

the spirit of doubt as to the Divine inspiration of the Bible will 
flee away. The fact that the truth has been hidden for ages and 
yet there, under cover of the mere history, is, to us, a strong 
evidence that no human mind laid the plan of the book or the 
great salvation brought to light by it. 

When men begin to see the flood of light from this source, there 
may be a liability to lose balance or to be carried too far in the 
application. An extreme spiritualism should be avoided as well 
as an extreme materialism. We do not believe that every portion 
of the Bible has double meaning as do some. Some portions 
relate wholly to the natural and some wholly to the spiritual, and 
the natural represents the spiritual, so that the relation of the two 
in the plan is preserved. For instance, there are two Jerusalems- 
the old and the new, the natural and the spiritual— and the old is 
doubtless a type of the new, but sometimes the Lord speaks of 
the one and sometimes of the other and we should be careful not 
to confound them. 

We would call special attention to the fact that antitypes are not 
always wholly spiritual. This has been overlooked by some in 
the treatment of this subject, and confusion instead of light has 
been the result. Adam is a type of Christ, but in Christ is 
combined both the natural and the spiritual, in the order of 
development. So this antitype is not wholly spiritual. The spirit 
of a type is what it means. Many types foreshadow the great 
plan of salvation, but the plan has the two elements: First the 
natural and afterward the spiritual; and therefore the type 
represents both. 

Christ's life is the key to the plan; two births and two lives are 
brought to view, and at his death and resurrection is the turning 
point between them. He was born of the flesh first, and 
afterward of the spirit. He was "put to death in the flesh, and 
made alive by the spirit." 1 Pet. 3:18. The life he lived before his 
death was natural, and the life by resurrection was spiritual, and 
Adam as a type represented both. In the natural life Christ was 
alone, (he had no church, then) and "Except a corn of wheat fall 
into the ground and die, it abideth alone." John 12:24. He died to 
bring forth fruit. So Adam was alone for a time, and the Lord 
said "it is not good for a man to be alone, and the Lord caused a 
deep sleep to come upon him;" and so his wife was developed 
from his side. 

That part of Adam's life which was before he fell asleep, 
represented Christ's natural life, and Adam's falling asleep, 
represented Christ's natural death. So we see that Christ's flesh 
life and his natural death are a part of the antitype, and an 
important part of the plan; let no man dare to belittle them; on 
the other hand let no one confound the natural with the after and 
spiritual life of Christ. Adam's life, after awaking from sleep, 



represented Christ's life after his resurrection. His marriage 
represented the marriage of the Lamb, the generation of the race 
the regeneration of the race, and the dominion over all given to 
Adam and his wife, represents the united reign of Christ and his 
wife-the church— over the Earth and the nations in the world to 
come. "Come hither, and I will show thee the bride, the Lamb's 
wife, and he showed me... that great 

R68 : page 5 

city, the holy Jerusalem." "And the nations shall walk in the 
light of it." Rev. 21:9,10,24. 

The bride in both type and antitype becomes a mother, and 
therefore imparts her own nature to her offspring. No one can 
see this great fact, without being impressed with the magnitude 
of the plan, and the fullness of the love of God. Isaac, the son of 
faithful Abraham, is a type of the Son of God, the Father of the 
faithful in the highest sense. Isaac was offered a sacrifice, being 
three days subject to death, and was received from the dead, all 
in figure, and Jesus the Son of God died, and rose again the third 
day, in fact. The calling of the wife, the marriage and the 
development of the family, in both type and antitype, follow the 
resurrection in proper order. Isaac's life, before he was offered, 
represents Christ's life, before he was offered— the natural life, 
the sacrifice of Isaac in figure represented the sacrifice of 
Christ's natural life; for Christ gave his natural life (psuchee) a 
ransom for many; and the after life of Isaac represented the 
spiritual life of Christ. Here again it is clear that the antitype is 
both natural and spiritual. Joseph went into the pit and came out 
again, and was exalted to the right hand of power in Egypt, and 
became the Bread keeper and Life preserver for both Egypt and 
Israel. Joseph had a life before he went into the pit, as well as 
after he came out, and so had Christ the antitype. 

Moses came twice to his own people —natural Israel, and was 
rejected at the first, but delivered them at the second coming. So 
of Christ, He comes twice to the same people, is rejected at the 
first and at the second delivers them. The coming in flesh, and 
the coming in glory are both represented, in that type, and yet 
both are to the natural seed. In each of these types, Adam, Isaac, 
Joseph and Moses, the death of Christ is foreshadowed, though 
none actually died. Adam fell asleep; Isaac was offered in spirit; 
Joseph went into the pit; and Moses had to flee for his life. The 
death of Christ is shown, in this and many other ways to be an 
important part of the plan. It is the turning point between the 
natural and the spiritual; and to say that the natural life, the flesh 
and blood life of Christ profiteth nothing, is to say that God's 
plan is all spiritual, instead of "first the natural and afterward the 
spiritual." This would be a strange perversion of Christ's words, 
"The flesh profiteth nothing;" for Christ was speaking 
figuratively, when he said, "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of 
man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. " Eating literal 



flesh, and drinking literal blood, of course would profit nothing, 
in giving spiritual life, and therefore Christ wanted them to 
understand that he was not talking of the literal. But that does 
not destroy the fact, that Christ had literal flesh and blood, that 
he took it for a purpose, (Heb. 2:9,14,15.) and that he actually 
died. 

The spirit could not take the place of the flesh, any more than 
the flesh could take the place of the spirit: both would be equally 
unprofitable, out of their order. Observe the order and all is 
clear, harmonious and beautiful. Christ gave his natural life 
(psuchee) to redeem man, and gives us the spiritual to live by, 
and we must eat it (i.e. receive the truth) in order to sustain life, 
(spiritual.) The value of the cross (death) of our Lord Jesus, is 
beautifully enforced by the two cherubim. The centre is the 
meeting place, the point of reconciliation between God and man, 
and so Paul says we are reconciled to God by the death of his 
Son. Rom. 5:10. The one cherub represents the Jewish church 
looking forward, and the second the Gospel church looking 
back. The first therefore represents the natural and the second 
the spiritual, and the antitype is again proved to contain both. 
From these facts we may see another. Because Elijah was a type 
of the Gospel church, and Elijah healed the sick and raised the 
dead (physically) it does not follow that the antitypical Elijah 
can only deal with spiritual life. Just as surely as to restore is to 
give back what was lost, so surely Christ and the church, will 
restore natural life to the world; It has not been proved yet, 
though often assumed and asserted, that man lost spiritual life by 
Adam's sin. But because restoration is the work of Christ and the 
church, let no one conclude that they will do nothing more. 
Elijah represents Christ as Restorer, and Adam represents Christ 
as Head of an immortal race. 

We do not presume to have exhausted this subject; no doubt 
there is much more to be learned. Each new truth learned must 
be retained if we would grow, and we are quite sure that any 
idea advanced, that ignores either the natural or the spiritual in 
the plan, is darkness instead of light, and if taken as the key to 
other ideas, will lead to greater darkness. It is doubtless true that 
many stumble because they fail to discern the spiritual; and as a 
means of safety we suggest the necessity of keeping in mind the 
relation between the natural and the spiritual. 

J. H. P. 



R69 : page 5 



Sanctification. 

"For this is the will of God, even your sanctification. "— 1 Thes. 
4:3. 

And thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron thy brother for 
glory and for beauty. And for Aaron's sons thou shalt make 
coats, and thou shalt make for them girdles, for glory and for 
beauty. And thou shalt put them upon Aaron thy brother, and his 
sons with him; and thou shalt anoint them, and shalt consecrate 
them, and sanctify them, that they may minister unto me in the 
priest's office. Ex. 28. 

Sanctify unto me all the first-born; they are mine. 

The church of first-born (Heb. 12) the body of Christ, is 
sanctified -called out or separated from the world-through the 
truth, the word of God, and for a purpose. 

Christ, praying to the Father, for the church, says: "They are not 
of the world, even as I am not of the world. Sanctify them 
through thy truth; thy word is truth." John 17:16,17. And Paul, 
in his letter to the Eph., 5 chapter; "Husbands, love your wives, 
even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it; 
that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water, 
by the word that he might present it to himself a glorious church, 
not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should 
be holy and without blemish." 1 Thess. 5:23 reads: "And the 
very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God your 
whole spirit, and soul-life— and body be preserved blameless in 
the (parousia) presence of our Lord Jesus Christ. " 

Again in 2 Thess. 2:13, we read: "God hath from the beginning 
chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the spirit and 
belief of the truth, whereunto he called you by our gospel, to the 
obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. " 

A sanctified church is composed of sanctified individuals, who 
are not called for their own sakes alone, but for a glorious 
purpose in God's plan; and sanctified, not because of their own 
merit (Gal. 2:6,) but because of their relationship to Christ. 

Unto the church of God which is at Corinth, to them that are 
sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints... I thank my God 
always on your behalf, for the grace of God which is given you 
by Jesus Christ; that in everything ye are enriched by him, in all 
utterance, and in all knowledge; even as the testimony of Christ 
was confirmed in you; so that ye come behind in no gift; waiting 
for the coming-revelation-of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall 
also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the 
day of our Lord Jesus Christ. For ye see your calling, brethren, 
how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, 
not many noble are called; but God hath chosen the foolish 
things of the world, to confound 



R69 : page 6 

the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to 
confound the things which are mighty, and base things of the 
world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea and 
things which are not, to bring to naught things that are; that no 
flesh should glory in his presence. "But of him are ye in Christ 
Jesus, who of God is made unto you wisdom, and righteousness, 
and sanctification, and redemption; that, according as it is 
written, he that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord. 1 Cor. 1. 

This complete sanctification in Christ; constitutes the perfection 
and unity of the church. 

"For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are 
all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain 
of their salvation perfect through sufferings. For both he that 
sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one; for which 
cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren." Heb. 2:10,1 1. 

"For by one offering he hath perfected forever them that are 
sanctified; whereof the Holy Ghost is also a witness to us." Heb. 
10:14,15. And again; God is faithful, by whom ye were called 
unto the fellowship of his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. "Now I 
beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions 
among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same 
mind and in the same judgment-sentiment. " 1 Cor. 1:9,10. 

This entire sanctification, like all other spiritual blessings, is 
based upon a knowledge of truth, which can only be obtained by 
earnest, continual, and prayerful searching; and being led by the 
spirit into all truth. Thus it can be called a sanctification of the 
spirit, and belief of the truth. 2 Thess. 2:13. No one can believe 
the truth, unless he knows the truth. 

As it is a fact that the scriptures develop or unfold gradually, and 
thus give light on the whole of the path of the just; and the spirit 
guides into all truth, then it is necessary to understand present 
truth. Faith comes by hearing; and hearing by the word of God, 
(Rom. 10:17) so faith is based upon the word of God. Paul says: 
"And now brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of 
his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an 
inheritance among all them which are sanctified." Acts 20:32. 

When we learn what is revealed of the glorious position to 
which the sanctified will be elevated in the future, we can not 
wonder at the strict requirements given in the scriptures, for 
those who would attain to that position. They are to be elevated 
to a higher plane; changed from the image of the earthly-first 
man; into the image of the heavenly, or second man, the image 
of God, adopted into the family of God, and become, in the full 
sense "sons of God." 



We who have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves, 
groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption -sonship-to 
wit, "the redemption of our body-the body of Christ. " Rom. 
8:23. 

"As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of 
God." Rom. 8:14. "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it 
doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he 
shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. 
And every man that hath this hope in him, purifieth himself, 
even as he is pure." 1 John 3:2,3. Jesus Christ was sanctified, 
and sent into the world (John 10:36.) for the good of the human 
race; and his body or bride are for the same purpose. 

If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of 
love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies; 
fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, 
being of one accord, of one mind. Let nothing be done through 
strife— party spirit-or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind let 
each esteem others better than themselves. Look not every man 
on his own things, or interests; but every man also on the 
interests of others. Let this same mind be in you, which was also 
in Christ Jesus; who, being in the form of God, thought it not 
robbery to be equal with God; but made himself of no 
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was 
made in the likeness of men. And being found in fashion as a 
man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even 
the death of the cross. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted 
him, and given him a name, which is above every name; that at 
the name of Jesus every knee should bow; of those in heaven, 
and those in earth, and those underneath the earth- underground 
ones— and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is 
Lord, to the glory of God the Father. Phil. 2:1,10. 

And if we are the children of God, we are heirs; heirs of God, 
and joint heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that 
we may be glorified together. No wonder that Paul could say: 
What shall we say to these things? If God be for us, who can be 
against us? He that spared not his own son, but delivered him up 
for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all 
things? 

B. W. K. 



R69 : page 6 

Farewell. 

We have now sent seven numbers of the ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER, to quite a number of persons from whom we have 
never heard. We have offered it FREE to all unable to pay if 
they wanted it enough to ask for it. Those who want it and can 



afford to pay for it, need no invitation to subscribe. So we 
conclude that all from whom we have not heard at all are not 
interested, and shall discontinue sending it. To all such we say 
God bless you— Farewell. 



R69 : page 6 



Extracts from a Letter. 



We make a few extracts from the letter of a friend. They are 
suggestive, and we hope that others may be profited by them as 
we have been. 

J. H. P. 

1 . "If a man wished to bestow a title of honor and entail an 
inheritance on a slave, would he not first make him free? How 
could a single soul be converted, if not first counted alive in 
God's sight? 'Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, 
and Christ shall give thee light.' Our freedom, so that we may 
choose eternal life, is based on Christ's death. " 

2. "He that hath the bride is the bridegroom. " "If Christ could in 
any sense be called a Bridegroom, without any bride, before the 
gospel 

R70 : page 6 

had even commenced, why can he not bear that title now, when 
he has come as Reaper? Why did the Jewish age belong in a 
special way to God? Although not 'called the Son until the 
incarnation' yet Christ as the 'word' created all things.' He is the 
Beginning as well as the End, the Author as well as the Finisher. 
Having created all things He sustains and possesses them. 'He 
came to His own and His own received Him not.' He came in the 
flesh to a fleshly typical bride. The marriage feast was prepared 
but those who were invited were unworthy. " Matt. 22. 

3. "I do not think any truth is vital, nor any error fatal which 
when believed and obeyed does not affect character. Those who 
understand the plans of God are called His friends, but the 
understanding does not make them so, it only proves their 
friendship. We permit others to become acquainted with our 
very life, not to make them our friends but because they are our 
friends. Christ says: 'Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I 
command you.' It seems strange that any can believe that 
righteousness is other than right doing. ['Little children let no 
man deceive you; he that doeth righteousness is righteous.']" 

4. "It is a relief to turn from the crooked and tangled reasonings 
of men, to the simple clear word of God. Its statements are full 
of heaven born power to those who receive them. I believe with 
all my heart that 'a little scripture is worth a good deal of 
reasoning,' and I am so glad man's reasoning can not alter God's 



word. I do not believe God ever put these latter day truths into 
one man's hands to dispense to the church. It would be too great 
an honor for the flesh to endure. Whoever makes such a claim, 
is in danger of becoming bigoted. But can we not afford to be 
calm, patient and charitable? 

Heaven help you, my brother, not to falter or grow weary. The 
work God does through us now will stand when controversies 
shall be forgotten. 

"Truth with diamond point shall be written on the hearts of a 
redeemed race. " 



page 6 

Thank You. 

Our request, of last issue met with a generous response for 
which we extend you our thanks. Very many of the papers 
returned were liberally underscored etc., and gave evidence of 
interest and careful and prayerful reading which was very 
interesting and pleasant for the editor to notice. Although not 
laboring for the "praise of men" nor "seeking praise one of 
another;" yet every such indication of your interest in the work 
we have so deeply at heart, gives us fresh strength and joy. 

The kind words received from many of you during the past six 
months have been duly appreciated also. Although we have not 
been able to answer you, they have afforded your editor pleasure 
and comfort, and that was doubtless your object. We seldom 
publish letters, of correspondents, because firstly, we have no 
room to spare, and secondly, they generally contain personal 
allusion to the writers too complimentary to admit of 
publication. We subjoin just two, which contain no personal 
allusions and which represent many received. 

Springfield, Mass. Dear Brother: I send you the paper you 
requested, but fear it will not be fit to send to your subscribers 
(The paper received was marked etc. , from first to last, I kept it 
as a memento.) I read them over and over, lend them, but never 
give them away for they are as choice to me as gold dust. As I 
read I mark and comment for my own benefit, so you see it is 
pretty well worn out and defaced. I cannot pay you until warm 
weather as my coal takes up all my spare money. But if you can, 
please continue it to me and may the Lord reward you. Your 
sister in Christ. 

V. N. J. 

Yes sister you will get your paper, as freely without as with the 
money. It is published expressly for such as you. 

A new reader writing from Vermont says: "A lady friend sent 
me two copies of ZION'S WATCH TOWER, which came from 
an unknown source. I then wrote to you and got more, also the 



little hymn book. I cannot express my gratitude to you for 
sending them to me. They are just what I wanted. It is meat and 
drink to read them. I want to introduce these papers into our 
village if I can. I think they are just what is needed all over the 
earth. As I am 83 years old and unable to canvas I have secured 
the services of a young lady to do so for me. Very truly yours." 

M. D. W. 

So it is, here and there, everywhere, some can say with the 
prophet "Thy word was found and I did eat it. " It is sweet unto 
my taste. 



R70 : page 6 

THE article entitled "The Holy Bible," crowded out of the 
December number, and referred to in the "Questions of 
Correspondents" last month, will be found in this number. 



R70 : page 7 

WILL THE CHURCH BE A MOTHER? 

We are in the habit of thinking and speaking of the church in 
this way. We have taught so because we supposed, felt sure that 
the Scripture was our authority for so doing. But upon 
investigation, we find that it has no Scriptural foundation. Let us 
look at the matter carefully and make sure what is truth, then 
cast away any ideas which we may have built upon this 
supposition. 

We had supposed it to be taught by the type of Eve and Rebecca 
and positively asserted by Paul in Gal. 4:26, "But Jerusalem 
which is above is free which is the mother of us all." Let us 
examine the positive statements first and afterwards the types. 
Casting your eye over the preceding verses and the third chapter, 
you will notice that in the Apostle's argument throughout, he 
endeavors to show clearly the difference between the law age 
just closed and the Gospel age just commenced. In 3:17, he 
contrasts the two agreements of God— the two covenants. He 
claims that God's first covenant- the Gospel-which was 
preached before (before the law,) to Abraham (Gal. 3:8,) and 
confirmed in Christ, could not be disannulled by the second 
covenant (the law) made with the fleshly seed. Then he argues 
[vs. 29,] that if we be Christ's, we are Abraham's seed and heirs 
according to the promise or first covenant and being children of 
this better covenant with the better promises, it is quite 
unnecessary to prove that we are related as children to the 
second covenant— the law— either by obedience to that law or by 
tracing of fleshly descent. In 4:21-31, he carries out this same 
line of reasoning, viz: That fleshly Israelites were children of 



God by the second covenant, while we become, by believing 
into Christ, children of the first covenant, and if we are children 
of that covenant, surely IT IS OUR MOTHER- "the mother of 
us all." 

Yes, Jesus our head, comes as the Son of this covenant and we 
in Him. 

Paul declares that God gave a type of these two Israels and two 
covenants. Abraham represents God. Hagar, the bond woman, 
represents the covenant of bondage- "the law." Sarah represents 
the first covenant, and as Isaac was the promised offspring of 
this wife, or free woman, so "we brethren, as Isaac was, are the 
children of this promise" or covenant. The fleshly children dwelt 
in the earthly city Jerusalem, still in bondage; but we who 
realize "the liberty of the sons of God," have "our citizenship in 
heaven" and in our new nature, "We are risen with him (Jesus) 
and seated together in heavenly places." They are the bond- 
servants of the law and of earth; we God's free heavenly 
children begotten of grace; they the children of the earthly 
kingdom, represented by Jerusalem; we of the heavenly 
kingdom, the "Jerusalem above. " 

We are sure then that Gal. 4:26 does not teach that the church 
will be a mother; are we not? 

Next examine with me the type of Eve: It is nowhere said that 
Eve is a type, but we think there are good reasons for 
considering her such, but we should remember that types have a 
time for ending as well as for beginning. Upon examination we 
feel assured that the type ceased where Eve was accepted by 
Adam as his wife. Paul tells us that Adam was a figure of him 
who was to come— Jesus— and we have seen how the death of 
Jesus was typified by the deep sleep which came upon Adam; 
how Jesus' pierced side, the price of our development as his 
bride, was typified by the open side of Adam from whence came 
Eve; how Adam, recognizing his wife as of his nature, bone of 
his bone, represents the fact that we shall be recognized by our 
Lord as of his nature-the spiritual. "He that is joined to the Lord 
is one spirit." But here the type ceases. We should not suppose 
because Eve became a mother that Christ's bride will become a 
mother, any more than that Eve sinned and caused Adam's fall, 
so the bride of Christ must sin and cause the fall of her Lord. 
Moreover, we are sure that the having of children by Eve was 
after she had ceased to be a type of the bride of Christ, because 
her children were born in sin and under the penalty of death. 
Should we force these children as a type it could only prove that 
the bride of Christ would become the mother of dead-born 
children. No, we see no reasonable ground for considering Eve 
as a type beyond the time of Union with Adam, representing our 
union or marriage with our Lord. In fact this seems to be as far 
into the future as God ever revealed either by word or type. 



But does some one say: "God said, be fruitful and multiply." 
Yes, we answer, this (Gen. 1:28.) was said to Adam as a natural 
man, not as a type of Christ. The description of the typical 
features occurs in another connection, Gen. 2:21. Read, compare 
and notice that there is no reference to offspring in the typical 
account. 

Again we have seen that Isaac was a type of Christ; that 
Abraham's sending the servant to get a bride for Isaac, typified 
our Father's sending the Holy Spirit to take out of the gentiles a 
people, or bride for his (Christ's) name. And 

R70 : page 8 

as the servant brought Rebecca from her father's house to Isaac 
and to Abraham's home, so we as the antitypical Rebecca leave 
our father's home [the world,] and go forth under the guidance 
of the spirit, to meet our Lord and to dwell in our Father's home. 
We, too, expect soon to meet our Isaac on the way that he 
himself may bring us into our new home. But here the type 
ceases. We had somehow come to imagine that Abraham 
blessed her and said: Be thou the mother of thousands of 
millions, but no, upon examination we find that this was the 
utterance of Rebecca's mother and brother, and was doubtless 
the customary greeting of their day. On the contrary, Rebecca 
was barren while a type. It was not until twenty years after this 
type had ended that she bore Jacob and Esau and this is quite 
another distinct type. Gen. 25:20,21,26. 

We conclude then that neither directly nor by type does God tell 
us that the church will after her union with Christ, beget children 
of her own nature. 



R71 : page 8 



Brother Geo. Storrs. 



Our brother, so long the editor of "The Bible Examiner" is 
known to most of our readers; also that he has been obliged by 
severe illness to discontinue his paper. While he no doubt feels, 
as we do, that he should like to continue the proclamation of the 
love of God for all His creatures, yet he has much reason to 
thank God for being privileged to spend so long a life and one so 
consecrated to the Master. 

Feeling that many of you, as well as I, would be glad to hear 
from our brother occasionally we offered him the use of a part 
of our space. The following from his daughter, will be of interest 
to you. 

BROOKLYN, Dec. 14th 1879. 

Bro. Russell: Your letter of the 9th, was duly received and read 
to father as he lay on his sick bed, exhausted and worn. He 



appreciates your Christian sympathy and kind suggestions, but 
as for his writing or inditing anything, he has not strength either 
of body or mind. He does not suffer so constantly, as he has 
done but he is much emaciated and helpless as a child and is so 
heavy, that we find it necessary to have a man to lift him. 

We should like a statement of his condition in ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER- Your offer is the first we have received, from any 
paper, and we thank you for it. He is very patient and 
uncomplaining, though, at times his sufferings are so great, that 
he longs for rest. Yesterday was his 83rd birthday, as I suppose 
you know. He sends much Christian love. Yours respectfully, 

H W. STORRS. 

We (without solicitation) suggest to any of our readers to 
whom the Lord has given bountifully as His stewards: that this 
is one opportunity (among many) of "ministering to the 
necessities of the saints." 



page 8 

Preaching. 

BRO. PATON purposes visiting several places in Indiana, 
Illinois and Iowa during January and February. Any living in 
that direction who desire meetings should address him at once. 
J. H. Paton, Almont, Michigan. 



R70 : page 8 

Our Living Savior. 

Though we have known Christ after the flesh and the memory 
of that "man of sorrows," "who bought us with his own precious 
blood" is sweet and sacred; yet: now we know him as our living 
Redeemer whom (because of obedience "unto death even the 
death of the cross.") "God hath highly exalted and given him a 
name that is above every name. "He is Lord of all. " Our living 
Savior. 



R71 : page 8 

Bible Class Department. 



The Holy Bible. 

The Bible commands our reverence and respect because of its 
author— God. We accept its teachings as authority and law on 
this account. How important it is then that we have the Word of 



God as pure and free as possible from human teaching. The 
channels through which it has come have not all been pure. Are 
we certain then, that the Bible as we now have it, is all inspired 
and holy? Let us glance at the New Testament. Perhaps all are 
aware that the New Testament was written originally by various 
apostles at different places and times. After their death, their 
letters, &c, came to be highly prized by the church as 
authorities on various subjects, and we have reason to believe 
that this was the design of the Spirit in causing the writings at 
first,-not merely to bless and instruct the portion of the church 
to whom directly addressed, but to have it contain elements of 
truth valuable, and intended for the whole church in all ages. It 
was not long before each church had a copy of all the sacred 
writings. These copies were all made with the pen for about 
fourteen hundred years (until printing was invented) and the 
process of copying and recopying gave rise to many small errors 
and omissions, as for instance the addition or omission of an 
and, or the, or but. Another source of trouble is the interpolation, 
or adding to the word of various words and sentences. A few of 
these, about four, bear marks of design and seem to have been 
added about the ninth century, probably to give a basis or 
support to some papal dogma, while the great majority seem to 
have arisen from accident. For instance, one copyist while 
writing the text of the word might add as a sort of parenthesis 
some thought which he might have as to its meaning, not 
designed to be understood as a part of the sacred writing, but 
merely to refresh his own mind when reading the same scripture 
again, much as we are in the habit of doing on the margin of our 
Bible. Yet another copyist using this MSS. as a guide would be 
apt to copy the previous writer's note into the body of the text, 
and so that uninspired clause would be handed down to future 
generations as inspired, and these have given much trouble. 

Seeing then the liability to error, it is only just to ourselves that 
we be careful that what we accept as our basis of faith and hope 
is the word of God and not the errors of men, since it is "all 
scripture given by inspiration of God, " that is "profitable for 
instruction in righteousness, etc." Our regular authorized version 
called "King James' Bible," was published A.D. 1511. It was not 
a translation from the original. It was not a direct translation 
from the original Greek, but a revision of several versions then 
in use as will appear from the following instructions given by 
King James to the forty-seven learned persons whom he 
appointed to revise translations then in use (1604)— "The 
Bishop's Bible (A.D. 1568) to be followed and altered as little as 
the original will permit. And these translations to be used when 
they agree better with the text than the Bishop's Bible-namely: 
"Tyndale's, (first Bible published 1526.) Coverdales, (1535) 
Matthews (1537) Whitchurch's and Geneva (1560.) These being 
all translations from the Vulgate Latin and not from the original 
Greek text, (only compared with it) it follows that our "King 



James' Bible" is only a revision of the Vulgate Latin. Says an 
able writer: "This translation was perhaps, the best that could be 
made at the time, but if it had not been published by kingly 
authority, it would not now be venerated by English and 
American Protestants as though it had come direct from God. " 
At the time of the revision of "King James' Bible," the 
translators had the advantage of some eight Greek MSS. and 
none of these were of earlier date than the tenth century. Who 
will say how many errors large and small crept into the text 
during that thousand years? It is claimed that the errors may be 
numbered by thousands, mostly small and insignificant, but 
some of importance and weight. 

Few perhaps are aware of the great advantages possessed by 
translators of the present day. Between 600 and 700 Greek MSS. 
are now known, some of which are quite ancient. Two of them, 
the "Sinaitic" and "Vatican No. 1209," dating about the year 
A.D. 350. What an advantage in our favor above every other 
age, for obtaining the pure word of God. Truly the word of God 
is being fulfilled, "In the time of the end ...knowledge shall be 
increased. Not merely scientific and mechanical knowledge has 
increased but also knowledge and understanding of what is the 
word of God. The Sinaitic MSS. the most valuable of all was 
only recently found and was published in 1870. 

If not governed by prejudice and preconceived opinions we 
should improve all the opportunities offered to grow in the 
knowledge of the truth, remembering that it is not error but truth 
which sanctifies. Truly 

We are living; we are dwelling, 
In a grand and awful time. 
In an age on ages telling, 
To be living is sublime. " 

WHAT HELPS CAN WE OBTAIN 

which would give us a more clear understanding of what is the 
true and inspired text, you ask. 

I answer: There are three which I can commend, all of which I 
make use of and receive help from, viz: The New Testament 
(regular authorized version) with foot notes of different readings 
by the three oldest MSS. -"Sinaitic," "Vatican No. 1209," and 
"Alexandrine "-the latter written about A.D. 450. (From the 
Vatican MSS. are missing the epistles to Timothy, Titus and 
Philemon and Heb., from 9:14 to close and also the book of 
Revelation.) This work, known as "Tischendorf s New 
Testament," is to me very valuable. 

Second: The "Emphatic Diaglott," a work upon which a great 
deal of time and care have been bestowed by its author Benj. 
Wilson. We value it highly. It contains the Greek text of the 
N.T. according to Dr. Griesbach and interlined with it a literal 



word-for-word translation— The corresponding English being 
placed directly under the Greek word. Together with this it 
contains a new version for general reading based upon the labors 
of many learned critics. In the form of foot notes, it gives the 
different readings of the Vatican MSS. No. 1209, as far as it 
goes, after which Vatican MSS. 1 160 (of the seventh century) 
884 pp. 

Third: "The American Bible Union" translation of the N.T.-a 
revision of the oldest translations compared with ancient MSS. 
It is very useful, giving a good clear rendering which is usually 
in harmony with the others above mentioned, though not so 
critical. It would be of little advantage to any who possess the 
Emphatic Diaglott. 

We have corresponded with the publishers of the above named 
works, and are able to announce that we can furnish them to our 
readers at wholesale prices— postage added, viz: 

Emphatic Diaglott" cloth, (price $4.00) for $2.70 
Emphatic Diaglott finer binding (5.00) 3.35 

"Tischendorf" N.T cloth, (price 1.00) .75 

A Bible Union N.T. (1.00) .65 

pocket edition (1 .00) .75 

If you wish any of these books we shall take pleasure in 
furnishing them to you at these prices. 



R72 : page 1 

VOL. I. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., FEBRUARY, 1880. 

NO. 8. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KErrH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
H. B. RICE, . . . W. OAKLAND, CAL. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R72 : page 1 



"THE LAW SHADOWS." 

The numerous sacrifices and observances of the Mosaic Law as 
recorded in the first five books of our Bible were given in 
minute detail and observed with scrupulous exactness; not 
because there was really any good in them, "for by the deeds of 
the law shall no flesh be justified in God's sight," and "the blood 
of bulls and goats could never take away sin," but these were 
used as pictures or shadows of realities which were future. (Heb. 
1:10) The amount of reliance which can be placed in the 
accuracy of these pictures can be judged from the strictness with 
which the Jews were obliged to obey them, and the severe 
penalties (generally death) administered in case of violation; and 
also from the words of our Lord; "One jot or one tittle shall in 
no wise pass from the Law until all be fulfilled" (Matt. 5:18). 

This being true, how anxious should we be to closely read the 
meaning of these pictures which required years for their 
execution, and which shadow forth minutely all the various 
features of the work of at-one-ment between God and all 
sinners. 

It is not all one picture but there are quite a number. We find 
them, so to speak, all grouped together. There are usually three 
or four pictures to each group, related to each other as being 
views of the same subject from various standpoints of 
observation; and then all the various groups of subjects are 
related to each other, and when all are properly arranged before 
our mental vision, each shows some special feature of the work 
of atonement and each adds value to the other. But why the 
mixture- why not told in plain words that all might understand? 
For the same reason has the spirit chosen to cover and hide 
beauties of truth under these types that he has in the book of 
Revelation and elsewhere hidden truth under symbols, i.e., that 
it might be known only as it becomes due, and then only to 
those "to whom it is given to know the mysteries of the 
kingdom, but to those that are without (not disciples) all these 
things are spoken in parables" and symbols and types. Luke 
8:10. Let us, asking wisdom of Him who giveth liberally, 
endeavor to arrange before our minds some of these pictures and 
try to drink in their true meaning and thereby be refreshed. 

Anointing the High-Priest 

This, under the "Law," was the ceremony for the installation to 
God's service as high-priest. The form is described in Exod. 29 
and Lev. 8. Aaron was anointed to his office with a peculiar oil 
not used on any one except the high-priest, and not lawful for 
any to have or to make under penalty of death. Exod. 30:25-32. 
This doubtless typified the Holy Spirit. 

For this service Aaron was washed and attired in the holy 
garments of "glory and of beauty." Exod. 28. Then the anointing 



oil was poured upon his head. Thus was Jesus, our High-Priest, 
robed and anointed. He needed not the washing as did the type, 
for he was "holy, harmless, undefiled." The linen "coat" 
represents him as pure and righteous; the girdle is the symbol of 
a servant; the linen girdle showing him to be a "righteous 
servant. " The robe of blue of one piece shows his heavenly 
nature (blue is the color of the peaceful heavens). The Ephod, 
made of two separate pieces, suspended the one before and the 
other behind him by two golden clasps which rested upon his 
shoulders, representing, we think, the two great covenants, the 
front one the Abrahamic and the back one the "new" covenant. 
These, though separate and distinct, are both seen to be 
dependent on him for their support and accomplishment. (It 
should be remembered that we are in him heirs of glory, not 
under the "new covenant," which is still future, but in the 
"Abrahamic covenant.") They were made of "gold, blue, purple, 
scarlet and fine twined linen," representing the blessings 
contained in those covenants: gold -spiritual blessings; blue- 
heavenly peace; purple— royalty of earth; scarlet— the 
unchangeable character of the covenant (scarlet was regarded as 
the most enduring of all colors); and linen- that righteousness 
was one of the conditions. As there was "none righteous" but 
Jesus, humanity would have failed to be benefited by these 
glorious covenants had not God "laid help upon one who was 
mighty." Both covenants would have fallen to the ground had 
not the golden clasp given them a resting on him. 

There was a "curious girdle" of the same materials as the ephod, 
which bound these two pieces (covenants) to him around the 
waist. This designates him a servant of a "curious" or peculiar 
kind; a servant combining the various qualities expressed by the 
gold, blue, purple, scarlet and linen. Yes, he was the Royal 
servant the "messenger (servant) of the covenant." 

Over the front part of the ephod was the breastplate; It was 
suspended by a golden chain from the gold clasp of his 
shoulders and was fastened to the ephod below by a lacer 
through golden rings-this fastening being so concealed 
underneath, that to the observer it might appear to be part of the 
ephod. This breastplate represents beautifully The Mosaic Law. 
It is not a part of the Abrahamic covenant "It was added. " Gal. 
3:18. As the Jew regarded them, not seeing the hidden 
connection, the covenant to Abraham and "the law which was 
430 years after" were all one. But Paul shows that God 
according to the covenant intended to justify all in his "seed." 
The Law emblem, was one of the most beautiful of the High 
Priests garments, made of the same materials as the ephod. It 
had in it, set in gold, twelve precious jewels, in which were 
engraved the names of the twelve tribes. It was bound on his 
heart, indicating that he was able to carry the Law as a covering 
of his inmost affections and that as a breastplate of 
righteousness," it covered him. "The Law of his God was in his 



heart." Psa. 37:31. That which condemned all others was his 
pleasure, "I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea thy law is 
within my heart." Psa. 40:8. 

This breastplate was two spans long and one wide folded in the 
middle so it really was a span long and a span wide double. The 
size- a span indicating that the law was the full measure of a 
perfect man— his ability. Jesus was the only perfect man who 
ever kept "The Law." Being double, of the same size and same 
measure represents the Jewish and Gospel ages. Fastened at the 
fold or center to the golden clasps illustrates how his cross-his 
death— was the dividing point and how we are "justified in him 
from all things." So that borne by him we are in God's sight 
justified. It illustrates too what we have found frequently 
elsewhere taught, viz: That the two ages are of equal size and 
equal measure. " The Jewish, a perfect type or picture of this age. 

The breastplate was studded with jewels set in gold 
representative of the true Israel. "They shall be mine saith the 
Lord in the day that I come to make up my Jewels." Thus 
fastened in gold— imbedded spiritually in Jesus we his jewels, 
have "The righteousness of the Law fulfilled in us." Rom. 8:4. 
Aaron as he stood forth clothed in these "garments of beauty and 
glory" was a beautiful figure of our High-Priest who appeared 
among men clothed by the Father with power and authority, as 
his representative to carry out his covenant promises. 

As he stood there, beside him stood the animals for sacrifice 
showing that the sacrifices were as much a part of God's pre- 
arranged plan as the covenants or any other feature. He was 
anointed with oil as Jesus was "Anointed with the oil of 
gladness above his fellows." "He giveth not the spirit by 
measure unto him. " John saw and bore record that Our 

R72 : page 2 

High-Priest was thus anointed. (John 1:32, Luke 4:1.) The holy 
oil was poured upon the head but "ran down even to the skirts of 
his garments." (Psa. 133:2.)-thus representing how we, the 
members of his body, are all to be partakers of the same 
anointing after our head. This oil began to reach the body on the 
day of Pentecost and flows on down the ages anointing all who 
are truly his- covered by his robes. 

The sons of Aaron-"his house" represents us-"whose house are 
we"— as they were washed and clothed in a linen coat and 
girdled, we are taught that if we be of his house we are justified 
thereby and reckoned of God-Righteous. They had bonnets 
while Aaron had none, (He wore a mitre on his forehead and a 
gold crown inscribed "Holiness to the Lord. ") Their heads were 
covered to illustrate that they were not the head, but "under 
authority; " illustrating how God gave Christ "to be the head over 
all things to the church which is his body." 1 Cor. 1:22 and 4:15. 



They were girdled showing that we are servants under him and 
reckoned as anointed in him. 

Aaron as he stood robed and anointed represented the entire 
church, head and body-Jesus and his church. "The seed" in 
whom "all the families of the Earth shall be blessed." They are 
covered with the covenants and authority of their position and 
anointed for their work. But remember, -the anointing oil must 
flow down and cover every member of the body and this 
requires the entire gospel age for its accomplishment. 



R73 : page 2 

Consecrating the Priests. 

This work under the Law (Lev. 8:14-35.) was typical of a work 
done for and by our High Priest and those who are members of 
his body or family. It illustrates our entire consecration-how 
Jesus was obedient, even unto death and how all who are his 
must be crucified with him. 

The bullock for the sin offering was brought "and Aaron and his 
sons laid their hands upon the head" of it. Thus saying, this 
sacrifice represents us. From that moment, all that happened to 
the bullock— represents what was to be done to Jesus, and his 
body-the church. The bullock is delivered up to "the Law" - 
(represented by Moses) to meet its demands. To thus meet the 
demands of the law it must be slain. "And Moses slew it." Then 
he applies the blood to the horns of the altar. The "finger" of the 
"Law" thus pointed out that the altar of earthly sacrifices was 
acceptable to God by reason of the shed blood (the life given), 
and that all who realize the power of the altar (horns are 
symbols of power), must recognize first the blood which 
sanctified it. 

The blood poured at the bottom of the altar doubtless represents 
that through his blood spilt, (life given) even the Earth was 
purchased back from the curse which sin brought upon it. (See 
Eph 1:14. "Unto the redemption of the purchased possession.") 

And Moses took the bullock, his hide, flesh, &c, and burnt them 
with fire without the Camp. (Ver. 17.) Thus Jesus freely gave 
himself up and submitted to entire destruction of the flesh. 
Though his flesh was holy, harmless, undefiled, yet he was 
"made a sin offering on our behalf," (2 Cor. 5:21. "Diaglott") 
and his flesh suffered the destruction, which otherwise would 
have come upon all men. And we, if we would be indeed 
members of his body must share with him the ignominy. 

But while the flesh, &c, was destroyed for sin, God accepts of, 
first, the blood (life), and second, parts of the inward life- 
producing organism and the fat, representative of love. In the 



sacrifice God recognizes the love that prompts the sacrifice and 
though the law took a part and burnt it, yet it must offer the 
balance as unto the Lord. It shows too that love and obedience to 
God were the motives that prompted the sacrifice "Lo, I come to 
do thy will O God, I delight to do thy will O my God." 

There are two Rams. These both represent as did the bullock, 
Christ Jesus and his body, the Church, but are different pictures 
and call our attention to other features of the same sacrifice. 

First as a burnt offering: Aaron and his sons laid their hands 
upon its head; it represents them. It is killed, its blood sprinkles 
the altar, and Moses "cut the ram into pieces, and washed the 
inwards and legs in water," and "burnt the head and the pieces 
and the fat. " Thus Jesus and his church-head and body are 
being presented during the entire Gospel Age before God on the 
altar -the head was laid there first, and since all who are "dead 
with him," (Col. 2:20, and 2 Tim. 2:2) are "cleaned by the 
washing of water through the word," and are reckoned as with 
him on the altar before God; its being burnt on the altar shows 
how God accepts this "as a sweet smelling savor" or perfume. 

The second ram— "of consecration" —shows what effect the 
sacrifice will have upon us, as the first showed how God 
received it. Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon its head-it 
represented them. And Moses slew it, and took its blood- 
(consecrated life) and put it upon each separately-(Consecration 
is an individual work— we must each stand forth and be 
consecrated to God.) And he put it upon the tip of the right ear, 
thumb of right hand and great toe of right foot. Thus by our 
consecration, we are enabled to have the "hearing of faith" and 
appreciate God's promises as none but the consecrated can. Our 
hands are consecrated so that whatsoever our hands find to do, 
we do it with our might right as unto the Lord. Our feet are 
consecrated so that henceforth we "walk not as other gentiles," 
but "walk in newness of life," "walk in the light," and even "as 
ye received Christ, so walk in him. " 

The choice portions of the ram, inwards and fat, representing 
our best powers and all our inward and outward (fat) affections, 
are taken in our hands, and waved, passed to and fro, before the 
Lord, representing the fact that a consecrated offering is not 
given the Lord for the moment, or day, or year, but continually 
we keep our affections and powers uplifted before our Father 
never ceasing until accepted of him as having finished our 
course. And Moses took them off their hands, God's acceptance 
being shown by fire. Fat probably typifies Love. When the love 
of our inmost being is laid upon the altar, it helps to increase the 
fire of God's acceptance. The more love (fat) there is connected 
with our consecration to God, the more quickly will it be 
accepted by Him as entire consecration. 



Upon this wave offering, while in their hands, was laid three 
cakes from a basketful which they were to eat (representative of 
all their bread.) It was necessary that these three- the 
unleavened cake, the cake mingled with oil, and the wafer made 
of flour and honey and anointed with oil-should be upon and 
thus recognized as rendering acceptable our offering. By these 
we acknowledge Christ, as we present ourselves to the Father; 
by the first we acknowledge the purity (no leaven) of "The man, 
Christ Jesus." The second cake mingled with oil shows him as 
our High-priest, "filled with the Spirit" (oil). The third wafer 
shows our appreciation of Him as our Glorified Lord. (Wafer 
made of fine flour mingled with honey, sweets of paradise.) 

These acknowledgments of Him are necessary to the acceptance 
of our consecration. 

And upon him as our heavenly food —manna we his priests feed 
during the gospel age. The cakes were only warmed but not 
burned- living bread, "of which a man may eat." (God never 
allowed honey to be used in sacrifice. [Lev. 2:2] There was no 
leaven in any of these cakes- "He knew no sin.") 

The anointing oil mingled with the blood of consecration was 
sprinkled over them [Ver. 30], showing how we may know that 
our consecration is accepted. 1 John 5:8, says: "There are three 
that bear record [witness] : the spirit and the water and the blood, 
and these three agree in one" [testimony]. And here are the three 
in the type bearing harmonious testimony that these consecrated 
ones are accepted in the beloved. Water is the symbol of the 
"word" ["washing of water by the word."] And in the type 
Moses takes the place of water as representing "The Law," the 
oil representing The Spirit, and the blood representing "the price 
of our peace. So through the word's testimony the blood is 
applied and with it comes the Spirit-sealing us sons of God and 
joint heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord. 

The boiling [Ver. 31] of the flesh of consecration was no part of 
the sacrifice, it was merely the preparing of the portion which 
they ate. It was all to be disposed of [Ver. 32] showing how we 
are entirely consecrated and none of our time or powers wasted- 
-all used as consecrated. 

The seven days of consecration [Ver. 33 and 35,] shows again 
that we are consecrated to God's service, not a part of our time 
only, but all of it, for seven is the complete number in scripture 
and signifies all or the whole of whatever it is applied to ("Seven 
Seals," "Trumpets," "Plagues," "Stars," &c.) Vs. 36 shows the 
completion of the work of consecration. 

There never was, perhaps, a time when it was more necessary 
than the present, for seeing to it that we "be dead with him," and 
our every ability waved before Him that he may accept and 
make use of our talents to His glory. Especially is it of interest 
to us to examine if it be true (as we believe) that very soon all 



the members of the body will be accepted with the head— a sweet 
savor, and all the members be consecrated and the work 
finished. And if we fail to be among the priests now during the 
time of consecration, we cannot expect to be one with them 
when they begin their service for the people in the "ages to 
come"— when these same Priests (now despised of men but a 
"sweet savor to God.") shall have the title of King added, and 
with their head-Jesus, rule and bless all nations. Do you wish to 
be amongst those who shall sing to the praise of our great High 
Priest? "Thou hast made us unto our God Kings and Priests and 
we shall reign on the Earth. " If so, be fully consecrated now, for 
"If we suffer with him we shall also reign with him. " 2 Tim. 
2:12. 



R73 : page 2 

A Plain Way of Stating It. 

Here is a sentiment from a man of God, who was never thought 
to be either fanatical or heterodoxical: "Any man who does not 
desire Christian perfection, and who does not constantly make it 
his aim to attain it, may set it down as demonstrably certain that 
he has no true religion. " 

These are the words of Albert Barnes. We hardly know of any 
more emphatic or radical statement concerning Christian 
perfection than this. Had it come from some modern preacher of 
holiness, or "high priest of sanctification," it would have been 
thought extremely ultra, and inexcusably uncharitable. 



R74 : page 3 



THE SCULPTOR. 

I saw a sculptor all intent 
Upon his marble white, 
And all his energies were bent 
To mould it day and night. 

With mallet hard, and tools of strength, 
And many strokes severe, 
The block was made to feel at length 
That skillful hands were near. 

And I beheld a child look on, 
And gaze with wondering eye; 
She saw the splinters, one by one, 
In all directions fly: 



The doubts that tilled that simple mind 
Were hard to understand, 
Like curious things that children find 
Upon the ocean's strand. 

The marble chips, at every stroke, 
Were scattered one by one, 
When childish doubt broke out and spoke, 
"Father, why waste the stone?" 

"It is," he said, in accents mild, 
"By strokes and heavy blows, 
That as the marble wastes, my child, 
The more the statue grows." 



—Selected. 



R74 : page 3 



Province of Faith. 



The province of faith is to apprehend truth. Truth is 
independent; error is a perversion of truth. To believe a lie, 
never makes it true, but is a fraud on one's self. To believe a 
truth, does not make it true; to disbelieve it, cannot destroy it. It 
is independent of us, but we are dependent on it. 

Truth is the proper food of man (Matt. 4:4.), and a large share of 
it must be received by faith, whether it pertains to the past, 
present or future. Thus it is true that we must live by faith. Faith 
is to truth, as eating is to bread. Without eating, man will die; 
but if he would have good health, he must do more than eat. 
Exercise is essential to life. So while we live by faith, it is not by 
faith alone. All faith and no work, will kill spiritually, as truly as 
all eating and no work will kill naturally. We greatly value faith, 
"For without it, it is impossible to please God; he that cometh to 
God must believe that he is, and that he is the re warder of them 
that diligently seek Him," (Heb. 11:6.) We please God when we 
obey him, and by this means we form a character like His own. 
In an important sense it is the Christian's life-work to come to 
God, and success is to the diligent seeker. He is revealed in one 
sense in the statements of His word, but he is revealed to the 
heart, when his statements are understood, and the spirit of 
obedience is essential to understanding. (John 7:17.) We are to 
grow in grace and in knowledge. 

Faith is fundamental; it is the basis of character and life, and 
also of hope. The death and resurrection of Christ are primary 
facts of the gospel, and, rightly understood, are a key to the plan 
of salvation. He was put to death in the flesh and quickened by 
the Spirit into a new and immortal life. The cross was to him the 
turning point between the natural and the spiritual. It was thus 



the key of hope for the world. When He died He met man's legal 
necessities, or removed all legal encumbrances. He destroyed 
the enmity between the world and God's law, which enmity was 
represented in the typical dispensation by the law of carnal 
ordinances. That law was the "middle wall" between Jew and 
Gentile-a typical distinction which is not recognized under the 
gospel. As soon as it is out of the way, the Jew and Gentile are 
alike before God, and both are reconciled to God by the cross. 
(Eph. 2:16.) The death of Christ thus met the legal claim on 
universal man, and secured his deliverance from the legal curse, 
which was death. Christ arose a conqueror, leading captivity 
captive. He brought life and immortality to light, as He had also 
made both possible for man. When He rose, it was the dawn of 
light on our dark world, the key of hope, a glimpse of 
immortality. These great facts of the past we receive by faith, 
and the past and the future are linked together. What has been 
done for Jesus is God's promise unto us. "He that raised up the 
Lord Jesus shall raise up us also, by Jesus." (2 Cor. 4:14.) He 
has given him the key— the power over death, and in addition, 
"the power of an endless life." (Heb. 7:16.) 

Faith is thus shown to be the foundation of hope, and hope 
maketh not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in 
our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given unto us." (Rom. 
5:5.) We can thus see the relation of faith, hope and love; "the 
greatest of these is love. " Without faith, neither hope or love 
would be possible; but love, by which faith now works, will 
continue when faith is ended in sight, and hope has been 
realized. Faith and hope are temporal, but love is eternal. Faith 
as a foundation is essential, but without love as a working 
power, a faith that could even remove mountains is worthless. (1 
Cor. 13:2.) 

"Through faith we understand that the ages (worlds) were 
framed by the word of God." These and "all things were made 
by Him (Christ) and for Him. " All that God has done is in 
reference to the plan of the ages, of which, as we have seen, the 
death and resurrection of Christ is the key. So by faith we grasp 
the fullness of Christ in the work of the ages, which is a glorious 
expression of the infinite wisdom, power and love. "Faith is the 
substance (basis) of things hoped for; the evidence of things 
unseen." Faith deals with the future and with the invisible. The 
future is our hope, our reward; the invisible is our strength for 
the work of life. It makes the invisible as if it were visible, and 
the future as if it were present. We are enabled to "look not at 
the things which are seen, but at the unseen." (2 Cor. 4:18.) 
Faith explains this paradox, and by the presence of the invisible, 
strengthens us to bear the afflictions of this life, which are but 
for a moment, and enables us to lay hold upon the eternal. There 
are given us in the Bible and also in the Christian's experience, 
many illustrations of the action of faith in reference to the 
unseen, present and future. The examples of faith given in the 



eleventh of Hebrews show the combination. They acted because 
they believed in the invisible God, and because they looked 
forward for the fulfillment of his word. They believed "that God 
is, and that He is the rewarder." Faith works; work secures 
reward. We observe that God did not say to the ancients, 
"believe." but he gave them something to do; and yet their 
obedience was the best possible evidence that they did believe, 
and their faith was approved. By faith Abel offered the sacrifice, 
which was valuable because it pointed forward to the sacrifice 
of Christ, for which his body was prepared. 

Enoch walked with God; he did not stand still, but walked; 
grasping by faith the presence and companionship of the 
invisible God, and was rewarded by translation, "that he should 
not see death. " Abraham obeyed God, on account of his faith, 
both in going out to the unknown land, and in the offering of his 
son Isaac. In both cases he grasped the future, seeing Christ and 
the heavenly country. (John 8:56 and Heb. 11:16.) The Lord's 
appearing to Abraham and others in human form doubtless 
illustrated the presence of the invisible. 

Moses refused royal honor in the court of Pharaoh, choosing to 
suffer affliction; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches 
than the treasures of Egypt; for he had respect unto the reward, 
and endured as seeing Him who is invisible. (Heb. 11:23-27.) 

The unseen world is the source of wisdom, strength and comfort 
to the pilgrims as disciples, as soldiers and as afflicted ones. The 
ministration of angels, under the all-wise and loving care of our 
Lord, is a great revealed truth, and full of comfort. 

We do not believe in the ministration of departed human spirits, 
but regard that idea as a perversion of the Bible teaching. The 
angels are not disembodied men. Man, when created, was "made 
a little lower than the angels." The angels rule in this world; "but 
unto the angels hath He not put in subjection the world to 
come.. .but what is man that thou art mindful of him?" "Thou 
hast put all things in subjection under his feet." (Heb. 2:5-8.) If 
angels are disembodied men, the above statement cannot be true, 
for in such a case the "world to come" would, as well as the 
present, be subject to angels. While we believe Paul, then we 
must discard the ministration of human spirits. But angelic 
ministration is a great and important fact in God's plan for the 
development of the ruling element of the future world. It 
doubtless deserves more 

R75 : page 3 

implicit faith than it often receives. When we are permitted from 
the standpoint of future glory to look back, we may see how 
much more fully they served us than we realized. In hours of 
danger and affliction their services are needed, and freely 
tendered. Their services might be not only more fully realized, 
but more common, were they expected. Unbelief, self- 



confidence and self -protection by foul means, doubtless grieve 
our angels, "which do always behold the face of our Father in 
heaven." (Matt. 18:10.) We cannot doubt that in hours of deep 
affliction, comfort and strength are often experienced, coming 
from the invisible, though not expected and its source not fully 
acknowledged. Our Savior himself in his earth life needed and 
received the help of angels. In His mental agony, in view of the 
coming ordeal, while he was in the garden praying that if it were 
possible the cup might pass from him, and sweating, as it were, 
great drops of blood, "there appeared an angel unto Him from 
heaven, strengthening Him." (Luke 22:43.) It was not possible 
for the cup to pass. He must drink it to the very dregs. His life 
was needed, but it was not enough; He must be obedient unto 
death, even the death of the cross," and he obeyed. (Phil. 2:8.) 
He could not escape, but He could receive strength to endure; 
and it seems that as soon as His help was withdrawn, He died. 
His death, not the pain He endured, met the legal necessities of 
the race. "The wages of sin is death. " Many followers of Christ 
have found help in time of need by coming to the throne of 
grace. He who suffered and was supported by angels is now 
their Lord, and, as His servants, they now minister to the heirs of 
salvation. (Heb. 1:14.) 

The importance of faith cannot be over-estimated, unless other 
things of importance are in our estimate crowded out. The past, 
present and future, we grasp by faith; we work by faith; we live 
by faith; we walk by faith; we endure by faith, as seeing the 
invisible; and waiting for our reward, are carried forward, so 
that all we expect to realize in the eternal life is now, by faith, 
possessed and enjoyed. 



Thanks be to God for the earnest of our inheritance. 



J. H P. 



R76 : page 3 

The ascending grade of the ages is obvious, each having better 
secular and spiritual facilities than its predecessors. And- 
strange infatuation —each has been jealous of the next to come, 
insisting that it had exhausted infinite mercy, grace and skill. 
What a lift forward the brief visit of Messiah gave the world. 
Though so humble, what fertility and power of growth in his 
gospel, infusing inconceivable vigor in every field of human 
enterprise and all under hostile gentile authority. What may be 
expected in the next age, when government shall co-operate 
with grace? The cross and the crown; Jesus condemned as a 
felon, mocked, spit upon, and crucified, then crowned and 
adored King of all the earth, suggest the contrast.— Selected. 



R75 : page 4 



The Cross of Christ. 

In the cross of Christ I glory, 
Towering o'er the wrecks of time; 
All the light of sacred story, 
Gathers round its head sublime. 

The cross as the representative of the death of Christ and plan 
of redemption, has always been to the Christian the center of 
attraction, and to glory in the cross the chief mark of the 
Christian's joy. The estimate in which it has been held by men in 
general has marked this line between the Church and the world; 
so that while the Church clings to it as the ground of all its 
hopes, it has been to the world the stumblingstone or the butt of 
contempt. What is precious in the sight of God and the hearts of 
His chosen, is foolishness to men in general. 1 Cor. 1:22-31. 

[Because some of the children of God have, under peculiar 
influences, and for a time, undervalued the cross, it does not 
change this general principle.] 

The value of the cross as the center of interest, the basis of hope 
and the key of truth is beautifully illustrated by the two equal 
cherubims, looking inward to the Mercy Seat, where God's 
presence in mercy appeared; representing, as they do, the 
equality of the Jewish and Gospel dispensations, between which 
at the "Fullness of time" our Lord came, and, meeting the claims 
of both, as the great antitypical Offering, was slain for us. Under 
the former dispensation those who understood the typical 
offerings, looked forward to the cross, and in the gospel 
dispensation we, by faith inspired by the Spirit and aided by the 
simple ordinances of the gospel, look back to the same central 
point. There, at the cross, the Church, old and new, meet by 
faith, and, bowing before Christ, our "Mercy Seat," witness the 
manifestation of the infinite mercy; for in Christ as the "Mercy 
Seat," God meets with man, and there they taste the sweets of 
grace and begin to "rejoice in hope of the glory of God." 

To remove from the Bible, if it were possible, the cross of 
Christ, and its relative teachings would virtually destroy it. He is 
the golden thread extending through it as a web from end to end, 
giving it strength, beauty and its real worth. Without him it 
would be an uninteresting arrangement of words, an empty case, 
a comb without the honey, a shell without the kernel, or the 
body without the life; and we, poor, sinful, dying men would 
pass on without one ray of light or hope to the future, dark and 
all unknown; and the cross is the center of interest and hope, 
around which, as bees around the honey, God's people have 
always clustered, drawing from it their joy, strength and life. 
The cross is also the key of truth in all that pertains to man, his 
nature, his life, and his relation to God. It is the basis of the 
atonement, the resurrection and restitution, and, while it does 
not of itself secure eternal life to any, it makes that life possible 



to all. God, in the gospel, provides for man's necessities, both as 
a sinner and a mortal. Because He was mortal, sin killed him, 
and "so death passed upon all men." Rom. 5:12. Mankind being 
dead (so counted even before execution), one died for all. 2 Cor. 
5:14. The man Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom for all. 1 Tim. 
2:5,6, and so receives the right and power to deliver the 
captives. Heb. 2:14,15. If the gospel did not provide for man's 
necessities, it would not be what the angels announced: "Glad 
tidings of great joy, which shall be unto all people." "Testified in 
due time. " 

As a treasure-house containing all we need— resurrection from 
death, pardon for sin, and immortality for our mortality-the 
gospel becomes a glorious expression of the Father's love. The 
wisdom, power and love of God are all engaged for man's 
salvation, and all find expression in the gospel of Christ, the 
center of which is the cross. We do not take the ground that a 
perfect knowledge of the relation the cross sustains to the other 
elements of the gospel is necessary in order to have a share in 
the benefits of the atoning sacrifice. The primary benefits are 
universal and unconditional, as was the curse through Adam. 
"As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." It 
is doubtful, too, if one in ten of the saints of God have even 
understood that much, and yet they have secured and enjoyed a 
share in the great and special salvation, by the impartation of the 
Holy Spirit, the salvation which the atonement makes possible 
for all. It is not necessary to understand the philosophy of 
atonement in order to be reconciled to God, any more than it is 
necessary to understand the science of astronomy in order to 
enjoy the benefit of the light of the sun. It is, however, the 
privilege of a child of God to learn all he can of what the Father 
has revealed. And we freely take the ground that no theory of 
man's nature, loss in Adam, restitution, hope and destiny, can be 
true, that ignores or belittles the doctrine of the cross. Such 
theories dishonor Christ, though not always purposely, and by 
casting into the shade certain comforting truths of God's great 
plan, they certainly hide many rays of Father's love, and 
therefore greatly mar the enjoyment of the Christian's life. As 
God has revealed nothing in vain, the more perfectly we can see 
the relation of His various truths, the better we will understand 
Him, and thus, by sympathy with Him, or rather fellowship of 
His Spirit, we shall be enabled to cultivate and grow up into the 
qualities of character most pleasing to Him, and which will best 
fit us for His purposes here and hereafter. 

The doctrine of the cross underlies the doctrine of atonement, or 
loss in Adam and gain in Christ, both being unconditional, and 
hence the price or ransom paid by the man Christ Jesus, must 
determine both the nature and extent of the loss to mankind by 
Adam. More than was needed would have been useless, and that 
God's wisdom would not give; less than was needed would not 
redeem, and God's love could not withhold. 



The darkness of the theological dogmas of the Church has 
doubtless for many reasons cast a mist over the simplicity of the 
teachings of the cross. Life was the nature and extent of the 
forfeit of Adam, and in him of all. "For the wages of sin is 
death. " "Dying thou shalt die, " was a process culminating in 
death. "Sin, when it is finished (not when it commences) 
bringeth forth death. " But what kind of death, natural or 
spiritual? we are asked. The mother church and nearly all, if not 
all, her daughters answer, spiritual death. The theological 
writings are full of such teachings. That is nothing new, and for 
some of us to accept it would be to take a long stride backward. 

But to answer the question, "What kind of life, " we resort to the 
Divine key-the cross, and ask, what kind of life did the "man 
Christ Jesus" lose? That must settle it, and the fog will clear 
away from all minds who will look at the facts. Mark, it is not, 
"what kind of life did the pre-existent Word lose (if He lost any) 
in becoming a man?" for it was the "man Christ Jesus" that gave 
His life a ransom for all. "He died for our sins." He took man's 
nature for the express purpose "that He, by the grace of God, 
should taste death for every man," "Even the death on the cross." 

This gives us clearly to understand that it was human life he 
gave as a 

R76 : page 4 

ransom. Hence it was the same kind of life that required 
redemption. It was not in Christ's case a necessity as in the case 
of a sinner, but by voluntary offering as a Redeemer. Spiritual 
death is a state of sin. "You hath he quickened who were dead in 
trespasses and sin. " But Christ was not a sinner, and could not 
therefore die a spiritual death. In his obedience lay the divine 
efficacy of the price. Sinners need conversion, but Christ did 
not, and "As in Adam all die so in Christ shall all be made alive, 
Christ the firstfruits" &c. 

So this passage can have no reference to conversion, or coming 
to the knowledge of the truth. 

This is evident also from the further statement, "They that are 
Christ's at his presence" [parousia] Christ's are not then counted 
but raised to immortality, hence this passage can have no 
reference to conversion, but is a positive declaration that all 
mankind will be restored to life by the Lord Jesus Christ. 

The ransom paid secures to Christ the power to raise the dead. 
Life restored is the proper basis of hope, the ground on which 
man must build, hence the cross is the basis of man's hope of 
glory. No wonder then that Paul should say: "God forbid that I 
should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

J. H P. 



R76 : page 4 

The Wedding Garment. 

The wedding garment is the end and object of Christian effort. 

If Christians are represented as running a race, it is that degree 
of swiftness which enables them to secure the prize, if, as 
fighting a battle, it is that ability which secures to them the 
victory. It is, in short, that preparation which renders them fit for 
the kingdom. 

Some teach that it is the creed, written or otherwise, the articles 
of faith to which men subscribe, that constitutes that covering. 
Hence the degree of purity of a man's belief would be the index 
to his fitness for the kingdom. But it is written, "Without 
holiness no man shall see the Lord. " Such teachers must then 
define holiness as a perfect theology. 

Others teach that the wedding garment is a character "without 
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing," such as God will build in us 
if we hold our hearts in obedience to Him. 

Both sides must agree that the wedding garment is 
righteousness. The Bible so defines it. Rev. 19:7-8. What then is 
righteousness? The word means a condition of being right. 
Humanity naturally is in a condition of being wrong, and 
because faith has power to change that condition and make them 
right, it is accounted for righteousness. Thus Abraham was 
justified by faith, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness. 
Although, perhaps, not blameless in character at the time, yet 
Abraham possessed that which would result in holiness, and 
God counted the work begun in him, as already finished. "To 
him that worketh not, but believeth in Him that justifieth the 
ungodly, his faith is counted to him for righteousness." Rom. 
4:5. That is, the seed sown is viewed in the light of its unfailing 
results, and the possessor is thus freed from guilt. 

Articles of belief differ from faith, In that faith describes a 
condition of heart as well as mind. The one may produce fruit; 
the other must. If truth be believed and obeyed, it becomes faith, 
and is therefore a means of obtaining righteousness. Truth 
sanctifies, Truth cleanses. It does not cleanse itself, but us. 
"Now ye are clean through the words I have spoken unto you," 
said Christ. Hence the cleansing of the church is not the 
cleansing of its theology, 

R76 : page 5 

but of its members by means, perhaps, of its theology. 

I think the statement not too broad, that the entire purpose of 
Revelation is to purify, elevate and establish the character of 
God's children. Truth is the great means used in the attainment 
of righteousness. The word of God is profitable... that the man 



of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good 
works. 2 Tim. 3:17. Thus holiness is still the object and must not 
be confounded with the means; for truth must be obeyed to 
make us righteous, and it is not the amount we believe, but the 
amount we obey that benefits us. Hence we cannot make a man's 
creed the index to his character, for God above can read the 
heart. 

Righteousness is Godliness, or God-likeness, and Christ has 
said, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father in heaven is 
perfect. " 

Christ came to illustrate to our bedimmed conscience the 
Father's perfection, and in Him is fulfilled all righteousness. 
Does not His life thus amply define and illustrate the subject? It 
gives us an idea of what Godliness is, of what God is, of His 
relations toward us and of what our relations are toward Him 
and toward our fellow-beings. Righteousness, however, is more 
than right doing. It is right being, which includes the other, and 
this is the wedding garment, for "to her it was granted that she 
should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white, for the fine 
linen is the righteousness of saints." 

L. A. A. 



R76 : page 5 

The Song of Moses and the Lamb 
Rev. 15. 

This scene is very evidently laid at the end of the gospel 
dispensation, as it is when the wrath of God is being completed, 
by the pouring out of the seven last plagues. Without discussing 
the merits of different views in regard to the Sea of Glass, as it 
were; and the condition of those who are said to stand on it; I 
would call attention briefly, to the song. 

Some think that by the song of Moses, is meant the song of 
deliverance, sung by the children of Israel, after crossing the 
Red Sea, in coming out of Egypt. But notice that the song is as 
here given. Does it not evidently refer to the harmonious 
teaching of Moses and Christ, as found in the scriptures; and 
those who have attained to the condition represented, having 
learned, they sing to, or teach others? The song, as given in the 
"Emphatic Diaglott," reads: "Great and wonderful are thy works, 
O Lord God, the omnipotent! Righteous and true are thy ways, 
O King of the nations." (Ethnon means nations; not saints, as in 
the authorized version.) 

Who shall not fear, O Lord, and glorify thy name since thou 
alone art bountiful? for all the nations shall come and worship in 
thy presence; because thy righteous acts were made manifest. 



The Greek word rendered judgments, in the fourth verse, by 
King James' translators, is not Krisis nor Krima, which are 
rightly rendered Judgment; but Di-Kaiomata, properly rendered, 
righteous acts. 

It occurs in Rev. 19:8. "The fine linen is, or represents the 
righteous acts of the saints. The force and beauty of the 
expression: For his righteous acts are made manifest, is seen, 
when we remember that the great mass of the gospel church, for 
centuries have taught, and the majority are teaching that the 
nations, except a comparatively few individuals, have been 
"turned into hell," in a condition of hopeless misery, without 
even having the gospel preached to them, giving them an 
opportunity to repent, and thus escape the awful doom. 

Such teaching makes God appear very unrighteous; and has 
driven the multitudes of those who have heard it away from 
God; and the Bible. Even if the sentence be eternal death, as 
many believe, still it has been without a knowledge of truth. But 
now many have learned, and many more will learn, and teach, 
the glorious song of Moses and Christ: That all nations shall 
come and worship in the presence of God; thus manifesting the 
righteousness of him: "Who so loved the world, that he gave his 
only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on him shall not 
perish, but have everlasting life." Before they can believe they 
must hear. Rom. 10. The billions who have died in ignorance 
must be made alive before they can hear; hence God will have 
all men to be saved made alive, and to come to a knowledge of 
the truth: For there is one mediator between God and men, the 
man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, to be 
testified in due time. 1 Tim. 2:4,6. 

B. W. K. 



R77 : page 5 



What is Perfect Love. 



"Perfect love is gentle and teachable, kind, and easy to be 
entreated. It enters the school of Christ, as a pupil, not as a 
master, realizing how much is yet to be learned, rather than how 
much has been attained. Perfect love shows us our ignorance 
and begets the inextinguishable desire to dissipate that darkness, 
and to enter the realm of real and reliable knowledge. If you find 
yourself growing wise above all your teachers, inclined to 
become dogmatic, to criticize your fellow disciples and set 
yourself up as a standard for the whole church, you have no little 
reason to fear that you are not controlled by the Spirit of God. 
Self- wisdom may easily assume the place of divine wisdom; and 
Satan may appear as an angel of light even in one who concerns 
himself with the most holy things. In no way are his ends more 



effectually secured than by inducing people to promote the 
subject of holiness by exceptional methods, and in an 
unteachable and arrogant spirit. " 



R77 : page 5 

The Gospel in the Light of Human Nature. 

"But God commendeth his love toward us, in that while we 
were yet sinners, Christ died for us." Rom. 5:8. 

That "God is love" and unchangeable we believe to be prime 
facts of the gospel; and that man alone is alienated and needs 
reconciliation. The death of Christ was not for the purpose of 
purchasing God's love: it is above price; nor for the purpose of 
appeasing— quieting, pacifying, or cooling down— God's wrath, 
as though he were excited and hated man, but by meeting a 
necessity of man, in his relation to a broken law, to express 
God's love for man. It is a great mistake to think that God ever 
did, or ever will hate man. God devised the plan, provided the 
Ransom, and sent his Son to die for us, because he loved us. 
[John 3:16.] This is one great fact the world needs to know. 

Love appreciated will produce love in return. "We love him 
because he first loved us." Then God loved us when we knew 
him not and even though we hated him. Parents and teachers, 
beware! If you tell those under your care, that God will love 
them if they are good, you make the impression on their minds 
that he will hate them if they are bad, which is false. By such 
means you make the wall higher, or the gulf deeper between 
them and the Lord, and though, you may, through fear, succeed 
in driving them to outward obedience, or gather them into the 
nominal church, by a "profession of religion," they may be as far 
from God as before, for only the goodness of God leadeth to 
repentance. Had we the power of ten thousand voices, we would 
proclaim, that God loved us while we were yet sinners, and 
Christ died to commend that love. 

"But," it is sometimes said, "you must believe it, Christ died for 
you, if you will believe." Indeed! Believe what? Believe that 
Christ died for you, of course. But if it is not true, I have no 
right to believe it, and my believing would not make it true. On 
the other hand, its being a fact that Christ died for me, is the best 
possible reason for believing it, and all the unbelief possible 
could not make it untrue. Truth is entirely independent of man's 
faith or unbelief, Faith in or knowledge of, a fact cannot make, 
or change, the fact, but it changes the man. 

God loves us whether we believe it or not, and Christ died for us 
whether we believe it or not, but the knowledge of these truths 
must exist, before gratitude and love can spring up in our hearts, 
and loving obedience result. Whatever facts or changes were 



produced by the death of Christ, are real, and not dependent on 
our believing, any more than is the fact that Christ died. If it be 
true, [as some teach, but which we do not believe] that the death 
of Christ secures spiritual life for some, we think it would 
follow of necessity that it would secure it for all, because Christ 
died for all. 2 Cor. 5:14,15. Heb. 2:9 and 1 Tim. 2:6. 

What Christ's death does not secure for every one, it secures for 
none. 

While the death of Christ does not secure spiritual life for any, it 
makes it possible for all, and on account of man's relation to the 
law, as dead, without Christ's death spiritual life would not be 
attainable. 

Repentance is a necessity in order to gain spiritual life, and 
without the motive of love, as presented to us in the death of 
Christ, repentance toward God would be impossible. But neither 
God's love, nor Christ's death, produce repentance in man, until 
man believes in the love and death. Hence God's love would be 
fruitless, were men allowed to remain in ignorance of the truth. 
God's love does not exhaust itself in the death of Christ, though 
that death commends it, for God has constituted Christ not only 
the Redeemer but the Light of the world. He engaged not only to 
save man from death by a Ransom, but to bring man to the 
knowledge of that truth. 1 Tim. 2:4. Hence Christ is the "True 
light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world." John 
1 :9. Not all at once nor in one age, but, it is "to be testified in 
due time." 1 Tim. 2:6. 

Now it is evident, that man cannot repent, because of a truth, 
until he knows that truth, and yet when known, the truth is the 
"Foundation of repentance from dead works." The greatest 
possible sin is to "sin willfully, after we have received the 
knowledge of the truth;" and for this there remaineth no more 
sacrifice." Heb. 10:26, and it is impossible "to renew them again 
unto repentance; seeing, they crucify to themselves the Son of 
God afresh, and put him to an open shame." Heb. 6:4,6. 

We believe, then, that the death of Christ is an expression of 
God's love, and that in order to win man from sin to holiness one 
of the first things a man needs to learn, is that Christ died for 
him. 

But how does the death of Christ show, or commend, God's 
love? It will not do to say it shows it because it shows it. That 
would be about equal to saying, God hates sin because he hates 
it, which is no reason at all. God hates sin because he loves his 
creatures; sin being their destroyer. If the death of Christ shows 
God's love to us, there must be something accomplished by that 
death which is adapted to man's necessities. Paul is talking of 
Christ's death on the cross, which was in "due time," i.e. the 
appointed time —"After the 62 weeks." Dan. 9:26. 



Christ did not die twice. His becoming a man, was not by laying 
down, as in death, his preexistent life. He gave up the glory, and 
afterward prayed: "Glorify thou me, 

R77 : page 6 

with the glory which I had with thee before the world was." 
John 17:5. 

We assert freely that Christ's death must have been; in some 
way adapted to the necessity of human nature, or it would not 
have been, what Paul asserts, an expression, or proof of God's 
love. What man does not need, even if it were provided, would 
not be gospel. If a man is hungry, bread alone would satisfy the 
want. If he thirsts, a cup of water from the hand of a friend 
would be an expression of love. And so of any want; but to say 
that God would seek to show his love by anything which was of 
no use to man, would be to ignore every idea of the harmony 
between God's wisdom and goodness. 

There can be no doubt in any reasonable Christian mind, that the 
Gospel, in all its parts, takes man's need into account. Christ's 
life was necessary, as an example of loyalty, of patience in 
suffering, of devotion to his Father, of the principle of love even 
to enemies, and of overcoming evil with good. It was by his 
earth life and experience, that he learned to sympathize with 
man in temptations, in poverty and other afflictions, and so he 
was fitted to be a merciful and faithful Highpriest; having been 
tempted in all points as we are, and yet without sin. Heb. 4:15. 
And one feature of his work since his resurrection, clearly is, to 
give us the benefit of his former experience, by giving aid to the 
tempted. (Heb. 2:18.) He is not only a sympathizing friend, but 
also the giver and sustainer of spiritual life until it culminates in 
immortality. We wish it distinctly understood that we value the 
life of Christ, both before his death and after his resurrection as 
necessarily adapted to the wants of human nature. But why 
should any one ignore or belittle his death because of the value 
of his life? One link in the chain of provisions for man would 
thus be destroyed. 

But we are told by some, that Christ "gave his life (not his 
death) a ransom. " But this is equivalent to the statement, "Christ 
died for our sins." The Greek word, Psuchee, rendered "life" in 
the above passage, never, unless we are greatly mistaken, refers 
to a period of existence, but to the nature of man as represented 
and sustained by the blood. Many other statements of the word 
agree with these in showing that Christ's death meets a necessity 
of man. "Behold the Lamb of God, (lamb led to the slaughter. 
Isa. 53:7.) which taketh away the sin of the world. " John 1 :29. 

The sin of the world is the sin of Adam, for "in him all have 
sinned." Rom. 5:12 Margin. This left man "without strength." 
(Ver. 6.) "And in due time Christ died for the ungodly." The sin 
made mankind "enemies," and we were "reconciled to God by 



the death of his Son." Ver. 10. "God laid on him the iniquity of 
us all." Isa. 53:6. And he "bore our sins on his own body 

R78 : page 6 

on the tree." 1 Pet. 2:24. He did not "lead" our sins, but is our 
Leader, or "Forerunner," into the heavenlies, and "he put away 
sin by the sacrifice of himself." Heb. 9:26. "And I, if I be lifted 
up from the Earth, will draw all men unto me. " And, as if to 
anticipate, and answer criticisms, it is added: "This he said, 
signifying what death he should die." John 12:32,33. It seems 
clear, that the sacrifice of Christ, covers all sin, except what Paul 
calls the willful sin. Heb. 10:26. And doubtless this is why the 
Savior could say: "All manner of sin and blasphemy SHALL BE 
FORGIVEN unto men, but the blasphemy, against the Spirit, 
shall not be forgiven unto men." Matt. 12:31. It does not say 
may be forgiven, but shall be. What! Without repentance? No, 
but God, as has been shown, by his goodness leadeth men to 
repentance. The death of Christ commends his love, Christ as 
the Light brings men to the knowledge of the truth, and thus the 
goodness secures repentance. 

Evidently the recovery of all, is as complete in Christ, as was the 
loss through Adam. 

It is strange that any person, thus saved from the curse of sin and 
death, should sin willfully and be lost, but we believe that facts 
as well as scripture sustain the idea that men fall away after 
being enlightened. 

Dead men need a Redeemer; Christ gave his life a Ransom. (The 
reason that men die, though Christ's natural life was given as a 
Substitute, is because men in the plan were counted dead 
already, and Christ did not give his life to prevent men from 
dying but to prevent them from remaining dead, or to redeem 
them from death.) Man is a sinner; Christ saves from sin. Man is 
mortal, even when redeemed; (except the church, who are raised 
a spiritual body.) Christ is the Author and Giver of immortality. 
Man is ignorant-in darkness: Christ is the true light, both as 
Teacher and our great Example. Man is weak and readily 
discouraged: Christ is a sympathizing friend. All fullness we 
find in him, just what men need is provided and no more; more 
would not be gospel, though provided. An appreciation of his 
fullness, tends to humility and to dependence on him, but 
whoever ignores any feature of Christ's work, in that particular 
overestimates himself and is in danger. 

Oh, that God's love may speedily win many from sin unto 
holiness, and lead them to seek, by a patient continuance in well 
doing, for glory and honor and immortality. To such the reward 
of eternal life is promised. Rom. 2:7. 

J. H. P. 



R707 : page 6 

FAITH triumphs over reason by receiving the revelation of the 
God of reason. 



R78 : page 6 



The Great Salvation. 



"How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation?"— HEB. 

2:3. 

This question is addressed to Christians, and not to the 
unconverted, as is often supposed. This the context proves. Paul, 
or whoever wrote this epistle, addressed it to the church. It 
seems peculiarly adapted to converted Jews, who were familiar 
with the writings of the Old Testament. We have in this epistle 
some of the most earnest exhortations to be faithful to the Lord, 
and the very best reasons and motives given for our 
encouragement. The text and context are of this character. If we 
are Christians we will find much applicable to us. It is important 
that we should, in order to get the benefit of the exhortation, 
remember that it means us. "How shall we escape, if we 
neglect?" On account of certain facts referred to in the first 
chapter, the second opens with: "Therefore, we ought to give the 
more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any 
time we should let them slip. " This certainly must refer to 
Christians; and there is danger of losing what we have received, 
unless we do give heed. 

The idea is suggested that neglect of the truths would cause 
them gradually to slip away from us. Backsliding is a gradual 
process, caused by neglect of truth and neglect of duty in 
obeying the truth. These are related to each other, and it seems 
that either may come as the cause of the other. The only 
safeguard against back-sliding and consequent falling away if 
persisted in, is to advance. Standing still seems to be impossible. 
In the sixth chapter the apostle seems to make falling away the 
alternative of going on to perfection. The Lord has arranged our 
life as a current against which we must row if we would go up, 
and he has placed the reward, the Great Salvation, at the head of 
the stream. If we would gain the prize, we must "run," "strive," 
"fight," or "overcome." If we fold our arms, we shall glide 
downward. It is easy to go with the multitude, but it is difficult 
to stem the flood, and we may be sure, "This vile world is not a 
friend to grace; to help us on to God. " What is worth having is 
worth striving for, and God has in both natural and spiritual 
things placed the valuable out of sight, or where it can be gained 
with difficulty. Our appreciation of the value of anything is 
shown by the earnestness with which we strive for it. We should 
be constantly seeking to know more of the truth of God for the 



purpose of obeying it. If we seek for truth merely as a theory to 
gratify our own curiosity, or for the purpose of showing our 
ability to cope with those who hold error, our intellect may be 
stuffed at the expense of our affections. Religion without love to 
both God and man, is as the body without the spirit— dead. 

Charity or love is the crowning excellency of Christianity, and is 
necessary to fit for the Great Salvation. "Add to your faith; 
virtue, and to virtue, knowledge; to knowledge, temperance; to 
temperance, patience; to patience, godliness; to godliness, 
brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness, CHARITY." 2 
Pet. 1:5-7. Love is last, and greatest. These additions secure the 
abundant entrance into the Kingdom of God. (Ver. 11.) Without 
the last all is vain. "Though I speak with the tongue of men and 
angels and have not love I am become as sounding brass, or a 
tinkling cymbal. And though I have (the gift of) prophecy, and 
understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have 
all faith so that I could remove mountains and have not love, I 
AM NOTHING." 1 Cor. 13:1,2. There is a kind of knowledge 
that cannot be gained from books, but comes by experience as a 
fruit of the indwelling of the spirit of God. "He that loveth not 
knoweth not God, for God is love. " 

Love is an experience, and includes in it an earnest desire for the 
well-being of the object loved. Until we have sympathy and love 
for mankind, such as would prompt us to do all in our power for 
their salvation, we cannot know God. To know him thus is to be 
in unison or fellowship with him, and hence is eternal life. 

page 6 

The apostle gives a contrast between the former dispensations 
and the gospel. In order to appreciate the question, "How shall 
we escape if we neglect?" it is necessary to see this contrast. 

"God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in times 
past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days 
(gospel dispensation) spoken unto us by His Son." Heb. 1:1,2. 
God spoke then, and the same God speaks now, but there is a 
contrast in the agencies- Then by the prophets, now by His Son. 
Moses the prophet and law giver of the old dispensation, and 
who was "faithful in all his house as a servant" (3:5) "received 
the law by the disposition of angels." Acts 7:53. It was 
"ordained by angels in the hand of a Mediator." (Moses, type of 
Christ.) Gal. 3:19. But Christ, the Prophet and Law Giver of this 
dispensation, is higher than the angels, "as he hath by 
inheritance obtained a more excellent name than they. " Ver. 4. 
His official position is "Lord of all," dead and living, Heavens 
and Earth, angels and men. He has been "appointed" by his 
Father, "heir of all things"— Creator, Upholder and Savior. Ver. 
2,3. He has the brightness of his Father's glory and the express 
image of his person, and hence is in a peculiar and emphatic 
sense, God's power, 



page 7 

Wisdom, Love and Word, the embodiment of all the fullness of 
the Godhead. His superiority to the angels is well established 
and is the basis of the superiority of the gospel dispensation. 
While Moses was faithful as a servant over the house of 
servants, Christ was faithful as a Son over the house of sons. Ch. 
3:5,6. 

"For unto which of the angels said he at any time, thou art my 
Son;. ..And again I will be to him a Father and he shall be to me 
a Son; " And again he saith, "Let all the angels of God worship 
him." Ch. 1:5,6. 

Of the angels he saith; "Who maketh his angels spirits, and his 
ministers a flame of fire." "Are they not all ministering spirits 
sent forth to minister to the heirs of Salvation?" Ver. 7,14. But 
unto the Son he saith, "Thy throne, Oh God is forever and 
ever. "...And "Thou Lord, in the beginning hast laid the 
foundations of the Earth, and the Heavens are the work of thy 
hands; they shall perish, but thou remainest, &c." This certainly 
refers to the old creation, as it was "in the beginning" or first 
stage of its existence, and is to be changed also by his power and 
put on its beautiful garments of the perfect state. The work of 
Creation in all its parts is of God through Christ. "In the 
beginning was the Word" and by him God spake and it was done 
commanded and it stood fast. 

The same Word was made flesh John 1 but was still "God- 
manifest in the flesh" and in the body prepared became a 
sacrifice for sin. And the same mysterious Name "which no man 
knoweth but he himself"— "The Word of God," goeth forth 
conquering and to conquer, when his army of assistants are with 
him, "Kings and Priests" to reign on the Earth." Rev. 5:10 and 
19:11-15. 

The value of the Great Salvation which is offered in the gospel 
can be appreciated when we remember that all the Father gives 
his son, the Son will share with his Bride. And in view of the 
superiority of the Lord Jesus the question of the apostle can be 
appreciated; "If the word spoken by angels was stedfast, and 
every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense 
of reward, how shall we (under Christ) escape if we neglect so 
Great Salvation? 

J. H. P. 



page 7 



STRAIGHT PATHS. 



Make straight paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be 
turned out of the way: but let it rather be healed."— HEB. 12:13. 



Such is the command of the apostle; but there is evidently a 
careless disregard of it among many of the professed Christians 
of to-day, as is shown by their lives and testimony. When we see 
those who profess to be followers of Jesus joining in the world's 
pleasures, and clad in the world's garments, we are led to believe 
that they have little care as to the paths they are making, and 
whether younger Christians coming after them will be turned out 
of the way, or established in the way, by their example. Tis true 
they are often heard to confess their sinfulness-their wanderings 
and short-comings; but seldom are they heard to warn others of 
the dangers that lurk by the way. They are never heard to tell the 
new-born soul to beware; that they should not love the world, 
but should come out, and be forever separate from it —from its 
sinful fashions and pleasures. No, we do not hear this; but we do 
hear these worldly-conformed professors ridiculing the very idea 
of plain dress for Christians; and with all their might do they 
uphold church fairs, festivals, parties, etc., laughing to scorn any 
who desire to lift their voices against them. Thus the crooked 
paths are being made, and scores of precious souls are being 
turned out of the way by those who should be "lights in the 
world." 

Take the evil of fashionable dress —that great and deadly evil, 
which is so fatal to spiritual life, and which is a ruling passion, 
and especially the besetting sin of the female heart. Oh, for a 
voice like a trumpet, to sound forth words of warning to my 
sisters in the churches. Are we adorned with the "modest apparel 
which becometh women professing godliness?" Let us look well 
to the paths we are making in this matter. It is so easy for some 
new-born soul to be turned out of the way by our examples. 
Some weak one who has just begun to look to us to see what we 
do, and how we dress.— Banner of Holiness. 



page 7 

The Example of Christ. 

It is only since his divine form has arisen before my soul, that I 
have learned to know the true condition of man. Formerly, by 
comparing myself with what was small, I appeared great in my 
own eyes; but since I have compared myself with him, how 
insignificant have I become. When we hear a man whom we feel 
to be truthful and humble speaking great things of himself, it has 
a humiliating effect upon us. And when the Savior utters such 
words as, "I do always those things that please him" and I do 
believe it to be in very truth that he utters this— I then become 
conscious of what man, who is created in the image of God, 
ought to be. 

When I see how, in all things, he sought not his own glory, but 
that of his heavenly Father, I am ashamed of my ambition; when 



I see how he came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, I 
am ashamed of my pride; when I see how he took the cup which 
his Father gave him and drank it, I am ashamed of my 
disobedience; when I see how he bore the contradiction of 
sinners against himself, and when he was reviled, reviled not 
again, I am ashamed of my impatience and my passion. Nothing 
has so subduing an influence as my Savior's example.— A. 
Tholuck. 



page 7 

In Memoriam. 

[On the death of Eld. Geo. Storrs.] 

The news of Bro. Storrs death (Dec. 28th, 1879,) reached us 
too late for insertion in last issue. As then stated our brother had 
just entered his 84th year and was quite ill. He was we believe a 
"faithful servant," and will soon "enter into the joys of our 
Lord. " We mourn the loss of a friend and brother in Christ yet, 
"not as those who have no hope." The great Deliverer, is at hand 
and assures us "I have the keys, of death and Hades." 



The well-worn armor is laid by! 
Thy faithful watchmen fall, O Lord, 
They gather up their feet and die, 
And wait their coming King's reward. 

Herald of truth, thy last farewell 
To earthly toils and scenes is given, 
No stain upon thy mantle fell, 
Thy record is laid up in Heaven. 

How little know the heedless crew 
In church or state, that by their side 
A witness, humble, faithful, true, 
Has lived long years for truth and died. 

In this dark world God's sons are veiled; 
It knew not Christ nor knows his, friends, 
They watch and wait to be revealed, 
When He, their Life, from Heaven descends. 

Rest veteran, in thy tomb awhile, 
'Twill not be long ere thou shalt rise 
To greet thy heavenly Leader's smile, 
And take from him the victor's prize. 

Surely the night is almost gone, 
And the millennial morn is near, 
Sentinels are falling, one by one, 
And leave the remnant weeping here. 



Come, Jesus, is thy remnant's call 
That first went up from Patmos' land; 
Come, heal the wounds of Adam's fall 
With the blest touches of thy hand. 



JOHN LYLE. 

Newark, N.J., Jan., 1880. 



page 7 



Bible Class Department. 



The Three Witnesses. 

"There are three that bear record in Heaven; the Father, the 
Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one."— 1 John 

5:7. 

In Lange's Critical Commentary, in reference to this passage 
we read: Said words are wanting in ALL THE GREEK 
CODICES; also in the CODEX SINAITICUS [the oldest 
existing MSS] AND IN ALL THE ANCIENT VERSIONS, 
INCLUDING THE LATIN, as late as the 8th century; and since 
that time they are found in three variations. Notwithstanding the 
Trinitarian controversies they are NOT REFERRED TO BY A 
SINGLE GREEK FATHER OR BY ANY OF THE OLD 
LATIN CHURCH FATHERS. 

The American Bible Union version [probably the best modern 
translation] leaves out the passage and adds the foot note, "The 
words omitted are wanting in all ancient copies." 

They are pronounced an interpolation by such authorities as Sir 
Isaac Newton, Benson, Clarke, Home, Griesbach, Tischendorf 
and Alford. 

In Hudson's Greek and English concordance we read: "The 
words are found in no Greek MSS. before the 15th or 16th 
century, and in no early version, unless, says Alford, pure 
caprice is to be followed in the criticism of the sacred text; there 
is not a shadow of reason for supposing them genuine. 
Tischendorf says, that this spurious addition should continue to 
be published as a part of the epistle, I regard as an impiety, etc.; 
and President T. B. Woolsey: "Do not truth and honesty require 
that such a passage should be struck out of our English Bibles; a 
passage which Luther would not express in his translation, and 
which did not creep into the German Bible until nearly fifty 
years after his death?" 

Dr. Adam Clarke, the learned Methodist commentator, in his 
notes on this passage, says: "It is likely this verse is not genuine. 
It is wanting in every MS. of this epistle written before the 



invention of printing, one excepted- condex motfortii, in Trinity 
College, Dublin; the others which omit this verse amount to one 
hundred and twelve. It is wanting in both the Syriac, all the 
Arabic, Ethiopic, the Coptic, Sahidic, Armenian, Slavonian, 
&c. ; in a word, in all the ancient versions but the Vulgate; and 
even of this version many of the most ancient and correct MSS. 
have it not. It is wanting, also, in all the ancient Greek Fathers; 
and in most even of the Latin.... To make the whole more clear, 
that every reader may see what has been added, I shall set down 
these verses, with the inserted words in brackets: 

"6. And it is the Spirit that beareth witness, because the Spirit is 
truth. 7. For there are three that bore record [in heaven, the 
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. 
8. And there are three that bear witness on earth.] the Spirit, and 
the water, and the blood, and these three agree in one. 9. If we 
receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater," &c. 
Any man may see on examining the words that if those included 
in brackets, which are wanting in the MSS., and versions be 
omitted, there is no want of connection; and as to the sense, it is 
complete and perfect without them, and, indeed, much more so 
than with them. I shall conclude this part of the note with 
observing, with Dr. Dodd, "That there are some intervals and 
accidental remarks which may render the passage suspected, for 
the sentence is complete, and the sense more clear and better 
preserved without it. Besides, the Spirit is mentioned, both as a 
witness in heaven and on earth; so that the six witnesses are 
thereby reduced to five, and the equality in number or antithesis 
between the witnesses in heaven and on earth is quite taken 
away. Besides, what need of witnesses in heaven? No one there 
doubts that Jesus is the Messiah, and if it be said that Father, 
Son, and Spirit are witnesses on earth, then there are five 
witnesses on earth, and none in heaven; not to say that there is a 
little difficulty in interpreting how the Word or the Son can be a 
witness to him. 

W. I. M. 



page 8 



THE LAW OF GOD. 



Christians are in the habit of looking at "the law" as a great 
enemy. Why? Because it does not countenance the least sin. It 
says, "walk before me and be thou perfect." Is that not right- 
could a perfect God recognize or make a law in any way 
imperfect? Surely not. The reason men count the law their 
enemy is that all have sinned, and ever since the disobedience of 
Adam they have been in the condition known as "sinful flesh." 
Prior to sin's entrance, the law was Adam's friend, and justified 
him; but the condition of death obtained after "sin had entered," 



and man in this fallen condition of death finds it utterly 
impossible to so live and act in harmony with his maker, that 
God's perfect law would not condemn him. And since all are 
sinners, of course none but a defective law could recognize such 
persons as perfect. The law of God has condemned all, and 
every one who has reasoning faculties seems to recognize that 
he is not perfect. 

God has always had a law; even before the giving of it in full 
form to mankind at Mt. Sinai. (Exod. 20.) And since He always 
has been perfect, His laws always have been perfect and 
condemned and opposed even the slightest sin. Abel, Noah, 
Abraham and all the patriarchs recognized the fact that they 
were sinners when they made altars and sacrificed thereon, 
before attempting to hold communion. Thus they acknowledged 
themselves sinners and unable of themselves to approach God. 
How different from the way Adam and God walked and talked 
in the Garden! No sacrifices or offerings for sin were there 
needed, for Adam was justified by God's law. Thus we see that 
what the patriarchs knew of God's law condemned them. The 
giving of the full law from Sinai did not take away man's sin. 
No, it only showed it the more fully. Did the keeping of it ever 
justify any of them? No; "By the deeds of the law shall no flesh 
be justified in His (God's) sight. " Was the fault in the law, or in 
the people? "The law is holy," and God's commandments holy 
and just and good." (Rom. 7:12.) Since, then, the law did not 
justify them, it must have condemned them, even as it had 
condemned the patriarchs. Not any more really (for there is only 
one penalty— death) but more loudly. They were no more sinners 
than the patriarchs and others who had not had the full law given 
them, but they were shown their condition as sinners more 
clearly. Why? That they might see their own fallen and 
imperfect condition and learn the exceeding sinfulness of SIN. 
(Vs. 13.) 

We have seen that God always has had a perfect law which 
condemned every sin in every being, and how it was shown in 
different degrees to the patriarchs and Israel, yet that the effect 
was the same— condemnation— only more fully realized by those 
who saw the law most clearly. Now, how about the great 
heathen world? Surely a righteous law could not say: The 
heathen are RIGHTEOUS; unless they live in harmony with 
God. And if you thought they were living in harmony with God 
you would not send missionaries to them. No. Then they, too, 
are condemned by God's law. And as Paul says: "These that 
have not the law" (the full written law as given to Israel) "show 
the work of the law written in their hearts," a spark of that 
principle if justice and knowledge of right and wrong which 
must have been an important part of the natural organization of 
the first perfect man, Adam; a spark merely, not quite 
extinguished by the degrading effects of sin. And what did this 
spark of conscience do for them? It sometimes justified, and 



sometimes condemned. But if their spark of conscience 
condemned them only ONCE during their lifetime, it showed 
that they were imperfect. 

Now, "all unrighteousness is sin," and "sin is the transgression 
of the law," and "the wages of sin is death." So we see that the 
only voice of the law of God to any who hear it, is: You cannot 
live. "All have sinned and come short of the glory of God. " 
Therefore must "every mouth be stopped and all the world 
become guilty before God." (Rom. 3:9.) 

There lay the whole human family dead and dying through sin, 
the law hanging up before them, they admit, is grand, "just" and 
"holy. " They were told that "The man that doeth these things 
shall live." (Rom. 10:5. Gal. 3:12.) But O, they could not do 
them. Some tried hard, as Paul describes, Rom. 7:14-24. When 
with their minds they resolved to "do those things and live, " 
they found sin in their members hindering and preventing. When 
the striving ones found they could not deliver themselves from 
death, they exclaimed: "Wretched man that I am, who will 
deliver me from this body of death?" (Diaglott) or, from the sin 
and death which has gotten possession of my body. When he so 
cries out, he has reached the place God wanted to bring him to, 
i.e., to realize that he can NEVER deliver himself from death 
and sin. But some one asks: If he dies does not the act of dying 
fill all the requirements of the law, and could he not, after thus 
dying, be raised up by God? No, you err in supposing that the 
act of dying is the penalty. Man has been dying ever since sin 
entered the world, but the penalty will not be entirely inflicted 
until all are dead. But when will the law of God release the 
sinner from the bondage of death? Never; if he could not obey 
the law while partially dead he certainly cannot when 
completely so. Ever since the "fall" from perfect manhood 
through sin, man has been in a dying condition, sometimes 
spoken of as already dead (see Matt. 8:22.) And none but a 
perfect man could keep a perfect law. But, says one, did not God 
send his Son into the world to show us how we could work our 
way up to spiritual life— appearing among us on the lowest 
round of the ladder, did He not point out to us the way; he being 
thus "our forerunner?" 

This view in many respects is held by a great many, mostly 
"Unitarians" and "Universalists" and like many other views has 
a mixture of truth in it; but as a whole is far from being "the 
truth" on this subject. Jesus did indeed "lay aside the glory 
which he had with the Father, before the world;" He did appear 
to "set us an example that we should follow in his footsteps" and 
to be "our forerunner," but more, he is also our "Redeemer" 
from the curse of the Law— the curse of the law upon us as 
sinners is death. How did he redeem us from death? To redeem 
us to purchase back. He therefore is said to have "bought us with 
his own precious blood. " Blood represents life -"The life of the 



flesh is in the blood" (Lev. 17:11) therefore shed blood 
represents death or sacrificed life. "He gave his life, " "He shed 
his blood;" "He tasted death;" all have the same meaning. But 
how could his life purchase or redeem or buy ours? He as a man, 
was a perfect man, kept the perfect law perfectly; therefore the 
same law which was the sinners enemy condemning us to death, 
was his friend and guaranteed to him life. But was he not born 
into the world under condemnation of death, as much as any 
other son of Adam? No, he was not the son of Adam, but a 
direct creation of God- "made in the likeness of sinful flesh," 
but "in him was no sin. " If he had done sin or been born a 
sinner, his life would have been forfeited as was the first Adam's 
and ours. If a sinner he would be obliged to die for himself and 
consequently would have nothing to give as a ransom for ours. 
But he was perfect, kept the law, had a right to perfect natural 
life forever; "But for the joy set before him," by the promise of 
the Father to raise him from the dead a spiritual body, he 
renounced the natural life and gave it for our ransom. 

But when he arose from death, was not that a taking back of the 
price? It would, if he had taken back the same life (perfect- 
natural) which he laid down; but he did not take back the 
natural; he was quickened by the Spirit-"made a quickening 
spirit," raised a spiritual body." There is a natural body and there 
is a spiritual body. 

Thus "by his precious (valuable) blood" (life), we were 
"redeemed from the curse of the law" -death. To what kind of 
life were we redeemed? The same which man had before death 
(the curse) came; the same kind that he gave for us, i.e., perfect 
natural life. But we are promised spiritual life, and that we shall 
be made like unto Christ's glorious body? Yes; it is a part of 
God's offer to us (during the Gospel age), that if we die to 
earthly and fleshly— natural— life, we may be reckoned as 
"members of his body," and partake of the same kind of life as 
our Head. In this arrangement, we are reckoned as being (with 
all the rest of mankind) justified to the perfect natural life first, 
else we could not give our lives; but being justified to life, Jesus 
says to us, you can either have this natural life, or, if you will 
renounce this natural, as I did, and become dead to the world, 
you shall have instead, the spiritual life and body. "If we be dead 
with Christ, we shall live with him." Rom. 6:4-8. It is a faithful 
saying: "For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him; 
if we suffer, we shall also reign with him." 2 Tim. 2:1 1. "Ye are 
partakers of Christ's sufferings." 1 Pet. 4:13. "Joint heirs with 
Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also 
glorified together. " Rom. 8:17. 

And it is because God thus waits until the elect number, the 
bride, the body, the Church, has "filled up the measure of the 
sufferings of Christ, which are behind," that the times of 
"restitution of all things," purchased for the world by the blood 



of Christ, are delayed and yet future. The Head suffered and 
died 1800 years ago; but all of the suffering and death of the 
body are not yet completed. Not noticing this, has caused 
wonder on the part of almost all, that the benefits and results of 
the ransom have not sooner come. (See type, "Scape Goat," &c, 
in next Number.) 

But would it be right for God to reckon the one righteous life 
given, as a full payment for the lives of the millions of sinners 
who have died? Does not the price-one, for a billion or more- 
seem like a short payment? This is a reasonable question, and 
we will allow Paul to give it a reasonable answer. He is a logical 
reasoner, as well as an inspired Apostle, and argues that, as God 
had seen proper to condemn all men to death on account of 
Adam's disobedience, so he had a right to reckon the second 
Adam a representative man, and justify to life all the race, in 
return for the sacrifice of this one perfect life. 

"For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so 
by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous." 
"Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all 
men to condemnation," (condemned to suffer the penalty of sin- 
death,) "even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came 
upon all men unto justification to life. " (Remember that we do 
not now enjoy life; our condition is a dying one.) "Dying thou 
shalt die" was the penalty pronounced on Adam (margin). The 
condition of perfect life as it was enjoyed before death came, is 
what all men are justified to, by the obedience of "Jesus Christ 
who, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man. " 

"For as in Adam (or by Adam's sin) all die, so "in Christ (or by 
Christ's obedience, &c.) shall all be made alive. As the first 
Adam's bride was a party to the sin, so we see the second 
Adam's bride is made a party with her Lord in the removing of 
the curse. Oh glorious plan, of our all wise and loving Father, 
and "the exceeding riches of his grace toward us, in Christ 
Jesus." 

But says one, I thought that Jesus had nullified, set aside and 
destroyed the law; and that therefore mankind could approach 
God. Oh no, that was a great mistake. Would it not be strange 
indeed if the Father made a law, which we have seen was "just" 
and "holy" and in fact the only one he could give because he 
could not make an imperfect law; would it seem proper even to 
think of Jesus as setting aside and destroying that "just" and 
"holy" law, or in any way making a league with sin or sinners? 
No, no. He came to do the Father's will and the law was the 
record of it. He kept it himself and taught the true meaning of it 
to be higher than the letter, and that to be "angry with a brother 
without a cause" was to violate the command "Thou shalt not 
kill. " No, says Paul: "Christ magnified the law (made it larger 
and more minute) and made it honorable," showed in fact that, 
that law could not be set aside nor broken. 



But we read, "Christ is the end of the law. " What can that mean? 
The trouble is you have not quoted the connections. The text 
reads: "For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to 
every one that believeth" (Rom. 10:5.) To whom is he this? To 
the believers— the members of his body. How? Righteously, not 
by breaking it, but by righteously fulfilling its requirements (and 
we in Him are just before the law.) Another similar text reads: 
"There is therefore" (because we in Him are reckoned dead to 
the world and alive toward God through Him-our new life) 
"now no condemnation to them which are IN Christ Jesus." Why 
are those in Christ not condemned? Because, since coming into 
Him by faith they have received of His spirit, and with Him can 
say "I delight to do thy will O, my God: yea, thy law is within 
my heart." (Ps. 11:8.) They are then alive spiritually though yet 
living in the dead body of sinful flesh which they are opposed 
to, and which by the holy spirit given they are enabled to 
"crucify, " &c. These walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, 
and to all so walking in Christ there is no condemnation from 
the law. And we may add none can so live and walk except they 
have recognized their ransom, come into Christ and received of 
His spirit. 

And in the glorious millennial age, when all shall know God 
from least to greatest, when "The knowledge of the Lord shall 
fill the whole earth; "-"The times of restitution"-there will be 
the same "holy and just" law, and under the "Royal Priesthood" 
after the order of Melchisedec (the order of an endless life,) poor 
fallen humanity will be helped back again to that perfect 
condition from whence Adam fell; a condition in harmony with 
God's law, and therefore in harmony with God. 

But will they receive no punishment for misdeeds of the present 
life? They will receive punishment, "stripes, &c," in proportion 
as they had light and lived contrary to it. As our Master 
explained: "It shall be more tolerable for Sodom, &c," in the 
day of judgment (in the age of trial) than for the Jews, to whom 
He spoke, because the Sodomites had less light. (Matt. 2:24.) 
There will be many or few "stripes," in proportion to the amount 
of light they have had and the use made of it. 

There will be rewards given to some during that age also; "for 
whosoever shall give to one of these little ones (of 'little flock) a 
cup of cold water, only in the name of a disciple, shall in no 
wise lose his reward." (Matt. 10:42.) And when the King shall 
sit "on the throne of his glory," (during the millennial age), some 
will be rewarded for having ministered to the members of His 
body. "Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of the least of these," (in 
the throne) "ye did it unto me." (Matt. 15:40.) 



page 8 



Bro. Paton's Trip West. 

Announced in our last, has been delayed for the present. He has 
been busily engaged during the past month writing a book which 
will be of general interest to you all. It will be a careful 
exposition of our views regarding fulfilled prophecy; our hopes 
of present and future; as well as the scriptural evidences of the 
presence of the Son of Man, and that we are now in "the day of 
the Lord," &c. 



R78 : page 1 

VOL. I. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., MARCH, 1880. 

NO. 9. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
H. B. RICE, . . . W. OAKLAND, CAL. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R78 : page 1 



The Great Day of Atonement. 
Lev. 16:3. 

In considering this type we must, to appreciate it, remember 
that it is a picture by itself, of one particular part, of the work of 
the World's High Priest. 

It is a comparatively easy matter to talk or write about the High 
Priest anointed &c, going into the Holy Place and coming out, 
etc., in a general way, but we believe, to understand the matter 
clearly, we must realize first, that while Jesus is our (the 
church's) High Priest, yet in the more full and complete sense, 
He is the head and we the members of the body of the great 
High Priest, and these Levitical pictures primarily referring to 
the Head, when fully considered refer to the body complete. For 
instance, the ceremony of anointing commenced with the 
"Head" and the anointing oil (the Holy Spirit) continues running 
down over all the members of the body during the Gospel Age. 

The consecrating of the priesthood includes all the members of 
his body, and requires all of the Gospel Age to complete it. 

The sacrifice of atonement commenced with the Head and we 
"fill up the measure of the sufferings of Christ which are 
behind," and therefore this suffering requires all of the Gospel 
Age. 

So we see that all of these pictures are separate and distinct, and 
will all be complete at the end of the Gospel Age. And then shall 
the Great High Priest of the world (Jesus and His bride, made 
ONE, Head and members complete) stand forth crowned a King 
and Priest after the Melchisidec order. 

There He will stand before the world (manifest but unseen) the 
Great Prophet- "A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto 
you like unto me, (Moses) and it shall come to pass that the soul 
that shall not hear that Prophet, shall be cut off from among the 
people." (The second death). 

R79 : page 1 

There He will stand, Priest of the most High God and King of 
Salem, i.e. "King of Peace"-"A Priest upon His throne." 

He came typically to the Jews in the end of their age as Prophet, 
(teacher) as Priest ("when he offered up Himself," Heb. 7:27.) 
and as King. (When he rode into their city at the close of his 
ministry.) But they did not receive him in any of these forms. 
During the Gospel Age, his church or body has acknowledged 
him as "a teacher sent from God" -the Great Prophet; as their 
"High Priest," and as their "King" or ruler. The word teaches 
however that it is not by the church only that he is to be 
accepted, but He (together with us as His body) shall be the 
Prophet for the people, the Priest for all the people and the King 



over all people, nations and languages; "Lord of all," Priest of 
all, Prophet or teacher of all. 

This chapter (Lev. 16.) treats of the sacrifice of atonement, 
which as we shall see requires all of the Gospel Age. In the 
work of sacrifice, Jesus, the head, was not arrayed in glory and 
we as his body are not in glory when we suffer with him. No, 
that will come after the sufferings of all are over; there we shall 
put on "the garments for glory and for beauty. " "If we suffer 
with him, we shall also be glorified together. " It is for this 
reason that on the day of atonement, instead of his "garments for 
glory and beauty," Aaron puts on simply "linen garments" 
representing holiness and purity. Ver. 4. These were put upon 
the body when washed and represented the fact that we, his 
members, not having righteousness of our own, were reckoned 
as pure, washed and clothed with "fine linen which is the 
righteousness of the saints." We need the covering, but our Head 
did not— He was holy, harmless, undefiled;" so the head of the 
typical High Priest, wore only a linen mitre or crown, 
representing a crown of righteousness— to which was added 
when this work of atonement sacrifice was complete and the 
glorious garments put on, a plate of gold representing glory. 

The first sacrifice, the Bullock, represented Jesus personally. 
Ver. 3 and 6. It stood "for" or instead of Aaron the High Priest. 
He could not lay down his life and then arise from the dead, and 
take of his own blood into the tabernacle, therefore God 
permitted him to represent himself by a Bullock, so then the 
Bullock's death represents the sacrifice of Christ's natural life; 
while the High Priest's taking the blood into the holy place 
typified the risen Jesus, a spiritual body entering heaven itself. 

But, before this sacrifice another work was necessary. Vs. 12 
and 13 inform us that before he could approach to make 
atonement with the blood, he must take fire from off the altar 
before the Lord and his hands full of sweet incense beaten small 
and bring it within the vail, and put the incense upon the fire 
before the Lord, that the cloud of the incense may cover the 
mercy seat. The incense was of a peculiar kind. (Read Exod. 
30:34-38.) None could be made like it. It, we think represented 
the perfection of "the man Christ Jesus." "Fairer art thou than all 
the fair among the sons of men. " This perfect character when 
placed (by himself) on the fire (trial and temptation) yielded a 
rich perfume, covering the "Mercy Seat." Our High Priest must 
first be recognized as a tried and perfect one, before he could be 
received as a sacrifice for us. In this way he was proved to be 
perfect and because perfect he could go forth and offer his life a 
sacrifice for sin. This incense (representing his tried but spotless 
life) having been offered, the High Priest takes, as we have seen, 
the Bullock which is for (instead of) himself, and offers it for 
himself and for his house to make an atonement. Vs. 5,11 and 
14.) It was offered for himself, i.e. for his body, the Bride. The 



Head was holy and had ever been at one with God, but the 
members of his body were yet enemies to God through sin. 
These must be made at-one. And not for the "little flock" -(the 
bride the overcomers) only is the bullock offered but also for his 
house. Aaron's house was the tribe of Levi (Num. 17:2-3) 
consequently the blood of the bullock, representing Aaron was 
used to make atonement for the Priest and for the house of 
Aaron-the Levites. Num. 8:12. So Jesus gave his life for the 
"Royal Priesthood" and also for the larger company of "them 
that fear God's name, small and great"— the general church, of 
believers. Be it remembered that we understand that the church 
or house of Christ is composed of a much larger company than 
the overcomers who are to sit on the throne. 

The bullock having been slain, its body was taken outside the 
camp and burned with fire; representing that when Jesus died for 
our sins, his flesh life was counted as though sinful and 
consumed. "His flesh saw not corruption" yet his flesh life was 
destroyed. "He took upon him the form of a servant for the 
suffering of death. There that form of life ended, and though we 
have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we 
him (so) no more. " He was quickened, or made alive by the 
Spirit and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit; and since he 
was the first (so) born from the dead, he was a spiritual body. He 
was sown a natural body, raised a spiritual body. As in the type, 
Aaron who took the blood of the bullock into the tabernacle, 
was a higher form of life than the bullock slain, so Jesus the 
spiritual body who enters the true Holy of Holies with his own 
blood is possessed of a higher life than the man Christ Jesus 
who died. 

As in the type, the life and body of the sin offering are kept 
separate from the higher life and body of the High Priest, so we 
find that Jesus our sacrifice both in life and body is kept separate 
and distinct from the life and body of our Great High Priest who 
entered the heavens. He gave this natural life and the natural or 
fleshly body for our sins according to the type, "A body hast 
thou prepared me. " But the slaying of 

R79 : page 2 

the sacrifice did not make the at-one-ment; the Priest must 
present before God, the blood as the evidence of its 
accomplishment, before the Priests and Levites could be at-one 
with God. So with our sacrifice; the death of Jesus brought no 
change to the condition of the Apostles until he had gone into 
the Most Holy and presented before God the evidence that he 
had "paid it all"— that he had "poured out his soul (natural life) 
unto death"-had "made his soul an offering for sin." It was 
accepted. God sent forth his Spirit on the day of Pentecost as the 
evidence of its acceptance. Thus he made atonement for us and 
by him, says Paul, we have received the atonement. Now we 
who were aliens and enemies to God and who never could have 



worked our way back to a condition of harmony with him, are 
justified in God's sight from all things through the blood of 
Jesus, and because at-one, God hath sent forth his Spirit into our 
hearts whereby we can call him Our Father. This feature of the 
work of atonement viz., the sacrifice for his body and his house 
was completed 1 800 years ago, and the mark of its acceptance 
and completeness is "the Holy Spirit given unto us." 

But another sacrifice is pointed to in the type, another sin- 
offering, not again for his body and house. No, that was 
finished, but this time "for the people" (Israel) type of the world. 
Two goats are used in making the atonement for the world, as 
the bullock had been for the house. The Lord's goat is made a 
sin offering, and Aaron did with it exactly what he did with the 
bullock. Vs. 8,15,18,27. The sin-offering of the bullock and goat 
were really one, and yet there are these two parts. What do these 
goats typify, has been asked by many Bible students, and we 
have asked the same and never until now have been able to find 
an answer to our satisfaction. We believe the two goats to be 
types of the two classes of true believers in Christ constituting 
his church. 

The "Lord's goat" represents the "little flock," "who count not 
their lives dear unto them. " 

The "scape-goat" representing "the great company" who through 
fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage." 

As these goats were taken from the people, as it were, to be 
representatives of them, so the church has been taken "from 
among men." "God did visit the Gentiles to take out a people for 
his name. " The work of taking out goes on during the gospel 
dispensation, and each one as soon as taken presents himself 
before the Lord, as the goats stood at the door of the tabernacle 
waiting. The lot is cast (Vs. 8.) indicating to us that God does 
not arbitrarily elect which shall be part of the little or the great 
company; all who believe are part of his house and are alike 
justified by his blood, but whether he shall be least or greatest 
depends largely upon his own use of the opportunities placed 
thus within his reach. Thus considered the church in its two 
companies- "The Lord's goat (Christ's body- the under priest) 
and the scapegoat (his house— believers in general, typified by 
Levites) have existed since the church began at Pentecost and 
have continued ever since. One party follows the example of the 
head and crucifies the flesh with its affections and lusts, 
reckoning themselves dead indeed unto sin. As Jesus renounced 
the world, flesh and devil, so do those actuated by the same 
spirit, remembering the promise of Jesus- "To him that 
overcometh, I will give to sit with me in my throne, even as I 
overcame, etc. " 

The sufferings of Jesus were not the price of our ransom, but his 
death— his shed blood or life given. In the type it was not the 



sufferings of the bullock or goat, but the DEATH, by which an 
atonement was effected, though they suffered, of course, 
because death involves suffering. "The Man, Christ Jesus," 
"tasted death for every man," by being crucified- a gradual or 
lingering death— but the giving of his life in any manner would 
have paid the price. Now, all who would be "members of his 
body" must die to the world, give up the flesh life, so that they 
can, with Paul, "reckon themselves dead indeed unto sin. " (Rom. 
6:11). And "If Christ be in you, the body is dead," "but the spirit 
is life." (Vs. 10). If you are fully and entirely consecrated, your 
own natural will and desire all resigned to the will of "The 
Head," "Ye are dead, 

R80 : page 2 

and your life is hid with Christ in God." (Col. 3:3), and you may 
add, "I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me. The life that I now 
live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God." (Gal. 
2:20). It is then "Christ in you" that is the only actuating or 
controlling principle. This bringing of the natural into subjection 
to the spiritual is a gradual death and requires time, and is 
therefore called "CRUCIFYING the flesh." Jesus could do this 
entirely, because perfect, but we are imperfect, therefore our 
Head supplies the overcoming power through the spirit, making 
our supply of strength to depend on our faith in Him. "This is 
the victory that overcometh the world, even your faith. " In some 
ages it has been necessary for those who would follow the 
Master to walk to the stake, and thus "crucify the flesh. " While 
those who live to-day are not caused to suffer thus, they are 
nevertheless called upon just as really to crucify the flesh. And 
we believe to some it is to-day a greater trial to follow the 
Master and walk separate from the worldliness in the nominal 
church, "having no fellowship with the unfruitful works of 
darkness, but rather reproving them," than to have gone to the 
stake to burn in an age when that was counted a matter of 
honorable distinction in the church. 

Ah, yes, to be dead indeed, and crucified with Christ is also to 
be "made a partaker of His sufferings." It is a reality which we 
fear is realized by but few of those who claim to be "followers 
of the Lamb." If we follow Him we will as surely be led to death 
as He was. If it caused Him to suffer, it will cause us to suffer 
also. You may expect it, for He said: "Whosoever will live 
godly shall suffer persecution. " As His persecution came 
principally from a nominal church, so we may expect the same. 
If they called the Master of the house, Beelzebub, the servant 
should expect the same. "The servant shall not be above his 
Lord. " If you get along smoothly, you have reason to fear that 
your life shows so little difference from that of the world that 
they don't think worth while to persecute you. But if you follow 
the Master, they will say of you also: "Thou hast a devil, and art 
mad," "Thou art beside thyself." This dying, or crucifying, 



requires frequently a long time, and often when you think you 
have, by grace given, mastered your old nature by your new, 
overcome your old will of the flesh by your new will of Christ 
"dwelling in you richly," you find, as Paul did, that the old may 
revive in a moment not expected, and require crucifying again. 
As Paul did, so must we keep our body under, and this killing 
and keeping under of our flesh nature continues to be a battle 
until physical death ends it. "Be thou faithful unto death, and I 
will give thee a crown of life. " 

But it may be asked: How is our death to the flesh any more of a 
sacrifice than the death of the world? We answer that we were 
justified to perfect natural life by the death of Jesus, and God 
promises that if we believe this and then voluntarily give up that 
portion of natural life, which we now possess, He will give us a 
higher life-the spiritual- and a higher body-the spiritual. And 
thus reckoned as the body or bride of Jesus, we become 
"partakers (part-takers) of the Divine nature" and in the highest 
sense "Sons of God" and "Joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, our 
Lord," who is and ever shall be "Head over all, God blessed for 
ever. " 

Again (vs. 27), the flesh of the goat was treated in the same 
manner as the flesh of the bullock; i.e., it was consumed with 
fire outside the camp. This is another proof that the goat of sin 
offering represents the body of Christ, for Paul (Heb. 13) 
exhorts us that as Jesus suffered without the gate— "Let us go 
forth therefore unto Him without (outside) the camp, bearing 
His reproach. " Nor should it seem strange to us that we should 
be called on to be sacrifices with Him-to die with Him, if we 
expect to be glorified together. If we are to know the power of 
His resurrection (have spiritual bodies like Him) we must expect 
the fellowship of His sufferings, being made conformable unto 
His death, if by any means we would attain unto THE (principal 
or first) resurrection:" (Phil. 3:8-11), for "If we be dead with 
Christ we shall also live with Him." (Col. 2:20; 2 Tim. 2:1 1; 
Rom. 6:8-11). "If we suffer, we shall also reign with Him. " (2 
Tim. 2:12). "If so be that we suffer with Him that we may be 
also glorified together." (Rom. 8:17). "For even hereunto were 
ye called; because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an 
example that we should follow in His footsteps." "For Christ 
also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that He 
might bring us to God." (1 Pet. 2:21 and 3:18.) Jesus suffered, 
even unto death, and we are to do the same— have "fellowship 
with His sufferings"— be "made conformable unto His death." 
"Forasmuch, then, as Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh, arm 
yourselves likewise with the same mind." (To crucify the flesh.) 
"For he that hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin;" i.e., 
the sufferings when ended result in death of the flesh. "For unto 
you it is given on behalf of Christ, not only to believe on Him, 
but also to suffer for His sake." (Phil. 1:29). And thus, as the 
sacrifice of the goat filled up the sacrifice of atonement and sin 



offering in the type, so our Head, having suffered, left some 
little (compared to His) suffering to be shared by us as his body, 
and we "fill up that which is behind of the affections of Christ. " 
(Col. 1:24.) 

"Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which 
shall try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you, 
but rejoice, inasmuch as ye are part-takers of Christ's sufferings, 
that when His glory shall be revealed ye may be glad also with 
exceeding joy." (1 Pet. 4:12). 

Since recognizing this as the meaning of the goat sacrifice, we 
see a force and meaning in some of the New Testament 
utterances relating to our death, &c, which we never saw 
before, and it has given us a still more exalted idea of "our high 
calling in Christ Jesus"— called to be consecrated, called to be 
anointed, called to suffer, be sacrificed and die with Him, and 
called to be joint heirs with Him, to be glorified together, to sit 
with Him on His throne, and to inherit with him all things; 
called to be tried and tempted that soon we may be able to 
sympathize with mankind, and, with our Head, "Bless all the 
families of the earth." "Faithful is he that called you." "Be 
THOU faithful unto DEATH. " 

When the blood of the sin offering (bullock and goat) had been 
received and sprinkled in the holy place, the work of sacrifice 
was over and the High Priest changed his garments, so when the 
sufferings of the church are all ended and the death accepted by 
the Father, our High Priest will change the garments of His 
body. We as His body have been clothed in "linen" garments 
which represent the righteousness of saints, viz.: imputed 
righteousness. When the work of crucifying the flesh is finished, 
this condition of imputed, gives place to actual righteousness, as 
shown by the washing of the flesh. Notice that there are two 
washings, the first before the sacrifice of the bullock, 
representing the personal righteousness of Jesus, which was 
followed by the imputation of righteousness to His body, 
illustrated by linen garments; and the second washing, after the 
sacrifice of the goat, illustrating the perfection or actual 
righteousness of the church; and this is followed by the clothing 
with the proper garments of the High Priest- "garments for glory 
and for beauty. " So when we are made perfect through suffering 
we shall put on the garments which properly belong to the high 
office to which we are called. "Then shall the righteous shine 
forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. " 

But before our change of garments from those of sacrifice to 
those of glory, another work must be done. The "scape goat" 
must be sent away, bearing the iniquity of the people. As already 
suggested, we believe that this goat represents the "great 
company," who, while believers, and therefore members of the 
house, are yet not overcomers as are the members of His body. 
Our Lord teaches us that when the time arrives for "one to be 



taken and the other left," among those left will be some whom 
he calls his servants- unfaithful, but still his servants- foolish, 
but still virgins. Not accounted worthy to escape those things 
coming upon the world, they must remain here and go through 
the trouble with the world, have their portion or place with the 
hypocrites in this trouble, yet they are not hypocrites, and they 
will, during this trouble, "wash their robes and make them white 
in the blood of 

(Continued on page 7.) 

R80 : page 7 

the Lamb." This class love the Lord, yet seem to cling to the 
world. They do not crucify the flesh and become dead to the 
world. Therefore they fail of attaining that honor attached to 
overcoming. They are "taken away" from being "branches of the 
vine," because, with full opportunity, they failed to develop 
fruit. They are "cut asunder" from membership of the body, 
chastised as the evil servants, or shut out from the wedding as 
foolish virgins. And when the bride company is made up, no 
more can come in, to that position. To any who afterwards claim 
to be the bride, He will say, "Depart from me, I never knew 
you," i.e., I do not recognize you as my bride. But though shut 
out from this, they are still recognized by the Lord as precious 
and beloved, and will be remembered as them that fear His 
name, small and great, and honored by an invitation to the 
"marriage supper of the Lamb," Thus, though they would not 
crucify themselves, and therefore could not be part of the sin- 
offering. (To be an offering it must be voluntary). God, 
unwilling that believers should be condemned with the world, 
puts them into a time of trouble, where they are forcibly put to 
death. It was so in Paul's day, also. He says: "Deliver such an 
one unto Satan (adversary) for the destruction of the flesh, that 
the spirit [life] may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus." (1 
Cor. 5:5). But we have gone farther than the type. It merely 
shows the sending away of the goat. We learn the result through 
Paul. 

It should not be forgotten, we repeat, that this type pictures, the 
sacrifice and sufferings of Christ (Head and body), and not the 
glory which will follow, which is referred to only incidentally as 
"putting on His own garments," the ones for glory and beauty. 
And now, as we expect so soon to change our garments and be 
"in glory and beauty arrayed," how important that we should 
each ask ourselves— Am I crucifying the flesh? Am I dead 
indeed? 



R81 : page 3 



A LITTLE TALK WITH JESUS. 

A little talk with Jesus, - 
How it smoothes the rugged road! 
How it seems to help me onward, 
When I faint beneath my load! 

When my heart is crushed with sorrow, 
And my eyes with tears are dim, 
There is naught can yield me comfort 
Like a little talk with Him. 

I tell him I am weary, 
And I fain would be at rest; 
But I still will wait his bidding, 
For his way is always best. 

Then his promise ever cheers me 
'Mid all the cares of life:-- 
"I am coming soon in glory 
To end thy toil and strife. " 

Ah, that is what I am wanting, 
His lovely face to see— 
And, I'm not afraid to say it, 
I know he's wanting me. 

He gave his life a ransom 
To make me all his own, 
And he'll ne'er forget his promise 
To me, his purchased one. 

The way is sometimes weary 
To yonder nearing clime, 
But a little talk with Jesus 
Has helped me many a time. 

The more I come to know him, 
And all his grace explore, 
It sets me ever longing 
To know him more and more. 



[Selected.] 



R81 : page 3 

One Body, One Spirit, One Hope. 

Eph 4:4. 

The unity of the church of Christ is clearly revealed in the New 
Testament. Though there is great variety in ability, naturally or 
acquired, yet the least as well as the greatest is a member of the 
Body, and all alike are vitally connected with Christ the Head. 
Those who are of full age, and strong, either to understand or to 



work, have the greater responsibility, but the young, unlearned 
and tender, as lambs of the flock, are carried in the Shepherd's 
bosom, and are the objects of his tender care. The figures used 
in the Bible all illustrate this unity, and, we may add, 
indivisibility. "One fold and one Shepherd;" John 10:16. The 
vine and the branches; John 10:16. The vine and the branches; 
John 15. The temple and living stones, built on one foundation; 
Eph. 2:20-22, and One City, as "the bride, the Lamb's wife;" 
Rev. 21:9,10. 

There are many scriptures which assert the unity of the Body 
aside from our text. The diversity does not weaken the fact of 
the unity any more than diversity in the families of men weakens 
their relationship. There is much comfort in the assurance this 
fact gives to all who have put on Christ. They are all one in 
Christ Jesus. Gal. 3:26-29. It is a great encouragement to all, for 
the least who retains this vital union with Christ is as certain of 
eternal life as the greatest. To see and appreciate this unity and 
indivisibility would destroy sectarianism and endear Christians 
one to another. Sectarianism began to show itself in Paul's day, 
and was condemned. "I am of Paul," and "I of Apollos," &c, 
was met by the question, "Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified 
for you? or were you baptized in the name of Paul?" 1 Cor. 
1:10-13. This is as much as to say: As Christ is not divided, ye 
should recognize no divisions, and call yourselves by no name 
but Christ. If it was contrary to the spirit of Christianity then, to 
say I am of Paul, or I am of Apollos, or I am of Peter, what can 
be said to justify men now in calling themselves "Calvinists," 
"Armenians," "Lutherans," "Wesleyans," or by any man-made 
name. If Paul were writing to the churches of the nineteenth 
century (was he not?) would he not call such things carnal, as 
when he wrote to Corinth? 1 Cor. 3:1-5. Would not every great 
and good man, after whom, or whose opinions, a party has been 
named, could he speak to-day, join with Paul and condemn it? 
Are mere opinions a sufficient ground for such gulfs or walls 
between Christians? These are but temptations, above which let 
the voice of the apostle be heard, "Endeavoring to keep the unity 
of the spirit in the bond of peace. " Eph. 4:3. Faith and opinion or 
knowledge are too often confounded. Every Christian has faith 
in Christ as a living person, and as a personal Savior, for 
"without faith it is impossible to please God," but a man's 
knowledge and opinions vary according to circumstances and 
the degree of advancement. What would we think of the 
humanity of a brother who would disown his brother in the flesh 
because he is less advanced in knowledge, or cast him out 
because he is young? Or what of the Christianity of a brother in 
the spirit who acts on the same principle? Does not this tendency 
grow out of a misapprehension of the true basis of fellowship? 
We think so. Is there a real tie between members of one family 
in the flesh? Yes, we say, they have the same blood in their 
veins. Is the tie any less real because it is spiritual that binds the 



members of the family in Christ? They have one spirit. "There is 
one body and one spirit," &c. The possession of the spirit of 
Christ is an evidence of vital union with Christ; Rom. 8:9-15; 
and the "fruits of the spirit" alone, should be accepted as the 
elements of Christian character and basis of recognition. Gal. 
5:22-24. The relationship of Father, Son and Brother, which is 
revealed in the New Testament, is based upon the One Spirit. 
All who possess it are fellows, whether they know it or not. "If 
the foot shall say because I am not the hand I am not of the 
body; is it therefore not of the body. " Or if one shall say to the 
other, "I have no need of thee, " does that destroy the 
relationship? 1 Cor. 12. "By one spirit are we all baptized into 
one body... and have all been made to drink into one spirit." Rev. 
13. Whoever has that spirit gives evidence of membership in the 
body, and therefore of acceptance with God; and whoever God 
accepts shall I reject? God forbid. Oh that we might rather more 
fully realize this unity, and sing in the spirit, 

Blest be the tie that binds 
Our hearts in Christian love. 

It will be observed that the unity of the body and the spirit is 
fundamental; and that as there is but one Head, all who have 
fallen asleep in Christ, are as much a part of the one body as are 
those who live at any time. The living generation of Christians 
represents the whole church, but they are not the whole any 
more than a part of my body is all of it, and the church, the 
Bride of Christ, will not, can not, be complete until all who 
compose it, either sleeping or waking, are developed. But if a 
part-the living mortals- can, as they do, represent the whole on 
earth, why may not a part— the first company made immortal- 
represent the whole in a heavenly state. This we say, with the 
possibility in mind that there is order in the reward of the 
church; "Prophets, saints and them that fear his name, small and 
great." Rev. 11:18. 

We are satisfied that whatever theory does not recognize the 
essential unity of the church must be false; and yet we believe it 
can be shown, and that it will yet become more apparent, that 
there is not only variety in condition here, but also a 
corresponding variety in position in the kingdom, and a 
difference in the time of reward, as we usually reckon time. 
"They that are Christ's, at his coming" (parousia -presence) 
must include all Christians, even "babes in Christ," unless it can 
be shown (?) that "babes in Christ" are not members of Christ's 
body; and yet it is evident that it is a period and not a moment, 
which is comprehended in the statement "at his coming." We 
understand it to mean "during his presence." Paul also says, "at 
(or during) the last trump," and it has often been shown that the 
last or seventh trumpet sounds for many years. Without here 
giving the proof, which has often been given to many of our 
readers, we would say, we believe the seventh trumpet will 



continue to sound until the year 1914, which includes, between 
now and then, the day of wrath and of angry nations, which is 
the period, not only of the restoration of the earthly Jerusalem, 
but of reward to the church, or the upbuilding and glorification 
of the heavenly Jerusalem. 

When the New Jerusalem descends at the end of that period, or 
is manifested as the light of the nations for the succeeding age, 
as Christ, the Head, has been the light during the Gospel age, it 
will be observed that it is a city complete- not all throne— but a 
company had just been exalted to the throne, or ruling position 
and capacity (Rev. 5:8-10) before the opening of even a single 
seal; but during the great tribulation which follows, a great and 
bloodwashed company find a place before the throne, (or on the 
"sea of glass;" comp. Rev. 4:6 and 15:2), and they serve God in 
his temple. Rev. 7:9-15. The temple is the church, and to be in it 
is to be a member of it. Here we find variety and unity. All 
constitute the "tabernacle of God," and the city as a whole is 
called the Bride— and yet we see some members higher than 
others. There are superiors -rulers-in the city, but the city as a 
whole is a ruling or influential power over the nations, and the 
"nations shall walk in the light of it. " We have in an article 
written 

R82 : page 3 

before, on "The Building up of Zion," shown the double 
character of Zion-Jewish and Christian-and that the same 
period, from now to 1914, is devoted in God's plan, to the 
restoration of the Old and the glorification of the New. With this 
view of the case, we can see room for the fulfillment of all 
scriptures that speak either of the unity or variety in the church 
of Christ. Some, like Elijah or Aaron, escape; others are left to 
develop or ripen by the judgments. The throne is first 
established, as in Rev. 4, and it becomes the nucleus around 
which the church will gather, until all that fear God's name are 
made up as jewels for his kingdom. 

Aaron was not the nation of Israel but he represented them, and 
while they were allowed to pass through ten plagues being 
protected from the seven last he, having previously gone up to 
meet Moses in the mount was the administrator of those plagues. 

We believe Aaron is a type of the overcomers, or saints, but not 
of the whole church, which includes them "that fear God's name 
small and great" as well as the "prophets, and saints." Rev. 
11:18. "And the Lord said to Aaron, "Go into the wilderness to 
meet Moses. And he went, and met him in the mount of God, 
and kissed him. " Exod. 4:27. The mount being a type of the 
kingdom of God, it would appear that Aaron meeting Moses 
represents a company meeting Christ in the kingdom. Christ is 
in the kingdom first, or is inaugurated in the kingly office, 
before others can share that honor as his cabinet. In Luke 19:15, 



we read: "That when he was returned HAVING RECEIVED 
THE KINGDOM," then he called the servants to account, and 
rewarded them with a share in his royal honors; "Have thou 
authority over two cities," &c. Ver. 17. Notice that the 
examination of the stewards is after he has the kingdom, or royal 
right and yet before they share it. The parallels of the Two 
Dispensations seem to indicate that Christ was due as King, or 
in the kingly office, in the spring of 1878. 

The immediate beginning of the legal restoration of the Jews, by 
the Anglo-Turkish treaty is circumstantial and visible evidence 
that "he whose right it is" had come. Ezek. 21:27. 

R82 : page 4 

When the crown was removed the nation fell, why then should 
not the restoration of the nation be taken as evidence of the 
official presence of the King? It seems clear to some that 
examination of the servants is now in process, and that soon 
reward may be expected. 

"The Times of the Gentiles" extend to 1914, and the heavenly 
kingdom will not have full sway till then, but as a "Stone" the 
kingdom of God is set up "in the days of these (ten gentile) 
kings," and by consuming them it becomes a universal kingdom- 
-a "great mountain and fills the whole Earth." Dan. 2:35-44. The 
history of the four universal monarchies symbolized by the 
image, and also by the four beasts shows that each existed in the 
days of its predecessor and became universal by conquest. The 
fifth is no exception to this rule, though it differs from the others 
in its nature, the character and condition of its rulers, (being all 
immortal like Jesus the Head) and in the mode of the warfare. 
First by purchase [long ago] next at the coming as King, by legal 
transfer, and later by conquest. "The kingdoms of this world 
become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his anointed ones." 
Rev. 1 1:15. In this conquest the saints in glory are to share, and 
shall "execute the judgments written, this honor have all the 
saints." Ps. 14:9. It has been inferred by some that mortals will 
do all that work, because the Psalm speaks of beds, "Let the 
saints be joyful in glory; let them sing aloud upon their beds." 
There are several reasons why we cannot believe that mortals 
will do that work. First: we believe that in this prophecy as in 
many others the type and antitype are blended, and therefore that 
all that suggests mortality in the executioners was fulfilled in 
King David and his army. The "beds" may represent the state of 
perfect rest; and the "two edged sword," "chains" and "fetters of 
iron," which are all weapons of carnal warfare, may represent 
the weapons of a warfare which is not carnal, but yet mighty 
through God to the pulling down of strongholds. There are many 
reasons for regarding the future work of the saints as of the same 
character as the present work but differing only in degree. When 
it is suggested that saints either mortal or immortal are to use 
carnal weapons, as they must if the literal statement of the psalm 



is to be fulfilled in the future, we are reminded of the reproof of 
Jesus to his disciples when they proposed calling down fire from 
Heaven, upon their enemies: "Ye know not what manner of 
spirit ye are of; I am not come to destroy men's lives, but to save 
them." We have no ambition for such work or such honor. Being 
non-combatant here, so far as relates to carnal warfare, so we 
expect to be hereafter. Again, we can not believe that mortals 
are to do the antitypical work, because the promise is to all the 
saints [not to all that fear God's name] and the inspired 
statement is that "it is sown in corruption; it is raised in 
incorruption: it is sown in dishonor; it is raised in glory: it is 
sown in weakness; it is raised in POWER," &c. "To him that 
overcometh and keepeth my works to the end will I give 
POWER over the nations." "Be thou faithful unto death and I 
will give thee a crown of life. " If saints were raised mortal to be 
washed by the word, it would prove that they were still on trial 
and their work unfinished. But Paul, having finished his course, 
could say, henceforth there is laid up for me a crown. The 
judgment of the church is in this life; the judgment of the world 
is hereafter. One of the clear evidences that this is true of the 
church is that they are raised immortal, and are therefore sure of 
eternal life. Whoever is raised mortal, and needs washing, may 
come under the power of the second death. Surely the great 
antitypical kingdom of God is not to begin its work in the mortal 
state and afterward be changed to immortality. Mortality is 
weak; immortals have power. 

There are, of course, two phases of kingdom work; one 
represented by David as a man of war, as in the one hundred and 
forty-ninth psalm; the other following as Solomon, the man of 
peace. But immortal saints can superintend the affairs of nations 
in the future, and work revolutions for their good, as immortal 
angels have done in the past, without using carnal weapons. In 
the future, as in the past, wicked men and nations will doubtless 
do their own fighting. 

During the coming reign of terror the saints will reign in 
judgment, and yet in war it will be "every man's hand against his 
brother. " 

There are evidences that during the downfall of nations, the 
house of the Lord is built up, and all that fear the Lord will be 
made up as jewels for his kingdom. Mai. 3:16,17. After the day 
of wrath, which seems to synchronize with the great harvest, 
Matt. 13, or the ingathering of all that fear God's name, Rev. 
11:18, then comes the shining forth as the sun, the manifestation 
or appearing in glory, or the descent of the New Jerusalem as the 
Bride of Christ and mother of the nations. Light, deliverance and 
glory to the nations will be the result. "There shall be no more 
curse. " As a means to that great end, the servant "before the 
throne" (or on "the sea of glass," Rev. 4:6) in that glorious city, 
will be as necessary as the priest who sits with Christ in his 



throne. The little, too, is as essential to the completeness of the 
body as is the Head itself. Both the Jewish and gospel churches 
are called a "kingdom of priests," or "royal priesthood." The 
former is a type of the latter. But in the type one tribe only 
represented its priestly character and did the priestly work. That 
fact did not destroy the unity of the nation. The like order will 
and even now does exist in the gospel church, but its unity, 
instead of being impaired, is rather sustained by the variety. 
Variety is an essential element of the Divine harmony. 

The holy spirit was sent to take out from among the Gentiles a 
people for his name-to be his wife. Are not all who are baptized 
by one spirit into one body, included among that people, 
whatever be their stage of development? When Christ prayed for 
all that believe, through the apostles' word, did he include the 
babes in Christ? If he did not, then a middle would exist 
between the church and the world; but his prayer that "they all 
may be one," "that the world may believe," shows that no 
middle class exists. The variety evidently exists within the limits 
of the one body, and we are convinced that all who possess the 
one spirit are members, and will be sharers of the one hope. As 
Christ is the Head of the church, so they, married, become the 
united head of the world, the father and mother of a redeemed 
race. 

J. H. P. 

[This article was crowded out of a previous issue.— EDITOR.] 



R82 : page 4 



A LIVING CHRIST. 



There is and ever has been but one Christ. A change of nature 
does not change identity. Whether as the pre-existent One, as the 
Word made flesh, or as the High Priest who can be touched with 
the feelings of our infirmities, He still is Lord, and as such we 
worship Him. "Ye call me Lord and Master," said He on earth, 
"and ye do well, for so I am." Forgiveness of sins is one of 
God's prerogatives. "He said to the sick of the palsy, 'Son, thy 
sins be forgiven thee,. ..that ye may know that the Son of Man 
hath power on earth to forgive sins.'" 

The wise men came at His birth to worship Him. (Matt. 2) The 
leper worshiped Him. They in the ship worshiped Him, as did 
also the ruler and woman of Canaan. Yet none were ever 
rebuked for it. 

Even in the flesh He was "God manifest. " From His character in 
its perfection we get our earliest and truest idea of God. When 
Philip 

R83 : page 4 



requested to see the Father, He answered him, "Have I been so 
long time with you, Philip, and yet hast thou not known me? He 
that hath seen me hath seen the Father also, and how sayest 
thou, then show the Father." (John). Whether we, like Philip, 
become acquainted with Him through His earthly life, or by 
catching the spirit of the written word, whose vital teachings 
contain the image of Him whose name is called the Word of 
God, if so be that we know Him, it shall be to us eternal life. For 
to know Him is to know the Father also. 

To worship a false Christ would indeed be sin, but to worship 
Christ in any form cannot be wrong, for when He bringeth the 
first Begotten into the world, He sayeth, "Let all the angels of 
God worship Him. " And Again, "Thou, Lord, in the beginning 
hast laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the 
work of Thy hands. They shall perish, but thou remainest.... As a 
vesture shalt Thou fold them up, and they shall be changed, but 
Thou art the same, and Thy years shall not fail." (Heb. 
1:6,10,12.) 

Mankind are represented as in a condition of death, because they 
are under sentence of death. Christ, who received from the 
Father an UNFORFEITED life, never entered that condition of 
death, never passed under sentence of death, until he voluntarily 
yielded himself into the hands of wicked men. Hence, whatever 
Scriptures typify his death (like the sacrifices of the law), or 
whenever His death is spoken of, the death on the cross, the only 
death He ever tasted, must be referred to. "In Him was LIFE, 
and the life was the light of men. John came to bear witness of 
that light. He was in the world, and the world was made by Him, 
and the world knew Him not. " 

He did not die when He became human, yet He took upon Him 
new relations and new offices, and consequently new titles. 
Prior to His humanity He is never called the Son of God, nor 
ever spoken of as Christ, which means the Anointed (He was 
anointed at His baptism). Let us then remember when Christ is 
spoken of, it is in His office as the Anointed and not in His pre- 
existent state. 

L. A. A. 



R83 : page 4 



JEWISH RESTORATION. 



A correspondent writes, "Watch the Jew if you would be 
posted. " We do watch them with great interest, but from totally 
different reasons. Many are interested in the rebuilding of 
Jerusalem and the return of fleshly Israel to Palestine as the 
promised establishment of the "Kingdom of God," and many 
now are deeply absorbed by the question, "Are not the English 



speaking peoples of the world a part of the lost ten tribes of 
Israel?" They think they see a similarity between England and 
America, &c, with some of the prophecies concerning Ephraim 
and Manassah. They seem to think, and present some evidences 
which appear reasonable, that these things are so, and we have 
no objection to its being proven so. We believe that fleshly 
Israel will, in the near future, be recognized as the chief nation 
of earth, "Jerusalem be a rejoicing and her people a joy," and 
that ten men shall lay hold, out of all nations, of the skirts of one 
Jew, 

R83 : page 5 

saying, we will go with you, for we have heard that God is with 
you. (Zech 8:23.) 

Nor have we any objection to its being seen that some of the 
prophecies will have a very literal fulfillment in them, but we do 
object to the ignoring of our birthright in Christ, and the 
statement that it is through fleshly Israel only that the promise 
made to Abraham shall be fulfilled— "In thee and thy seed shall 
all the families of the earth be blessed. " The natural seed can 
never fulfill any except the natural part of that promise and 
others like it. The great and glorious part of it belongs to "the 
seed which is Christ," "and if ye be Christ's, then are ye 
Abraham's seed and heirs according to the promise." (Gal. 3:29.) 
When the spiritual children of Abraham are all selected from the 
world and glorified, then in their "blessing all families" we 
understand prophecy to teach that fleshly Israel will be the 
principal instrument through which the blessing will flow. We 
watch the Jews because in their preparations we see that God is 
making ready the instrument. Before their restoration is 
complete we expect to be "changed" and made "like unto 
Christ's glorious body" -or, in a word, that "The Kingdom of 
God" will be set up (organized). When established, its outward 
representative will be "Jerusalem rebuilt upon her old heaps," 
but the New Jerusalem is "The Bride. " This is the city which in 
truth will "reign over the kings of the earth. " But while the 
natural kingdom of Israel may be seen, "the eternal is unseen. " 
The kingdom of heaven cometh not with observation, neither 
shall ye say lo, here, or lo, there, for it will be in your midst- 
and "except a man be born again he cannot see or enter into it. 

When established, "The Law shall go forth from Mount Zion 
(spiritual mountain or kingdom) and the Word of the Lord from 
Jerusalem." Yes, our redemption precedes theirs, as Jesus said 
when he had cursed the fig tree (their nation): "When ye see the 
fig tree put forth his leaves ye say that summer is nigh, so 
likewise ye, when these things come to pass, lift up your heads 
and rejoice, knowing that your redemption draweth nigh. " 



As, therefore, corroborative of our faith in "our high calling" 
soon being realized, we "watch the Jew." We subjoin a few 
items of news concerning them from various parts of the world: 

The Jewish Chronicle says: "If subjected to rigid tests it may 
appear unreasoning that scattered millions of the Jews, 
inhabiting all climes, speaking all languages, and subject to all 
forms of government, should yet turn toward the East with the 
utmost solicitude, and feel for the Holy Land a reverence and 
affection which centuries of exile are incapable of eradicating. 
In this, as in some other respects, the Jewish mind is peculiarly 
constituted. Other races have been expatriated, and have 
forgotten the land from which they sprung; other races have 
colonized lands and have founded distinct nationalities, or have 
only hung on to the parent stem by the slender ligatures of 
language and custom. It is not so with the Jews. Citizens of all 
countries, they are Jews, and through each and all there runs a 
sympathetic chord which vibrates to the touch of the skilled 
player." 

Again, the same paper writes: "They might as well attempt to 
turn the course of the Atlantic as to stem this irresistible tide. In 
the total population of 36,000, the Jews in Jerusalem were 
reckoned two years ago to have increased 13,000, and now they 
are numbered at 18,000; and the contributions for their support 
from the Jews of other countries were estimated at L. 60 ,000 
($300,000) a year." 

The Scotch Record says: "There always was an indescribable 
yearning in the Jew toward the land owned by his ancestors. At 
this time this indescribable yearning has turned to Jerusalem 
such a stream of emigration that some of the Jews were 
proposing to arrest it by assisting the pauper emigrants to turn to 
their own countries." 

A leading London Journal has recently thus adverted to this: 
"The possession of Palestine and a part of Syria by a people who 
have retained an indestructible nationality, while they have 
learned a complete cosmopolitanism during some eighteen 
centuries, a nation at once European and Asiatic— Asiatic in its 
origin, and European in its education, would not be by any 
means a bad arrangement. It might not be impolitic on the part 
of the European powers to assist in placing so influential a 
people in so important a position, as the inevitable decay of 
Turkish power renders a change of government necessary. All 
the difficulties and jealousies incident to any project of joint 
occupation would be avoided; for the Jew is at once of no nation 
and of all. No people could better solve what before many years 
must become the Syrian difficulty. " 

Jer. 16:14, says: "I will bring them again into their own land that 
I gave to their fathers." 



Dr. Moody Stuart stated, at the late general assembly of the 
"Free Church, " quoting a very remarkable statement which was 
recently made by one of the Jewish organs in England, namely: 
"If it is the good will of Providence that there should arise out of 
the accumulated ashes of desolation which covers Palestine, an 
era of glory which shall unite the Jews in the cradle of their race 
and their religion, that consummation could not take place under 
happier auspices than those of England, (although it was 
remarked that the time for this was not yet). In addition to the 
growing desire of the Jews to return to their own land, and signs 
of desire elsewhere to hasten their return, there was (he thought) 
another element in the hope of the world's peace being cemented 
by their occupying the lands of their fathers." 

Isa. 55:5, says: "Nations that know not thee shall run unto thee." 

The following was translated from a French Newspaper: 
"Judging by reports, which appear tolerably well confirmed, the 
Jews are little by little retaking possession of their ancient 
patrimony. Eighty years ago the Sublime Porte permitted 
residence in the Holy City to only three hundred Israelites. Forty 
years ago this number was raised, but the Jews were obliged to 
reside in a special quarter of the city which bore their name. 
This last restriction, however, disappeared in its turn ten years 
ago, and since then the Jews have bought up all the land in 
Jerusalem that could be bought, and have even built entire 
streets of houses outside the walls. Synagogues and Jewish 
hospitals have multiplied. The German Jews have no less than 
sixteen charity associations, and in the interior of the city one 
may count already twenty-eight congregations. Two journals 
have been established. In 

R84 : page 5 

the Rothschild and other Jewish hospitals, six thousand patients 
are ministered to annually. A Venetian Jew has given 60,000 
francs to found a school of agriculture in Palestine. Baron 
Rothschild, at the time of the last loan of 200,000,000, made to 
Turkey, accepted a mortgage on the whole of Palestine. Owing 
to the Jewish immigration, the population of Palestine has 
doubled during the last ten years." 

Jer. 32:41-44: "I will rejoice over them (Israel) to do them good, 
and I will plant them in this land assuredly with my whole heart 
and with my whole soul.... And fields shall be bought in this 
land; ...men shall buy fields for money and subscribe evidences, 
and seal them, and take evidences in the land of Benjamin, and 
in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, and in 
the cities of the mountains, and in the cities of the valley, and in 
the cities of the south, for I will cause their captivity to return, 
saith the Lord. " 

Not only has the Lord commenced bringing them back, but He 
arranges for their reception and comfort on arrival. Late advices 



state that the Rothschilds have just sent to Jerusalem $60,000 to 
be expended in building a large reception house for the newly- 
arriving Jews, where they will receive temporary 
accommodations until able to arrange for their permanent 
homes. This is in addition to large buildings already in use for 
the same purpose. 

And now the latest news through the press is that a prominent 
man in Constantinople, Mr. OLIPHANT, has proposed to the 
Turkish government that it place 1,500,000 acres of fertile land 
lying on the east of the river Jordan in the hands of a 
colonization company whose business it will be to promote the 
immigration thither of Hebrews from all countries of the world. 
And just as the Lord opens the way for their return to Palestine, 
He, as it were, forces them out of other lands. Orders have been 
issued within the last ten days by the "Russian Church," at the 
instance of the Czar, compelling the removal of Hebrews from 
all except the Polish provinces of that vast Empire. This is the 
more remarkable when we reflect that nearly one-third of the 
Jewish population of the world resides there. 



R84 : page 5 

The Meat-Offering. 

LEVITICUS 2. 

As the burnt-offering represents the value of Christ's work in 
the Father's estimation, giving "Himself for us, an offering and a 
sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savour," (Eph. 5:2,) so the 
meat-offering sets forth His perfect human character and 
conduct; and may be linked with His own testimony, "My meat 
is to do the will of him that sent me and to finish his work. " 
(John 4:34.) 

I. It was not a bloody sacrifice, but consisted of fine flour, or 
flour that had no roughness nor unevenness. Neither was there 
anything uneven in the human nature of the Lord Jesus. In all 
other men, however great the church or the world may judge 
them to be, there are serious defects and infirmities, and their 
strongest points are sure to be counter-balanced by some 
humiliating weakness. But He could declare: "The Father hath 
not left me alone," and He could add, as no one beside can say, 
"I do always those things that please him; "-"Which of you 
convinceth me of sin?" (John 8:29,46). Hence God twice burst 
heaven open to exclaim, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am 
well pleased," (Matt. 3:17; 17:5); but this was the only time in 
the history of our race its silence was thus broken. 

II. The fine flour was baken in an oven, and thus every particle 
of it was exposed to the action of the fire. So we hear the perfect 
Man crying in His hot distress, "I am poured out like water, and 



all my bones are out of joint; my heart is like wax; it is melted in 
the midst of my bowels. My strength is dried up like a potsherd, 
and my tongue cleaveth to my jaws, and thou hast brought me 
into the dust of death," (Ps. 22:14,15). The fire was burning very 
fiercely, when He who had always done those things that 
pleased His Father uttered the wail of a 

R84 : page 6 

breaking heart: "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" 
(Matt. 27:46). 

III. The fine flour was mingled with oil, and oil is the well 
known symbol of the Holy Spirit in the Scriptures. When the 
angel announced to the virgin the birth of the promised Messiah 
he said to her "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the 
power of the Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also that 
holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of 
God." (Luke 1:35). While therefore the Lord Jesus was the seed 
of the woman, He was not the seed of the man, but as the angel 
said to Joseph, "That which is conceived [margin, begotten] in 
her is of the Holy Ghost." (Matt. 1:20). Hence His very nature 
was perfectly holy, unlike our nature, which "is enmity against 
God; for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can 
be." (Rom. 8:7). 

IV. The unleavened wafers of fine flour were anointed with oil. 
When the Son of Mary came up out of the water of baptism, "He 
saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon 
him," (Matt. 3:16); and "Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost, 
returned from Jordan, and was led by the Spirit into the 
wilderness;" and "returned in the power of the Spirit into 
Galilee," to proclaim, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, 
because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor." 
(Luke 4:1,14,18). Peter also testifies "How God anointed Jesus 
of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power," (Acts 10:38). 
And if the blood of sacrifices under the law availed to put away 
sin for a time, "How much more shall the blood of Christ, who 
through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, 
purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living 
God?" (Heb. 9:14). 

V. The meat-offering was not only anointed with oil, but 
frankincense was put thereon. This word is derived from a verb 
which signifies "to be white or to make white," and it is the verb 
David used when he cried out, "Wash me, and I shall be whiter 
than snow," (Ps. 5 1 :7); and the verb God used when He said, 
"Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow. " 
[Isa. 1:18]. The word rendered frankincense occurs twenty times 
in the Old Testament, and it was closely connected with the holy 
anointing oil, the type of the Holy Ghost, [Ex. 30:34], and 
placed upon the twelve loaves that were ever in the presence of 
God, on the tables of shew-bread. [Lev. 24:5-8]. Where sin was 



in question, it could not be used, [Lev. 5:11; Num. 5:15]; but it 
tells of the relation between the Bridegroom and the Bride. 
[Song of Sol. 3:6; 4:6,14]. 

VI. No meat-offering could be made with leaven or with honey. 
The word leaven, in its various forms and inflections, is found 
seventy-one times in the Old Testament, and seventeen times in 
the New, and it is the appropriate and unvarying symbol of that 
which is evil. There is not so much as a solitary exception to this 
rule, and little progress can be made in an intelligent 
acquaintance with the Bible, until it is acknowledged, and kept 
constantly in mind. Honey was forbidden, to teach us that 
whatever is sweet to nature must be disowned, if we would walk 
after the example of Christ who pleased not Himself. [Rom. 
15:3; Matt. 16:24; Luke 9:59-62; John 6:63]. 

VII. "Every oblation of thy meat-offering shalt thou season with 
salt -with all thine offerings thou shalt offer salt. " The quality 
of salt to preserve, and to arrest the spread of corruption, 
rendered it a fit symbol of an everlasting covenant, and a 
significant type of true Christians in the midst of sin and vice. 
"Ye are the salt of the earth," said Jesus to His disciples; "but if 
the salt have lost his savour, wherewith shall it be salted? it is 
thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be 
trodden under foot of men." [Matt. 5:13]; "Let your speech be 
always with grace, seasoned with salt." [Col. 4:6].— Selected. 



R84 : page 6 



CLEAN THEOLOGY. 



Theology is a science. It treats of the existence, character and 
attributes of God; of his laws and government, the doctrines we 
are to believe, and the duties we are to practice. 

Theory is an exposition of the general principles of any science, 
or the science as distinguished from the art. Theology is the 
substance of truth, and theory is an arrangement of the truth for 
expression. Theology, rightly understood, is always clean, but 
because men have not understood it, and, therefore, taught error 
for truth, it has given reason for the common use of the terms 
"false" or "true," "clean" or "foul," theology. In fact there has 
been so much error mixed with truth in the popular teachings, 
that to many who are aroused to the knowledge of this, 
"theology" has become the synonym of error, and "theologian" a 
brand almost akin to infamy. 

Some of our readers have received the idea that we belittle the 
importance of a clean theology; that we have become disgusted 
with all theory, and have spoken contemptuously of the great 
things which our Father has revealed concerning his plan as 
"theory, theory." 



How any one gained such impression we know not. Certainly 

R85 : page 6 

not from anything, properly understood, which we have ever 
spoken or written. We have always regarded with favor any 
effort to ascertain what God's plan is, both of revelation and 
salvation; and men are not liable to speak of anything with 
contempt which we regard with favor. If colored glasses affect 
the appearance of objects viewed through them, something 
analogous to this may affect the hearing. We do not look 
favorably upon every theory about God's plan, but we are not 
conscious of treating any one, or his theory, with contempt. In 
the investigation of so great a science as theology, there is room 
for many honest differences of opinion, and while we can not 
help believing right what we are convinced is true, we think it is 
becoming in a fallible man to be humble and civil at least, and to 
remember that we may be mistaken. We are conscious of being 
misunderstood sometimes, and it may be we are too apt to 
wonder why it is so, when it may arise from our inability to 
express our own ideas properly. We feel almost certain that 
much of the difference among people arises from the use of the 
same words to express a different thought, or different words to 
express the same thought. We are reminded that as others have 
misunderstood us, it is quite likely that in some things we have 
misunderstood others. We need not be surprised at this, for even 
the Lord himself has not yet made himself understood. If he 
bears "so patiently" being misunderstood and misrepresented, 
we might be encouraged to bear a little, and in the spirit of love, 
"try, try again." 

In common talk, what a man believes about God and His plans 
is called the man's theology, or his theory, and while such use of 
the terms may not be exactly right, it should not be considered 
disrespectful to use them so. 

In all that we have said or written on the subject of holiness or 
righteousness as the "Wedding Garment," it has not been our 
object to set aside the necessity of truth, or the importance of 
knowing the truth, but we wish to be understood positively as 
teaching that knowledge, without obedience, is not only not 
enough, but that it is a curse, and will prove "the savor of death 
unto death." Jesus said: "If ye know these things, happy are ye if 
ye do them, " and "He that knows His Master's will and did it not 
shall be beaten with many stripes." These, certainly, imply that 
knowledge does not necessarily produce right practice, and Paul 
tells us of a class who "hold the truth in unrighteousness," (Rom. 
1:18), and "when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, 
neither were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, 
and their foolish heart was darkened. " A clean theology includes 
the "duties we are to practice" as well as the "doctrines we are to 
believe; " but we maintain that a man may have a very correct 
idea about the doctrines of the Bible and of the duties 



inculcated, too, and yet not practice them. Science is one thing; 
art is quite a different thing. The difference is just as great 
between theology and righteousness, for He that doeth right is 
righteous. 

We plead for the necessity of obedience; not mere outward acts, 
that would be formalism, but loyal obedience —obedience from 
the heart. (Rom. 6:17). "He that hath clean hands and a pure 
heart" shall ascend into the hill of the Lord (the Kingdom). Ps. 
24:3,4. 

Loving obedience must be more pleasing to the Lord than 
anything short of it, and doing is the best evidence of love. Jesus 
said: "If ye love me, keep my commands." John 14:15, and "Ye 
are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you. " John 
15:14. To such as obey him he says, "I call you not servants," 
and reveals to them his will and plans, (ver. 15.) So we see that 
obedience is important if we want the Lord's help to understand 
the plan. "If any man will do His will he shall know of the 
doctrine." John 7:17. 

There are several things which we would be glad to say and be 
understood. 

1. We believe it is our duty as Christians to gain all possible 
knowledge of God's plans, remembering that "Things that are 
revealed are for us," and therefore proper subjects for thought 
and search. "Hidden things belong to the Lord," and no man by 
searching can find them out. We are to get our theology as clean 
as possible. We are to "grow in grace and in the knowledge of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. " 

2. We believe that the object of knowledge is to promote love 
and obedience, and to assist us in the formation of God-like 
characters, thus enabling us to "apprehend that for which Christ 
apprehended us." (Phil. 3:12), "for God hath called us, not to 
uncleanness, but unto holiness." (1 Thess. 4:7.) 

3. We believe it is possible for men to gather a large store of 
knowledge of prophecy and the mysteries of God, and not have 
love, and in such a case all is vain. 1 Cor. 13:2. Knowledge is 
power for good or evil, and if a man does not "obey the truth," 
the more knowledge he has the worse man he is. 

4. When teaching that a clean theology is not all that is required, 
let no one suppose that we under- value the knowledge of truth 
as a means, when it is obeyed, to the attainment of holiness. 

5. While opposing other men's ideas, we have nothing to say 
against men. For years we have stood in defense of a large 
liberty of opinion within the limits of the "One Faith" and 
Christian fellowship, and never before as much as now have we 
realized the necessity for such freedom. We ask for ourselves 
only what we freely grant to others-the 



R85 : page 7 

right to do our own thinking— calling no man Father, Master, or 
Lord in matters of faith or opinion. 

We hope to be willing in the future as in the past to learn from 
any one, however humble in station or ability, and to receive 
nothing without evidence, however exalted they may be, even 
though it were "an angel from heaven." Gal. 1:8. 

We disfellowship no man for opinion's sake, believing that 
many, who know but little, are dear unto the Lord, and will be 
heirs of the Kingdom among the sanctified. We have sometimes 
been cast off by others, but we have never been conscious of 
casting off others, and we hope and pray that we may never be 
guilty of such a thing. J. H. P. 



R85 : page 7 

An offer to you. 

We have a few hundred copies of "The object and manner of 
our Lord's return." [a 60 page tract price 10 cts.] To those who 
will distribute them we will send at 60 cents per doz., or 30 
cents half dozen. If you will use them judiciously and cannot 
afford to pay we will send them free. 

We advise that you read your paper carefully at least twice. 



R85 : page 7 

The Three Great Covenants. 

A covenant is a ratified, unalterable agreement. God has made 
many covenants with man. (Gen. 6:18; Jer. 33:20, &c.) Three, 
however, stand out very prominently, as in them have been 
bound up all the best interests of mankind. 

FIRST: The Covenant of God to Abraham. This covenant seems 
to comprehend and include a blessing on the natural fleshly 
descendants, as well as upon the higher, spiritual, seed, "which 
seed is Christ; and if ye be Christ's (body), then are ye 
Abraham's seed and heirs according to (this) promise. " If this 
thought be borne in mind, it will assist us in grasping the full 
meaning of this covenant. The spiritual seed is called the 
"blessing seed" and "stars of heaven." It is prophesied that 
"They that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars 
forever." (Dan. 12:3). And Jesus calls himself "the bright and 
morning star. " This thought seems to have had more weight and 
meaning with the ancients, who looked up the stars with 
superstitious reverence, believing that they controlled the 
destinies both of nations and of men. So probably this portion of 
the covenant represented by stars signifies heavenly rulers- 



Christ and His Bride. The natural descendants are probably 
meant when mention is made of "a great nation" possessing "this 
land"-Canaan- said to be as the "sand of the sea." This 
represents an earthly people as plainly as the stars do the 
heavenly. Let us read the covenant and see that it contains these 
two elements, and recognizes both natural and spiritual Israel. 
(Gen. 12:2,3; 13:14-16; 15:18, and 22:16-18). Paul assures us 
that "the seed" referred to in this covenant is Christ. (Gal. 3:16.) 
Fleshly Israel lost this, the cream or choicest part of the 
covenant-the spiritual. As Paul says (Rom. 11:7): "Israel hath 
not obtained that which he seeketh for, but the election hath 
obtained it. " But the losing of this better part does not cut them 
off entirely from having a part in that covenant. "For brethren, 
that you may not be conceited with yourselves" (thinking that all 
of God's favor and covenant are taken from them and given to 
you), "I wish you not to be ignorant of this secret: that hardness 
in some measure has happened to Israel till the fullness of the 
Gentiles may come in (i.e.,) until the bride selected from the 
Gentiles has been completed). "And then all Israel will be saved, 
as it has been written, "The Deliverer shall come out of Zion, 
and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob," and "This is THE 
COVENANT WITH THEM FROM ME, when I shall take away 
their sins." (Rom. 11:25- "Diaglott"). 

Though for 1800 years they have been counted as enemies, and 
blinded to the gospel, yet they are still beloved for the father's 
sake; for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance (vs. 
29); i.e., these earthly blessings are just as sure to them as our 
spiritual ones are to us, because God so promised or covenanted, 
and never changes. Thus, we see the breadth and grandeur of 
God's plan and arrangement —how the natural seed was cast 
aside for the time that the spiritual might be developed, who, in 
their turn, are to be made the instruments for blessing the 
natural; when "they shall obtain mercy through your mercy; " 
when "The Deliverer shall come out of Zion (spiritual Israel- 
the church) and turn away ungodliness from Jacob" (fleshly 
Israel). When we see this, we see the fullness of this covenant to 
Abraham. It shows us what God meant when he promised that 
Abraham's seed should be mighty, possessing the gates of their 
enemies (the place of power and control), and be so far above 
others as to be able to "bless all the families of the earth." "O, 
the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God! 
How unsearchable His judgments and untraceable His ways; for 
who hath known the mind of the Lord?" 

THE COVENANT OF THE LA W, 

is the second covenant we wish to consider. It was unlike the 
Abrahamic, in that it was conditional and two-sided, i.e., it was 
made between God and Israel and by its arrangements, God was 
bound to do certain things, if Israel did certain other things. The 
one with Abraham was unconditional. God said: "I will, &c. " It 



was not so, with the Abrahamic covenant, Abraham was in no 
way obligated. (Circumcision was instituted after the covenant. 
Rom. 4:10.) It was not Abraham's covenant, but God's entirely; 
and for this reason it had no mediator. (A mediator is one who 
stands between the parties to an agreement or contract, whose 
duty it is to see that both parties fulfill their parts of the 
covenant.) Instead, God sware by himself that he would keep 
His covenant [See form of oath Gen. 15:8-18 andJer. 34:18-20.] 
"The Law," is called a covenant. [Compare Gal. 3:17 and 4:24.] 
It was ordained in the hands of a mediator (Moses. Deut. 5:5) 
which proves that it contained conditions for its fulfillment; for 
"a mediator is not of one," (Gal. 3:20.) or, not necessary where 
there was only one party contracting as in the case of the 
Abrahamic Covenant. 

This (the Law) was not a part of the first covenant, neither was it 
made with the people of the world, but only with fleshly Israel- 
"And Moses called all Israel and said unto them: Hear O 
Israel.... The Lord our God made a covenant with us at Horeb. 
The Lord made not this covenant with our fathers, BUT WITH 
US, even us who are all of us here alive this day." Deut. 5:1-5. 

That the Ten commandments, particularly, and the ceremonial 
law, incidentally, constituted this covenant, is clear from the 
reading of the remainder of this chapter. A difference between 
moral and ceremonial law is now recognized, but it is of men. 
God called them one- "The Law." This Law Covenant was 
seemingly designed as a blessing to Israel, yet really by coming 
under it, they condemned themselves; for it is written "cursed 
[condemned] is every one that continueth not in all the words of 
the Law to do them. " God never intended therefore, that they 
should be benefited by this covenant since, "By the deeds of the 
Law shall no flesh be justified in his sight. " What then was the 
object of this covenant? It had two objects: first, it demonstrated 
that the natural man as a fallen creature, could not live in 
harmony with God -could not do right or be righteous. And 
finally it was proved and illustrated that a perfect man could 
keep God's perfect law, when Jesus did keep it and thereby 
became heir legally as well as by grace, to all the provisions of 
both covenants. 

Secondly: The law "was appointed on account of transgressions, 
till the seed should come to whom the promise related. " (Gal. 
3:19). God knew the best time, and "in due time sent forth His 
Son. " The law was introduced because the proper time had not 
come for the development of "the seed" referred to in the 
covenant to Abraham, and was intended to prevent Israel's 
becoming degraded like other nations, and to act as a restraint 
on their fleshly nature, and an educator of self-control, &c. It 
thus was a "schoolmaster," which, by showing them their own 
weakness, prepared them to receive Jesus Christ as their justifier 
from the things which the law condemned. (Gal. 3:24) And it 



did this very work. By the time the seed was due, it had prepared 
some to receive Jesus. 

Thirdly: It was used as a type, not of the Abrahamic, but of the 
new covenant, to illustrate the operations and conditions of that 
covenant, as we shall soon see. 

"THE NEW COVENANT" 

Is repeatedly mentioned in scripture. It should not be 
misconstrued as being God's covenant with us- "the seed;" no, 
that was part of the Abrahamic covenant, and although in 
harmony with each other, they are not the same, nor is the "new 
covenant" made with the church at all. It does not come into 
operation until the spiritual seed as well as the fleshly children, 
have come into possession of what was promised them under the 
Abrahamic covenant. 

It, like the law which was its shadow or type, is between God 
and fleshly men-the world. If, therefore, this covenant is 
between two parties (God and the world), there must be 
conditions binding upon both; hence there must be a mediator 
(as in the type) to stand responsible for the fulfillment of the 
conditions of both. Who, then, is to act as mediator of the new 
covenant? Let Paul answer: "Jesus, the mediator of the new 
covenant." [Heb. 12:24]. Yes, Jesus, our Head, is the one, and 
the only one, who can stand uncondemned before God's 
righteous law. In Him God recognizes His holy Son, separate 
from sinners, and in Him humanity may, and soon will, 
recognize their Lord, now highly exalted, but once "the man of 
sorrows and acquainted with grief, who, by the grace of God, 
tasted death for every man;" and "who is a faithful High Priest," 
able to sympathize. Only through Him can the world ever be 
made at-one with God— His great work is at-one-ment. He will 
associate with Him in this work His tried and faithful bride. 
Now, what are the conditions of this new covenant? They are, as 
in its type, the law, do and live. God can never be a party to any 
covenant recognizing sin. Perfect righteousness ["Be ye 
perfect"] has always been the condition on which God 
recognizes or communes with any of His children. Christians in 
the present age, although not individually perfect are reckoned 
so, being hid in Christ, and as members of His body are covered 
by His robes of righteousness. But in the coming time, the 
imputed righteousness of another will not avail, but "every man 
shall die for his own sin" [not the sin of Adam], 

R85 : page 8 

or vice versa, live by his own righteousness [perfect obedience]. 

It may be asked, then: In what way will the new age under the 
new covenant differ from the Jewish age under the law 
covenant? If the conditions of life are obedience to God's perfect 
law, will it not result, as the law covenant did, in condemning all 



under it to death? We answer no, the difficulty then was, not 
with the law, but with man. Man, in his fallen, imperfect 
condition, could not keep "the law ordained to life. " But the 
conditions of this new covenant on God's part are, that man shall 
be brought to a condition in which he can obey the perfect law, 
and always keep it in his heart, as it is written, "Behold, the days 
come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the 
house of Israel, and with the house of Judah....This shall be the 
covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those 
days, saith the Lord: I will put my law in their inward part, and 
write it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be 
my people, for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember 
their sin no more. " "In those days they shall no more say, the 
fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the children's teeth are set 
on edge, but every one shall die for his own iniquity. " [Jer. 
31:31.] 

"And in that day I will make a covenant for them with the beasts 
of the field and with the fowl of heaven and with the creeping 
things of the ground and I will break the bow, and the sword, 
and the battle, out of the earth." (Hos. 2:18. See also Jer. 32:37- 
41, Ezek. 37:26.) We see clearly that the new covenant is yet 
future and also that a great change will be effected in the 
condition of Israel, who, under the Law previously, were unable 
to keep it. The trouble then was, "the fathers [Adam and his 
successors] had eaten the sour grape of sin, and the children's 
teeth were set on edge so that they could not keep the Law of 
God; so the "Day of Atonement" is brought in [the Gospel Age] 
and during it, they, and all men, are redeemed from sin and the 
curse, through Jesus Christ, who, by the grace of God tasted 
death for every man, The man Christ Jesus, holy, harmless, 
separate from sinners, made a curse for us, made sin [i.e. dealt 
with as the sinner] for us, [he] who knew no sin." And it is 
consequently after the gospel age when they are pardoned freely 
for Christ's sake, and restored to the condition of sinless perfect 
manhood, that the new covenant comes into force. And to this 
thought agree the words of Paul [Rom. 11:27.] "This is my 
[new] covenant unto them when I shall take away their sins." 

The nations are to be blessed also under this new covenant, by 
becoming "daughters" to Israel. "I will give them unto thee for 
daughters, but not by thy (old) covenant." Ezek. 16:61. 

We have seen that to every covenant to which there are 
obligations of two parties, there is a mediator, or one who stands 
between guaranteeing the fulfillment of its conditions. As under 
the covenant of the Law, Moses was the mediator, so is 



"JESUS THE MEDIATOR OF 
THE NEW COVENANT, " 

and to him God looks for the fulfillment of the Law, and to him 
Israel and the world look for ability to comply with its 
conditions. Remember that we, the gospel church do not come 
to Christ under the new covenant neither under the "old" or Law 
covenant, but under a covenant older than either of these [Gal. 
3:17.] the Abrahamic covenant; as part of "The Seed." "If ye be 
Christ's [body] then are ye Abraham's Seed and heirs according 
to (that) promise." Gal. 3:29. 

As the typical or Law covenant [or "testament"-same Greek 
word;] was ratified or sealed by Moses its Mediator, with the 
blood of a bull and a goat annually, so the "new covenant" is 
sealed with the blood of better sacrifices" [plural] which these 
represented, viz: Christ-Head and body. 

Moses took a bunch of hyssop and scarlet wool and therewith 
sprinkled of the ratifying blood mixed with water, both the book 
(type of the Law) and all the people. (See Heb. 9:19.) So with 
the New Covenant, it must also be ratified with blood; and the 
mediator of the "New," gives his own blood (life,) both head and 
body, during this gospel day of sacrifice. And soon when the 
better sacrifices are complete, the people will be sprinkled with 
this cleansing blood and with the pure water of truth. It will 
sprinkle both book (law) and people, bringing the people into 
harmony with God and therefore, into harmony with his Law. 
Their teeth will no longer be set on edge; no longer will they, 
when they would do good find evil present with them; for "All 
shall know the Lord from the least to the greatest," and "The 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth. " 

Who will do the sprinkling after the sacrifices are complete? It 
was Moses in the type; it will be the Great Prophet and Mediator 
in the antitype— "A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up 
unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all 
things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to 
pass that every soul which will not hear that Prophet, shall be 
destroyed from among the people." Acts 3:22. This prophecy 
belongs to the "Times of restitution of all things," and is quoted 
by Peter as applicable there. 

That prophet or teacher- "The Christ" -Head and body is now 
being "raised up" (to power) and soon the work of sprinkling 
and cleansing humanity begins; and the soul (person) who will 
not then obey and be cleansed shall be destroyed. In that age, the 
sinner a hundred years old will be cut off, though at that age he 
would be but "a child. " Isa. 65 :20. 

Let us briefly review these covenants as they are illustrated in a 
type or allegory. (Gal. 4:22-31). Paul explained that Abraham's 
wife, Sarah, was a type of the covenant made with Abraham, 
referring to "The Seed. " As years rolled by, and no child came, 



they began to look for a fulfillment in some other way, and 
Hagar takes the place of a wife and bears a son, who apparently 
is to be the heir. So the original promise of God meant Christ, 
but He was not born until "due time," and in the meantime "The 
Law" was given from Sinai, apparently taking the place of the 
covenant, and under the law covenant a fleshly seed was 
developed-fleshly Israel. But the Abrahamic covenant had not 
failed, and after the Hagar covenant had borne fleshly Israel 
(typified by Ishmael), the true seed of Abraham and heir is born, 
under the first (or Sarah) covenant; i.e., Christ Jesus and the 
members of His body- spiritual Israel. 

This is as far as Paul carries the type, because speaking only of 
the two seeds, natural and spiritual, and the two covenants under 
which they come into existence. But as we find that God is to 
make "a new covenant," "after those days," we naturally inquire: 
Why was not this new covenant typified by a wife as well as the 
other two? And upon examination we find it was so illustrated. 
Turning to Gen. 24:67, we read how Isaac receives Rebecca into 
Sarah's tent, and she becomes his married wife, &c, illustrating 
how our heavenly bridegroom will receive His bride at the end 
of her journey, and bring her into, and associate her with, 
Himself, in the enjoyment of all things promised in the first (or 
Sarah) covenant. Then we read: "Then, again, Abraham took a 
wife, and her name was Keturah," illustrating, as plainly as a 
type can, the new covenant. 

Each of the first two covenants, bore but one offspring. The 
first, the "heir of all things," (Isaac-the spiritual Israel) and the 
second, fleshly Israel, beloved for the Father's sake. But the 
New Covenant (Keturah) bears six sons, which, taken with the 
one of Hagar would be seven— a complete number— representing 
that all the fleshly children would be developed under the Hagar 
and Keturah or "Law" and "New" Covenants. The name Sarah 
means Princess, Hagar means flight or cast out, Keturah means 
incense or sweet; all of which are significant. 

Oh, how our covenant— the Royal —looms up above all the 
others. Let us not forget that we must die with Jesus, if we 
would LIVE and share in the glorious work of sprinkling and 
cleansing the world in the next age. "That by means of death 
...they which are called might receive the promise of eternal 
inheritance." Heb. 9:15. 



R85 : page 8 

An Objection Answered. 

We noticed in a local paper a few days ago an extract entitled 
"A Curious calculation," which assumed to figure up the total 
number of inhabitants who have lived on the earth; claiming an 



unreasonable number, and asserting that the globe was a vast 
cemetery; that in fact it must have been dug over about eight 
times in order to bury its dead. As this may seem an objection to 
truths which we hold concerning the race in this day of the Lord, 
in the reliving of all the dead upon this earth, and as this article 
in some shape is picked up and passed along by the press every 
little while, having been frequently answered, we propose to 
illustrate how it may be met. 

The most reliable statistics place the present number of the 
world's inhabitants at not to exceed 1,200,000,000. 

It is evident that the world was never so thickly settled as at 
present; and as man's age is gradually shortening, the number of 
generations in a given time is proportionately increasing. 
Consequently, if we multiply the present population of the earth 
by the number of generations since creation, assuming the 
present ratio, it is evident that we will more than cover the entire 
number that have ever lived on this globe. That is, we assume, 
for the sake of argument, that the race begun with one billion, 
two hundred millions, and that there have never been less in any 
generation since. 

To show the extreme liberality of our estimate, we have but to 
remember that the race really began with a single pair, and 
continued so for many years, as Seth was born when Adam was 
130 years old. At the flood, the race started again with only four 
couples. The present length of a generation is reckoned at about 
33 years, or three generations to a century. But, from Genesis, 
5 th chapter, we learn that there were only eleven generations 
between the creation and the flood- 1,656 years-making full 
150 years to a generation. In Luke, 8th chap., we find seventy- 
six generations from Adam to Christ inclusive. Dividing into 
4,000 years, the commonly accepted 

R86 : page 8 

chronology— we get about 52-1/2 years to a generation. 

Discarding, however, all reductions, and assuming that we are 
6,000 years from the creation of Adam, which is about the time 
by the best chronology we have, 3x60 = 180 generations. Then 
180 x 1,200,000 = 217,000,000,000, as total number of 
inhabitants. Allowing ten square feet as the surface covered by 
each dead body, large and small, we have 2,160,000,000,000 
square feet occupied. 

Now, the State of Texas covers 237,000 square miles. There are 
27,878,400 square feet to a mile, so that there is a surface of 
6,607,180,800,000 square feet in Texas. 

Dividing this sum by the number of square feet required as 
above, we find it goes three times, with the trifle of 
127,000,000,000 of square feet to spare. That is to say, THREE 
TIMES our most liberal estimate of the world's total number of 



inhabitants since creation might be buried in the State of Texas, 
with nearly 3,000,000 of acres left. W. I. M. 

[We have just received an article of similar import to the above, 
from Brother Rice, with which he sends us the following 
statistics clipped from a California paper, which is both curious 
and interesting. Evidently there is room enough for the 
accomplishment of "the restitution of all things which God hath 
spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets. "-EDITOR.] 

DENSITY OF POPULATION. 

"In the following computations it is assumed that the earth was 
created 6,000 years ago, and that the average population since 
the creation has been the same as the population of the present 
time, and the average duration of life 33 years. 

A person in a standing position occupies 1 -2/3 square feet of 
space. 

A person in a sitting position occupies 3-1/3 square feet of 
space. 

The present population of the earth (1,424,000,000), could stand 
on an area of 86 square miles; an area about twice that of the 
city of San Francisco; and that number of persons could be 
seated on an area of 171 square miles; an area about 2-5/8 that 
of the District of Columbia. 

The area of the United States is 3,603,884 square miles. Within 
its boundaries there is standing room for 60,282,31 1,823,360 
persons; a number equal to the population of 1,396,991 years, in 
time nearly 233 times the age of the earth."- Statistician. 



page 8 

Preaching Notice. 

Invitations to hold meetings may be addressed either to the 
editor (mentioning whom you wish to have), or direct to the 
brethren. 



R86 : page 1 

VOL. I. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., APRIL, 1880. 

NO. 10. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
H. B. RICE, . . . W. OAKLAND, CAL. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R86 : page 1 



The Melchisedec Priesthood. 

DIALOGUE. 

B. We have not had our usual talks of late, Brother A., and I 
called for one this evening. Suppose we drop our study of 
Revelation, tonight, and consider the Melchisedec Priesthood. I 
have a new idea concerning Melchisedec, viz. : that he was really 
Christ Jesus in another manifestation; the same person who was 
afterward born in Bethlehem. What do you think of it? 

A. It may be a new thought to you, Brother B., but it certainly is 
an old one to most of the deep thinkers of the church; i.e., they 
have usually thought of the question, but usually, also, have 
concluded that it is a mere random thought, suggested by the 
statement that he was "without beginning of days, nor end of 
years," but upon close examination of the subject it has been 
dropped. This, however, is not an argument against your view, 
which you supposed new. If you have any good reasons, let me 
have them, and let us reason together, and let the new idea stand 
or fall accordingly. It is a thing we should always remember, 
however, that all new things are not, because new, true. 

B. I may have been hasty in deciding on this subject. The text 
you refer to has been the one on which I built most- "Without 
beginning of days, nor end of years." How would you 
understand this text unless by supposing that it refers to God, 
who is "from everlasting to everlasting"? 

A. Well, to take your view of it would make Melchisedec the 
Father, and not our Lord Jesus, who is called the "first- 
begotten," "only-begotten," "the Son," "the beginning of the 
creation of God. " We believe that Jesus had an existence before 
He came into the world, that it was in glory, and that He left the 
glory which He had with the Father "before the world was." We 
believe the word to teach that since "His obedience unto death, 
even the death of the cross," "God (the Father) hath highly 
exalted Him, and given Him a name above every name," etc.; 
that now all power in heaven and earth is given unto Him. " We 
believe that "of His kingdom there is no end," and that "His 
throne is forever and ever. " But we cannot suppose that He 
never had a beginning, since it is positively stated that He was 
"the beginning of the creation." This, of course, involves the 
idea that the Heavenly Father and Son are no more one person 
than an earthly father and son could be one in person. There is a 
one-ness, however, a unity, existing between them, the one-ness 
of will, aim, &c, as it was written of Jesus, "Lo, I come to do 
Thy will, O God. " We remember further that Jesus prayed for 
us, His church, that we might have the same kind of unity; not 
unity of person, but unity of purpose, aim, and interest. He prays 
"That they all may be ONE, even as Thou, Father, and I are 
one. " This shows us clearly the kind of one-ness existing 
between our Father and our Lord. 



If, then, the text, "without beginning of days, nor end of years," 
as applied to Melchisedec, means that he never had a beginning 
nor end of life, it would prove not that he was Jesus, but 
Jehovah. We think, however, that this is not its meaning, but- 

B. Let me first explain my process of reasoning on the matter, 
that you may more fully answer. Paul says that Jesus was made 
a priest after the order of Melchisedec. Now, I reason that if of 
that order, He must have been the head or founder of it; that 
therefore Melchisedec was Christ. If Melchisedec was only a 
man, if he were not Christ, would it not imply that Jesus must be 
lower than him, and consequently not in as high honor as the 
man Melchisedec, who was the head of the order? 

A. I do not think your reasoning sound. You seem to forget that 
men are sometimes used as types of Christ, and that the type is 
always inferior to the antitype. For instance: Adam was a type, 
as the head of the human family; David was the first king who 
ever "sat on the throne of the Lord;" Moses was a figure of Him 
that was to come, as it is written: "A prophet shall the Lord your 
God raise up unto you like unto me. " 

If Christ is a prophet like unto or after the order of Moses, does 
it prove that Moses was not a man— that Moses must have been 
Christ? If David (the name means the anointed -the Christ) was 
a type of Christ, and called "the Lord's anointed," does it prove 
that he was not a man? If Adam was the head of the race was he 
really not a man; was he Christ in some previous manifestation? 
By no means. Adam, David, Moses, Aaron, as well as Solomon, 
Isaac, Jacob, Melchisedec, &c, were but figures of the true 
Head, King, Prophet, Priest, and Melchisedec, as a type, showed 
how the kingly and priestly offices (separate under the law) 
would both unite in Him, so that He would be a "Priest upon His 
throne. " All the types are natural, representing things higher. 
First, the natural head, king, prophet and priest: afterward, the 
spiritual. 

R195 : page 1 

B. This, I admit, seems to overturn my new ideas, but let me 
know how Melchisedec was without father or mother? 

A. It would scarcely be necessary to remind you that Christ was 
not without a Father. Call to mind His words— "Father forgive 
them; " "Father, glorify Thou me with the glory which I had with 
Thee before the world was." It could not then refer to Christ in 
His pre-existent state, nor, can it apply to Him as "the man, 
Christ Jesus," for Jesus was "born of a woman." Wakefield's 
new version renders this (Heb. 7:3) "Of whose father, mother, 
pedigree, birth, and death, we have no account. " There was a 
strict record kept of parentage, birth, death, &c, of every Levite, 
so that any one claiming to be a priest or Levite could prove it 
by the records. 



The Diaglott, renders this text, "without father, without mother, 
without genealogy, having neither a beginning of days nor an 
end of life, but having been made like to the Son of God, 
remains a priest perpetually. " Some take the view (as does 
Wakefield, quoted above) that this text only means that no 
account was kept of his birth, death, &c. While we may feel sure 
that he had a father and mother and a beginning of days, we are 
not sure that he died. Verse 8 seems to imply that he, like Enoch 
and Elijah, did not die— "Here, indeed, men (the Levitical 
Priesthood) receive tithes, who die; but there, one (Melchisedec 
received tithes), of whom it is affirmed that he lives. This is a 
positive statement that Melchisedec did not die. We must 
suppose that he was translated. 

B. Would not the fact that he was called a priest, and that he did 
not die, give strength to my suggestion that he was Christ? 

A. No, the very reverse. It is testified of Melchisedec that he did 
not die, "that he lives," but it is testified of Christ that He did 
die. This same Paul could say of Christ: "Jesus Christ, by the 
grace of God, tasted death for every man. " We conclude, then, 
that as Christ, on the spiritual plane of life, had a Father, and on 
the earthly plane a mother, and did "die for our sins," "even the 
death of the cross," therefore He was not the same person as 
Melchisedec. 

B. Yes, now I see clearly that they are not the same, but can you 
show why the two priesthoods are given, and why they are 
contrasted? 

A. Jesus fills up so large a work, and so varied, that many types 
are required to illustrate His work. David illustrated His kingly 
power -putting down all enemies. Solomon represented His 
peaceful reign (the millennium), and His wisdom. "In His day 
the righteous 

R195 : page 2 

shall flourish." But these were only imperfect types. Their 
kingdoms and lives had an end. A type was needed which would 
show that His kingdom would have no end. 

Again, the Aaronic Priesthood was a type of the Christian 
priesthood, during the time Christ and His body suffer and die, 
down until they shall appear in the glory of the kingdom. Here 
the Aaronic type ceases, and where it ceases the Melchisedec 
type begins. The Melchisedec type shows no death, no sacrifice, 
only the reigning and blessing -king and priest. How beautifully 
it illustrates what we must shortly be. With Jesus our head, we 
soon shall be "kings and priests unto God, and reign on the 
earth. " One of the most notable events of that reign will be the 
blessing of the natural descendants of Abraham, as shown in the 
type (Gen. 14:18-20): "And Melchisedek, king of Salem (type of 
Christ-head and body) ...blessed Abraham." Then "the elder 



(natural Israel) shall serve the younger" (spiritual Israel), and 
pay them tribute and homage, as Abraham paid tribute and 
homage to Melchisedec. 

"If He were on earth He could not be a priest," says Paul. I am 
not trying to prove to you that Jesus' claims as a priest are based 
upon titles of the law. No, we claim that He came of Judah, the 
kingly tribe. As a priest, He did not attempt to usurp your office. 
No, He was offered on the great altar-the earth itself, and when 
He went in with the real blood of sin-offering, He did not 
attempt to go into the holy places made with hands, but into the 
real ones, of which yours is only a type or shadow. Soon the 
sacrifice will all be over. He has left a measure of suffering and 
death to be filled up by us, His body. Soon all will be over, and 
we "shall appear with Him" to "bless the people" (as you do in 
symbol), but it will be with kingly power united to our priestly 
office. And then, too, when complete, our priesthood shall 
continue forever. See, God gave you a type of this higher 
priesthood in Melchisedec, "King of Peace" and "Priest of God," 
of whom it is testified "he lives." So when our priesthood 
reaches the plane typified by Melchisedec, we will never die, 
but abide a "Royal Priesthood" forever. How indispensable are 
both of these types, the Aaronic, showing how we must die with 
Him, and the Melchisedec, how we shall live with Him and be 
glorified together; "no cross, no crown." 



R86 : page 2 

DEATH SWALLOWED UP. 

"Then shall be brought to pass the saying, which is written: 
Death is swallowed up in victory." 1 Cor. 15:54. The apostle has 
just led us down the stream of time, to the resurrection of the 
church, when they who sleep in Jesus awake immortal, and the 
living members of His body are changed to His likeness, and 
together are caught up to meet the Lord in the air. And here he 
quotes from Isaiah 25:8, saying, that then that prophecy will be 
fulfilled, not that it is fulfilled by the resurrection of the saints, 
but that it "then" begins to be fulfilled. The bruising of satan 
("under your feet"), Rom. 16:20, and the destroying of death, 
have both been deferred until the body of Christ (the church) is 
complete. With the first resurrection, that company, "the Royal 
Priesthood," is complete, and their work is before them. That 
work includes the binding of Satan, the destruction of death; i.e., 
the "swallowing up of death in victory, " and the restoration of 
mankind to harmony with God, and to that condition of life 
enjoyed before sin entered-a condition of at one-ment. 

This work of restoration apparently occupied all of the thousand 
years (Rev. 20:4), since it is called "the times (years) of 



restitution. " Just as death, like a huge monster, has devoured the 
human family gradually for six thousand years, so 

R87 : page 2 

death is to be destroyed gradually ("swallowed up") during the 
millennial reign, until, at its close, He shall have completely 
destroyed death, and him that has the power of death, that is, the 
devil. 

That this is the apostle's thought may be seen by referring to the 
prophecy from which he quotes. After describing the coming 
time of trouble in grandly awful and symbolic language, and the 
exaltation of the kingdom when "the Lord shall reign in Mount 
Zion," continues: "And He will destroy in this mountain 
(kingdom) the covering cast over all people, and the veil that is 
spread over all nations. He will swallow up death in victory." 
Thus our work is seen to be two-fold —destroying and removing 
sin and its effects, and thus restoring to man happiness, purity, 
and all that was lost through sin. But while our work really 
comes in the next age, let us not forget that if we are in full 
sympathy with the object of "our high calling," we will be 
interested in doing all in our power, in the present age, to 
counteract sin, and to restore mankind to harmony with our 
Father. We are thus ambassadors for God, as though He did 
beseech them through us: We ask them in Christ's stead; be ye 
reconciled to God. 2 Cor. 5:20. 



R87 : page 2 

FROM AND TO THE WEDDING. 

A brother requests our explanation of Luke 12:36, and Matt. 
25:10, intimating the possibility of a mistranslation in one of 
them. 

We have no fault to find with the translation nor do we know of 
any critic who materially alters either of these texts. The 
Diaglott renders Luke 12:36. "Be you like men waiting for their 
Master when he will return from the nuptial feasts; that when he 
comes and knocks they may instantly open to him. " And Matt. 
25:10, is rendered: "And while they were going away to buy, the 
Bridegroom came and they who were prepared entered with him 
to the nuptial feasts." 

The fact that one text speaks of going in to the marriage, and the 
other of a return from a marriage has troubled some and has 
given rise to the query: "May not Luke refer to a company not 
the bride, but coming after?" We think not, for the reason that 
the context addresses them as "Little flock"-vs. 32. The 
marriage (union) of Jesus and his church is so different in many 
respects from earthly marriages that it can be but imperfectly 



illustrated by them. In the earthly, the Bridegroom comes to the 
Bride's home and there they are married; but not so the 
heavenly. True the Bridegroom comes- "The Lord himself shall 
descend," but the church also goes— "We shall be caught up 
together to meet the Lord in the air," &c. There is in fact no one 
scene which could fully picture the event, therefore several are 
used. 

Our Lord comes as "a thief" upon the world and takes away his 
Bride. It is not to be in the general form of a marriage, rather an 
elopement. He has communicated to the virgin (chaste) church 
his design and instructed that during all the night she "sleep not 
as do others," (2 Thes. 4.) but be awake, robed, ready and 
eagerly watching the various signs promised. The earthly 
marriage feast at the Bride's home lasted an indefinite time and 
when it was over Bridegroom and Bride went to his home where 
all things were in readiness and the servants on the alert, robed 
in their best livery were watching and waiting to receive their 
Master and Mistress; and woe to the servant found careless or 
napping on this important occasion. Our Lord used this 
illustration to show the proper attitude of his church at his 
coming. They are to be on the alert, watching, robed and 
waiting, having their "loins girt about with truth," i.e., being 
nerved up, made strong by the truth and ready for any service. 
Our Bridegroom does not come to us after the marriage, but 
when he comes we are to be as those servants were under those 
circumstances. 

The Bride only, thus awake and expecting the Bridegroom hears 
his knock and opens to him. The sleeping world and drowsy 
worldly church, neither hear the knock nor heed his ("parousia") 
presence, but eat, drink, plant, build and marry as ever and 
"know not" of His presence. This scripture has, we believe, been 
largely fulfilled. The prophetic arguments have rapped loudly 
enough for some to hear who were awake and ready. They 
declare to us plainly that- 

"Our Lord has come to take us home; 
O hail happy day!" 

Yes we heard his knock and opened by faith and received him, 
and his words have been fulfilled- "Blessed are those servants." 
Yes truly blessed has been our experience since we recognized 
his presence and received him. Verily he has girded himself 
(become our servant) and caused us to sit down to meat 
(heavenly food,) and we have feasted and are still feasting upon 
Jesus and His word. We thank him that ours has been a 
continuous growth in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord 
Jesus, whom to know is life everlasting. True, we have long 
known him in a measure and have known much of his plan, &c, 
but our realization of his love and of the fullness which is in our 
"Head" and our experimental knowledge of "the deep things of 
God" have been greater than we could have supposed possible. 



It has been "a feast of fat things" of "wines (Joys) well refined." 
But this knock has not been heard by all the servants at once. It 
is an individual matter; each must hear for himself as Jesus 
further explains -Rev. 3:20 "Behold, I stand at the door and 
knock; if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come 
in to him and sup with him and he with me. " The presence and 
knock began in the Fall of 1 874. It still continues and many have 
received him and are being feasted and prepared for the 
elopement. Soon from the field, mill and bed one shall be taken 
and another left- "caught up to meet (unite with) the Lord in the 
air. 

We understand the word to teach that those taken, although 
knowing neither the day nor hour of their taking will not be in 
darkness on the subject but will have discerned the Lord's 
presence, received him and been feasted before going to him. 
Have you heard his knock and opened to him? 

Let us next examine the parable of Matt. 25. 

"THE TEN VIRGINS." 

Unlike many of our Lord's parables this one is placed and fixed 
by the word "then. " Taken in connection with the preceding 
chapter, it is fixed as belonging to the last generation of the 
church living when the Lord comes. The kingdom of heaven is a 
term applicable to the church, which, from its establishment at 
Pentecost has always been God's kingdom in which He is King 
and over which his will is law. True, in the future it will be "set 
up" and then it will be more generally recognized by mankind 
but even now we are really his kingdom; and when it has nearly 
finished its course in the world- "Then shall the kingdom of 
heaven be likened to ten virgins who took their lamps and went 
forth to meet the Bridegroom. " 

The name virgin means chaste, pure; in the parable ten are made 
to represent a larger company of chaste ones in the church. The 
conditions of this parable have been fulfilled by the church of 
our day. At any other period as well as the last, the church might 
have been properly represented by virgins of any number, but of 
no other than the last could it be said: "They took their lamps 
and went forth to meet the Bridegroom," because not until this 
nineteenth century has the "lamp" ("Thy word is a lamp") been 
in the hands of the virgins-the church, to give them light on the 
subject of the Bridegroom's coming. 

During the three and a halftimes or 1260 years of Papal 
supremacy, ending A.D. 1798, these two witnesses (the old and 
new testaments) had been clothed in the sackcloth of a dead 
(Latin) language, but since that time it has been taken up by 
Bible and tract societies and scattered over the world by the 
million. And it is since this book has been thus among the 
virgins that its teaching of the coming kingdom and coming 



Bridegroom has begun to contradict the assumptions of Papacy— 
that it was his kingdom and its Pope his vicegerent. 

Just at a proper time then, as the word of God had begun to 
circulate freely, comes what is commonly known as the Miller 
movement. It was a movement among Christian people of all 
denominations, principally Methodists and Baptists, a general 
awakening, and included many of the best people in all of the 
churches. Mr. Wm. Miller, a very Godly man, (a baptist) was 
the prime mover in this country, though simultaneously Wolf 
and others were calling attention to the same subject in Europe 
and Asia; the real movement, however, was in our own land. 

But the parable mentions a going forth to meet, &c. What does 
this signify? This is another evidence of our stage of the church, 
for although 



(Continued on seventh page.) 
R87 : page 7 

From and To the Wedding. 

(Continued from second page.) 

the Bible had always taught the "second coming of Christ," yet 
it had been understood in so general a way that none were able 
to settle upon any definite time and say— then he will come; 
consequently there could be no such going forth to meet him, as 
is demanded by the parable. Now the case is changed, Wm. 
Miller's attention is attracted to and riveted upon the prophecies. 
He reads: "Unto 2300 days and the sanctuary shall be cleansed." 
He counts and finds that it would end in 1 843 or 1 844. He 
supposes the earth to be the sanctuary and expects its cleansing 
to be by literal fire. He, though a calm deliberate man, could not 
forbear to tell his fellows that so read the prophecies, and so he 
believed. It spread rapidly, among old and young alike, and 
many virgins after examining with the lamp, were convinced 
that 

R88 : page 7 

the word taught them to expect the coming of their Bridegroom 
in 1844; and on the strength of this faith they went forth to meet 
him. In going they walked by faith, not by sight, but they did 
what the virgins never had done before, because never before 
had the word, or lamp led them to thus definitely expect him. 
(We believe him to have erred both in what the sanctuary is and 
what the fire is.) 

Five of the virgins were wise and five were foolish. Of those 
who went forth, some were actuated by excitement, and carried 
along with the occasion, but others-the wise- not only had the 
zeal of the moment, but it was backed by a deep, heartfelt desire 



and spiritual yearning for the Bridegroom's presence. "While the 
Bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept. " Their 
expectations of the coming of the Bridegroom, and burning of 
the world, met with disappointment. He "tarried," and they slept. 
They dreamed all sorts of foolish things, and various times for 
His coming, as illustrated by the various fanciful and fanatical 
views held by them during many years succeeding. 

At midnight, or during the night (the Greek word is not definite, 
like ours), there was a cry made: "Behold, the Bridegroom 
cometh; go ye out to meet Him. " Who made the cry is a matter 
of no consequence. The cry was made before morning too; i.e., 
the announcement and preaching that the Bridegroom was due 
to be here in 1 874, was made, as is well known by many of our 
readers. (We understand that morning began to dawn in 1873, 
where the 6,000 years from Adam ended.) It was made first 
among the Second Advent denomination. 

The evidences from scripture that the 6,000 years would end and 
the morning dawn in 1873, and that, with the morning the 
Bridegroom was due, was preached upon by a brother of very 
marked ability as a prophetic student, who also published a 
series of articles on the subject in the leading paper of that 
denomination, ("The World's Crisis") as well as afterward in a 
pamphlet, and finally as a monthly paper called "The Midnight 
Cry." The message attracted general attention from the people of 
that denomination, so that in a few issues its circulation ran up 
to 15,000, or more than all other papers devoted to the subject of 
the Second Advent together. This, we believe, fulfilled this 
parable, not that Advent people alone are virgins, but they were 
the part of the company that were at that time looking for the 
Bridegroom, but asleep and unconscious as to the time of His 
coming. 

"Then all those virgins arose and trimmed their lamps." Their 
lamps once pointed them to 1 844, but He "tarried. " A cry is now 
made that the tarrying time was thirty years (from 44 to 74), as 
paralleled by the thirty years of the Jewish age, from the birth of 
Jesus until He "came," being thirty years of age. This cry 
proclaimed to the virgins that the "2,300 days" did end in 1844, 
but that the thing expected was wrong. Instead of the "sanctuary 
cleansing" meaning the burning of the world, it is now seen that 
the sanctuary, or God's dwelling-place, is the church, and 
therefore it is the church that is to be cleansed. It is to be 
cleansed by the separation of the wise and foolish virgins at the 
end of the tarrying time- 1 874- when the Bridegroom came. 
When the cry is heard, the virgins begin to awaken. Some have 
of the oil (the spirit) in their vessels (themselves), as well as in 
their lamps (the word). These are able to see. To see what? That 
the Bridegroom is coming merely? No, they all knew that, but it 
enables them to see the time of his coming and to again go forth 
by faith as before. 



As the lamp shed forth light on time at the first going forth, so it 
shed light again on the same subject —the time— and that time 
was 1 874. And bear in mind that the cry is made before 
morning-in the night, and that it announces the "Bridegroom" 
and further, if at all right— if it was the true cry, "the Bridegroom 
came" as it had announced. 

All of this has been wonderfully fulfilled, it seems to us. It was 
first seen that the night (6000 years) would end with 1873. 
There the Millennial morn began to dawn. And the monthly, 
called the "Midnight Cry" ceased because the name was no 
longer applicable when the morning had begun to dawn. The 
editor of that magazine tersely remarked (p. 30), "Will some one 
inform me how a "Midnight Cry" can be made in the morning?" 
The division between the wise and foolish virgins, the one part 
seeing the 1 874 time as taught in God's sure word of prophecy, 
and the others interested at first, but unable upon examination of 
the word to see any light on the subject, is illustrated by the fact 
that the 15000 readers of the "Midnight Cry" dwindled down to 
about 2000. The others went to the "Eastern Question," &c, to 
look for light, confessing that they no longer had light from the 
sure word of prophecy on the time of the Bridegroom's coming. 
They took the paper, examined the arguments and apparently 
sought to get oil or light from the wise, but it must be an inward 
oil (the indwelling Spirit) that will reveal some of the deep 
things of God. Of this Spirit the wise can have enough for 
themselves but never enough to spare. Each virgin must buy for 
herself. 

While the advent people have been used to a large degree as 
representatives in the movements of the parable, yet we do not 
think that it is confined to them, nor to people who were 
interested in the movements prior to the coming of our 
Bridegroom. (1874.) The writer, among many others now 
interested, was sound asleep, in profound ignorance of the cry, 
etc., until 1876, when being awakened he trimmed his lamp (for 
it is still very early in the morning.) 

It showed him clearly that the Bridegroom had come and that he 
is living "in the days of the Son of Man." Yes the Bridegroom 
has come and is making up his jewels, and early before the 
servants of the house or the outside world are awake the chaste 
virgin church will be caught away to be united to her Lord. 

"They that were ready went in with him to the marriage. " Some 
time ago we supposed that this going in meant translation, but it 
now seems clear to us that it is a going in to a condition rather 
than a place; that it implies a withdrawing from the world and a 
coming in to a condition of special preparation for the marriage. 
This too has been fulfilled to a great extent, and particularly of 
late. The theme of most of our writers and public and private 
speakers has been Holiness— the "Wedding Garment" -for 
without holiness no man shall see the Lord. And this preparation 



still continues. Some are just awakening, and others are more 
nearly dressed in the spotless robes of Christ's righteousness. It 
is a time of helping each other to put on the wedding dress. 
("His Wife hath made herself ready.") 

Another parable (Matt. 22:1 1) shows a work which must take 
place before the marriage, viz. : "When the King came in to see 
the guests." This shows an inspection among those assembled, 
and one not having the wedding garment is cast out from the 
light of the position into which all had come; cast into "outer 
darkness," the darkness which covers the world on this subject; 
the darkness in which the foolish virgins were when their lamps 
would not burn. These so cast out are not "counted worthy to 
escape the things coming on the world, and consequently have 
part in the time of trouble, when there will be "weeping and 
gnashing of teeth. " 

But when will our Lord be present as King? We answer that the 
parallels of the Jewish and Gospel ages, so perfect throughout, 
indicate this point also. It was just three and a half years after 
John had announced Jesus as the Bridegroom (John 3:29) to the 
typical house of Israel, that He came to them as their "King." 
"Behold, thy King cometh unto thee" was fulfilled the day Jesus 
rode into Jerusalem on the ass. The parallel point in the Gospel 
age shows Him to have been due here as King in the Spring of 
1878, just three and a half years after He came as Bridegroom, 
and some time this parable must be fulfilled, and the King 
inspect the company assembled for the marriage supper. So at 
some time after 1878 we may look to see some (we wish there 
were none) cast out of the light into which all had come. As the 
light was on the time of the Bridegroom's coming, it would seem 
to teach that some would come to disbelieve the Bridegroom's 
presence. Why? Because not clothed with the wedding garment. 
Probably they will trust in, and "go about to establish their own 
righteousness," which is as "filthy rags," and endeavor to climb 
up some other way, " and win their way to eternal life. 

After inspection, we expect translation -to be "changed in a 
moment, in the twinkling of an eye"- to be "made like unto 
Christ's glorious body," and to be "caught up to meet the Lord in 
the air." This will be our marriage— being made like and united 
to Him. But the supper is apparently delayed until the company 
of our loved brethren -those who go through the trouble, and 
"wash their robes," etc.-shall have "come up out of (after) the 
great tribulation," because, after the marriage of the Lamb, the 
message goes forth: "Blessed are they that are called unto the 
marriage supper of the Lamb." (Rev. 19:9). Among this great 
company, whom no man can number, will doubtless be many of 
the foolish virgins. They have lost the position and honors of the 
Bride, but evidently, ultimately get oil and may gain a place 
among "the virgins, her companions that follow her." Psa. 14:14. 



When the Bridegroom says, in answer to their appeal, "I 
recognize you not," we believe it has reference to His not 
recognizing any as part of His Bride when once that company is 
complete, or the door to that position closed. 

Have you heard the cry, the knock announcing our Bridegroom's 
presence? Are you awake? Are you seeing to it that you are 
clothed with the righteousness of Christ as with a garment. See 
that, under His direction, you have it "without spot or wrinkle or 
any such thing," and help one another, "and so much the more as 
you see the day approaching," remembering that it is written, 
"The Lamb's wife hath made herself ready. " Rev. 19:7. 



R195 : page 3 

WAITING AND WATCHING. 

Waiting and watching the livelong day, 
Lifting the voice of her heart to pray; 
She stands in her sorrow the bride and queen, 
Counting the hours that lie between. 

Lone as a dove, on a storm-swept sea, 
Teaching her heart hope's minstrelsy; 
With a cheerful note, though a weary wing, 
She learns o'er sorrow to soar and sing. 

Abroad through the earth is a sound of war, 
Distress among nations, wide and far; 
And the failing of strong men's hearts for fear 
Of the dreadful things that are drawing near. 

Famine and pestilence stalk abroad; 
Scoffers are slighting the Word of God; 
And the love of many is waxing cold; 
Dimmed is the sheen of the once fine gold. 

But she stands in her safety, the bride and queen, 
Leaning as only the loved can lean 
On the heart that broke in its love for her, 
When bearing the burden she could not bear. 

-British Evangelist. 
R89 : page 3 

THE TWO LIKENESSES. 

"There are two likenesses spoken of in the Bible— the likeness 
of men, and the likeness of God. From several scriptures it is 
evident these cannot be the same, though they are sometimes 
confounded in the minds of the people. David says: "I shall be 



satisfied when I awake with thy likeness." Psa. 17:15. As much 
as to say I am not satisfied now, because I am not in thy 
likeness. We know the Psalmist had the form and likeness of 
man; hence man is not in the likeness of God. If it be claimed 
that this was a prophecy of Christ, the conclusion can not be 
weakened, but rather strengthened, on account of positive 
statements. "Who being in the form of God, thought it not 
robbery to be equal with God: But made Himself of no 
reputation, and took upon Him the form of a servant, and was 
made in the likeness of men." Phil. 2:6,7. 

Here we have a clear statement of the condescension of Christ; 
in leaving His own exalted condition- "The glory He had with 
the Father before the world was"— and coming down to the 
condition of man. He had the nature and form of God, and took 
not the nature of Angels. Heb. 2; but the seed of Abraham, the 
nature and form of man. But if man is in the nature and form of 
God then the condescension of Christ exists only in name. 
"Though He was rich, yet for your sakes He became poor, that 
ye, through His poverty, might be rich. " This passage gives us 
the object of His condescension, to enrich us. But the value of 
this offering of Christ depends upon the depth of our poverty, or 
the contrast between what He was and what He became. Or the 
difference between what we are and what we may become 
through Him. He came down to our level that we might go up to 
His level. He took our nature and form, that we might become 
partakers of the Divine Nature, and in due time be made like 
Him when we shall see Him as He is. 

Wondrous love and abasement on His part, glorious exaltation 
on our part! But all these scriptures mean nothing, if human 
nature and Divine Nature are one and the same; or if man is in 
the likeness of God. 

We, makes a distinction between the terms, nature and form as 
applied to persons, the former being the foundation of the latter. 
The nature is in the seed, but properly speaking, the form is not. 
The apple nature, in a seed, will produce an apple tree. The tree 
has the form. Human nature produces human forms, and Divine 
nature produces Divine forms. Those who in this age become 
partakers of the Divine nature, have the assurance, that "when 
He shall appear we shall be like Him. " "Who shall change our 
vile body that it may be fashioned like unto His glorious body, " 
&c. Phil. 3. 

The terms form, likeness and image are used, in reference to 
persons interchangeably, and apply primarily to what we term 
body, though it may be proper to use them also in reference to 
mental conditions, as when the Heart is used to represent the 
mind. "Son give me thine heart." "I will create within you a new 
heart." 



The term flesh as used in the New Testament, evidently refers to 
humanity as a whole and not to what covers our bones, in 
common parlance called flesh. "That which is born of the flesh 
is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit is spirit." John 3:6. 

This passage is not designated to teach whether man is unit, dual 
or tripartite, (one, two or three) but simply, that which is 
produced by human beings is human, and that which is produced 
by the Divine Spirit is Divine. "The Word was made flesh," 
means simply, what is elsewhere taught in scripture. That "He 
was made in the likeness of men"— became a human being. As a 
human being— born of the flesh, he was a Jew. But Jesus has 
been born again, not of the flesh, but of the spirit; "The firstborn 
from the dead" and as such is "declared to be the Son of God. " 

That human beings as represented by "The first man Adam" are 
"of the Earth, Earthy" is clearly taught by Paul, 1 Cor. 15:47. 
Man made of the dust, is sustained from the ground, and returns 
thither again. "Naked came I from the Earth, and naked shall I 
return thither again. " All who are born of the flesh "bear the 
image of the Earthy." (Ver. 48,49.) Christ Himself in becoming 
our brother on the plane of the flesh, bore the same image. But 
now, born of the spirit having "returned to the glory he had with 
the Father before the world was." "He is the brightness of His 
(Father's) glory, and the express image of His Person." Heb. 1:3. 
That is, He was in the likeness of man, but He is in the likeness 
of God. Here we have the two likenesses fully developed in the 
same person. First the Natural, and afterward the Spiritual. 

That the foundation for that spiritual body, was laid during His 
earthly life, in the spirit given Him without measure, we fully 
believe, but He was not, as a man (to leave out the idea of His 
Preexistence for in that He is an exception and not our 
Forerunner, of course) a fully developed spiritual being, until 
His Resurrection which was His second birth. He being the 
"First Born from the dead." Col. 1:18. He had the Divine Nature, 
before He was put to death but he was in human form. 

In His life, death, and resurrection, or in the process of 
development from the lower to the higher, from the Natural to 
the Spiritual, He is the Forerunner of His saints; the "Head," that 
in all things He might have the pre-eminence. Col. 1:18. He 
opens the way and Himself is our Leader. All who ever enter the 
Heavenly life, and bear the Divine Image, as Sons of God, must 
go the way He went. 

While in the flesh, which is the first or lowest stage of 
development, they, by the spirit of God imparted, become 
partakers of the Divine Nature. They are thus begotten to a 
lively hope, which hope is consummated when they, like their 
Head, are borne from the dead. Those thus begotten by virtue of 
the spirit given them, call God, Father, claiming Divine Sonship. 
By faith they grasp the glorious realities of that Blessed Hope, 



and so count themselves, as God also counts them, in Christ, as 
on the Risen side, to die no more. This is indeed a glorious 
privilege, and we can exclaim, as John says: "Now are we the 
sons of God, but," we add, which tends both to humility and 
encouragement, "It doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we 
know that when He shall appear, we shall be like Him, for we 
shall see Him as He is." 

This order of development must be observed by us as it is by the 
Lord. "First, the natural, &c. " Some overlooking the order, and 
quoting from Paul, "There is a natural body, and there is a 
spiritual body," conclude at once that both bodies exist together, 
and that at death the spiritual body leaves or is withdrawn from 
the natural body, and that this is the Resurrection. By this view 
they are forced to ignore the Apostolic teaching concerning the 
Resurrection and the coming of Christ. 

Nothing is more simple than that death and resurrection are not 
at the same time. "As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be 
made alive, but every man in his own order. Christ, the first 
fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at His coming. Even 
Christ was not raised until the third day after His death. But they 
that are Christ's, no matter when they died, are raised at His 
coming. "At the last trump," says Paul, and all must admit the 
seventh or last trumpet did not sound all the way through, as 
men have been dying. 

The stress laid by some on the present tense of the verb, be, in 
the passage: "There is a natural body and there is a spiritual 
body," is of no value as an argument. It proves nothing. "Unto 
us a child is born," spoken by Isaiah hundreds of years before 
the birth of Christ, is understood by all. In common language we 
say: "As the twig is bent, the tree is inclined." All understand it 
is first the twig and afterward the tree. "As is the child, so is the 
man." 

Describing the order of seasons in a year we may say: There is 
Spring, it is followed by Summer, &c. Paul was speaking on the 
same principle in reference to the order of human development, 
from the lower to the higher; and of its stages he says: "There is 
a natural body and there is a spiritual body." (1 Cor. 15:44.) 

The first half of the same verse shows that they do not exist 
together, but, "It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual 
body. " But as if he were anticipating the caviling which would 
come, and determined to give a clear offset to it, he says: 
"Howbeit that was not first which was spiritual, but that which is 
natural, (is first) and AFTERWARD that which is spiritual. " 
(Ver. 46.) The whole passage is luminous with the glorious hope 
of Eternal life and glory at the coming of Christ, the Life Giver, 
at the last trump. "As we have borne (in this life) the image of 
the earthly, we shall also (in the future life) bear the image of 
the heavenly." (Ver. 49.) Glorious promise and hope. Here again 



is the positive evidence that here, in the flesh, men have not 
attained the likeness or image of God, but that it is something to 
be attained, when that which is perfect is come. 

It is, we are well aware, the general impression, and not without 
apparent good reason, that man was at first created, and is, in the 
image of God. "Let us make man in our own likeness." But the 
harmony will be seen by those, and those only, who will take a 
glimpse at God's revealed plan as a whole, and remember that 
all that is done on the plane of the flesh is preparatory, and that 
the natural life is only the first step in the plan of development. 

It may be said that the first is typical of the second, or higher, to 
which the lower points. The whole plan is built on the two 
phases, "First the natural and afterward the spiritual." There are 
two creations, two Adams, two Eves, two marriages, two births 
and two lives, and consequently the two likenesses. 

R90 : page 3 

Christ, as already seen, was Adam-like, the first to enter the 
second, or higher life. 

R90 : page 4 

By his life, drawn from his side, so to speak, the church, Eve- 
like, derives her life, and being called out during the gospel, 
enters fully on her higher life at his coming to claim his Bride, 
when the marriage takes place. 

Then the plan reaches the world; as on the plane of the flesh, 
none entered life excepting Adam and his wife until after their 
marriage, so none enter the higher— the Eternal Life— excepting 
Christ and his wife -the Church-until after the marriage of the 
Lamb. Then follows the Regeneration. 

The life to come is the perfect life, and until that is reached, we 
must ever speak of God's plan as in process and not complete. 

The New Testament is the complement of the Old, and it clearly 
reveals when and how we are to attain the maturity— the glory, 
the perfect day. The prophetic eye of the Psalmist looked 
forward, and seeing the perfection of character and person 
combined, he exclaimed, "I will behold thy face in 
Righteousness. I shall be satisfied when I awake in thy 
likeness." (Psalm 17:15.) 



R90 : page 4 



STAND FAST. 



Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made 
us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. 
Gal. 5:1. To stand, is to adhere to fixed principles; or in other 
words, to be steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the 



work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in 
vain in the Lord. 1 Cor. 15:58. We are frequently exhorted to 
stand; to be steadfast; to continue, etc. Watch ye, stand fast in 
the faith, quit you like men, be strong. 1 Cor. 16:13. Stand fast 
in one spirit, with one mind striving for the faith of the gospel. 
Phil. 1:27. 

But no one can stand in his own strength; so we are admonished 
to stand fast in the Lord. Phil. 4:1. Take heed, brethren, lest 
there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing 
from the living God. But exhort one another daily, while it is 
called to-day, lest any of you be hardened through the 
deceitfulness of sin. For we are made partakers of Christ, if we 
hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end. 
Heb. 3:12,14. 

Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary, the devil, as a 
roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour; 
whom resist steadfast in faith. 2 Pet. 5:8-9. 

Stand fast therefore, in the liberty, wherewith Christ hath made 
you free. But what is the liberty, or freedom, which we have in 
Christ? But now being made free from sin, and become servants 
to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end-not 
beginning-everlasting life. Rom. 6:22. Whereby are given unto 
us exceeding great and precious promises; that by these ye 
might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the 
corruption that is in the world, through lust. 

And besides this, giving all diligence, add to your faith, virtue or 
fortitude; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, 
temperance; and to temperance— or self-control, Godliness; and 
to Godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, 
love; for if these things be in you and abound, they shall make 
you neither barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 1:4-8. Therefore has reference to something 
previously stated; so we read in Gal. 4. : When we were children, 
(under the law,) we were in bondage under the elements of the 
world; but when the fullness of the time was come, God sent 
forth his son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem 
them that were under law, that we might receive the adoption of 
sons. And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of 
His Son into your hearts, crying Abba, Father. Wherefore thou 
art no more a servant, but a Son; and if a son, then an heir of 
God through Christ. How be it then, when ye knew not God, ye 
did service unto them which by nature are not Gods; but now 
after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how 
turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye 
desire again to be in bondage? 

And you, that were some time alienated and enemies in your 
mind by wicked works, yet now hath he reconciled in the body 
of his flesh through death, to present you holy and unblamable 



and unreprovable in his sight; if ye continue in the faith 
grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of 
the gospel, which ye have heard. Col. 1:21-23. 

As ye therefore have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye 
in him; rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith, as 
ye have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving. 
Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain 
deceit, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. 
Col. 2:6-8. Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the 
rudiments of the world, why as though living in the world, are 
ye subject to ordinances, after the commandments and doctrines 
of men? Touch not; taste not; handle not; which (ordinances) are 
all to perish with their using. Col. 2:20-22. 

Again, in Gal. 4., freedom in Christ is illustrated by an allegory. 
Tell me, ye that desire to be under the law, do ye not hear the 
law? For it is written, that Abraham had two sons, the one by a 
bond-maid, the other by a free woman. But he who was of the 
bond- woman was born after the flesh; but he of the free woman 
was by promise. (They which are the children of the flesh, these 
are not the children of God; but the children of the promise are 
counted for the seed. Rom. 9:8). 

Which things are an allegory; for these are the two covenants; 
the one from Mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which 
is Agar. For this Agar is, or signifies, Mount Sinai in Arabia, 
and answereth to Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage 
with her children. But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is 
the mother of us all. Now we brethren, as Isaac was, are the 
children of promise. But as then he that was born after the flesh 
persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now. 
Nevertheless what saith the scripture? Cast out the bond-woman 
and her son; for the son of the bond- woman shall not be heir 
with the son of the free woman. So then, brethren, we are not 
children of the bond- woman, but of the free. 

Stand fast therefore in the liberty or freedom, wherewith Christ 
hath made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of 
bondage. In this condition, we are exempt from the works of the 
old law, and are under a new law. The law of the Spirit of life in 
Christ Jesus, hath made us free from the law of sin and death. 
Rom. 8:2. Behold, I, Paul, say unto you, that if ye be 
circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. For I testify again 
to every man that is circumcised, that he is debtor to do the 
whole law. Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of 
you is justified by the law; ye are fallen from grace. For we, 
through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith. 
For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth anything, nor 
uncircumcision, but faith which worketh by love. 

Ye did run well; who did hinder you that ye should not obey the 
truth? 



There are many things to overcome, requiring constant effort; a 
continual putting off the old man with his deeds, and putting on 
the new man; being renewed in the inner man, day by day; 
which is Christ in you, the hope of glory. 

Brethren, ye have been called unto liberty; only use not liberty 
for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. Walk 
in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh. There is 
a warfare between the flesh and the spirit, but if ye be led of the 
spirit, ye are not under law. The works of the flesh are manifest, 
which are these: fornication, impurity, debauchery, idolatry, 
sorcery, enmities, quarrels, jealousies, resentments, altercations, 
factions, sects, envyings, inebrieties, revelings, and things 
similar to these; respecting which I tell you before, even as I 
previously told you; that those who practice such things, shall 
not inherit the kingdom 

page 4 

of God. 

But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, forbearance, 
kindness, goodness, fidelity, meekness, self-control; against 
such things there is no law. And they that are Christ's have 
crucified the flesh, with the affections and desires. If we live in 
the Spirit, let us walk also in the Spirit [Diaglott]. 

B. W. K. 



page 4 

Thoughts on the Lord's Prayer. 
Matt. 6:9-13 

The 17 chapter of John is more properly the Lord's prayer, the 
earnest expression of his own heart. This, usually so called, is 
rather the disciple's prayer, learned from the Lord in answer to 
the request, "Lord teach us to pray. " 

Coming from His lips it can not be unimportant. We are 
impressed with its simplicity, brevity, and comprehensiveness. It 
contains no "vain repetitions." Christians should follow Christ 
rather than the heathen, who "think they shall" be heard for 
much speaking." Ver. 7. Prayer is not designed as a lecture of 
suggestion or instruction to the Lord, for he knoweth what 
things we need before we ask. Ver. 8. And yet he teaches us to 
pray. It seems important that we should feel our need, and 
dependence on the Lord as the Giver. 

R90 : page 4 

To express our wants makes a deeper impression on our own 
hearts. Even vocal prayer has thus an important use, though we 
are glad our Father recognizes even our thoughts, and "is able to 



do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think. " Eph. 

3:20. 

We do not regard this as designed for a stereotyped form of 
prayer. There may be as much danger of mere formalism in 
repeating this as any other form of prayer. 

It is the manner of the prayer on which Christ lays the stress. 
"After this manner, therefore, pray ye." It is clear, childlike and 
pointed; and it is in harmony with God's plan. We should know 
what we want, and ask expecting to receive. Prayer must be 
intelligent in order to be of faith, for faith is not feeling, but a 
depending on God's promises; it is taking him at his word. 

It is interesting to observe the divisions of this prayer. It has 
three parts. The first relates to God, the second to others, or the 
general cause, and the third to ourselves. This is important. True 
prayer is 

R91 : page 4 

humble worshipful and unselfish— "Our Father" first, ourselves 
last. He should be recognized first because of what he is and 
what he deserves. Let his sacred Name be spoken with 
reverence. A careless use of God's name is profanity. Morality 
relates to human relations Christianity includes both human and 
Divine. A proper recognition of our relations to God will best 
secure the performance of our duty to humanity. As God in man 
is man's hope, so to realize God, is the mainspring of life. For 
this reason doubtless God is placed first in the arrangement of 
the prayer. 

R91 : page 5 

The prayer recognizes the plan of the ages, and the 
dispensational steps of advancement; and to lose sight of God's 
order of development is as unreasonable as to expect harvest 
without seedtime, or fruit before the tree is grown. "Our Father" 
savors of the Gospel dispensation, which was dawning when 
Christ taught his disciples. Former dispensations revealed God 
as Creator, Lawgiver and Judge, and the terrors of Sinai were 
characteristic of the effect produced on the minds of the people. 
The gospel reveals him as a Father, and we as brethren. That 
was bondage; but God hath not given us the spirit of bondage 
again to fear, but the spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba- 
Father. Rom. 8:15. 

The former church were mere servants and to them Christ came, 
but to as many as received him he gave power to become sons. 
John 1:12. This new name brings new and exalted privileges, 
even fellowship or unity with God and his Son Jesus Christ. 
This gives a new basis for action, love instead of fear and leads 
to certain success. The complete realization of this unity, is the 
prime element of our Blessed Hope. For this the Savior prayed- 
the marriage -"That they all may be one," "even as we are one," 



"made perfect in one" "that the world may believe." John 17:20- 
23. This unity is thus shown to be not only the Christian's life 
and hope, but also the basis of the world's hope. Certain it is that 
the world cannot be saved until after the church is glorified. 

Do we, when we say "Our Father" realize how much it means. 
He that does not receive Christ as his Savior and elder Brother 
cannot consistently or truthfully say "Our Father." This is the 
prayer of the disciples of Christ, or the son of God, not by Adam 
but by the Divine Nature. 

The prayer is prophetic. The second part shows this. In this it 
resembles the 17th of John. The fact that they were taught to 
pray "Thy Kingdom come" is an indication of God's plan, and 
the assurance of its success. Prayer moved by the spirit will be 
answered. "Thy will be done in Earth" finds its assurance in the 
promise. "The Earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the 
Lord," and its many kindred statements. The coming of the 
kingdom must precede the state of holiness referred to. In "Thy 
kingdom come, Thy will be done, " the relation of cause and 
effect between the two parts of the sentence is too often lost 
sight of. The prayer, "Thy will be done," is certainly appropriate 
to cases where, as individuals, we are subjected, in God's 
arrangements, to trying circumstances, as when Jesus said, "Not 
as I will, but as Thou wilt. " But is it not too often applied where 
the circumstances are not of God, but of our own arrangement? 
That this second phase of the prayer is for others, more than for 
ourselves, will be most appreciated by those who know the 
glorious truth that the object for which Christ and the saints will 
reign is to bless the nations. With this in view, the Christian's 
hope is unselfish. As the joy set before Christ was the well- 
being of others, for which he endured the cross, and despised the 
shame, so for the same joy we can endure hardness as good 
soldiers of Jesus Christ; and as now in part, by and by to the full 
extent, we shall "enter into the joy of our Lord." Whoever can 
appreciate this fact concerning the coming kingdom, must of 
necessity appreciate the gospel dispensation and its privileges. 
As we are being nourished for Christ and His work, all personal 
benefits are given by Our Father, and received by us as a means 
to a great end, and we can, for this reason, pray, "Father, give 
us"— to use for Thee. 

J. H. P. 



R91 : page 5 



NUMBER SEVEN. 



Seven is a peculiar and much-used number in the Bible. It is the 
basis of reckoning in many prophetic arguments. It is what may 
be termed a complete number. It represents the whole of that to 



which it is applied, and the whole is often divided into seven 
parts. It may be to others, as well as ourselves, both interesting 
and profitable to consider the relation of this number to the 
various elements of God's revealed plan. 

The thoughtful reader of the Bible may have been impressed 
with the oft-repeated use of this number. It suggests to our 
minds, in harmony with many other things, the idea of order in 
the plan. The idea of the Bible being a chance book cannot long 
be entertained by those who can see the systematic development 
in its revelations. We believe the veil will be removed from the 
face of the nations (Isa. 25:7), by the manifestation of long- 
hidden truths, whatever means God may use to bring it about, 
and it is doubtless the duty and privilege of all who have any 
degree of light, to let it shine. 

The first use of the number seven in the Bible is in the formation 
of the week. The creation week was seven days. We do not 
assert that they were each twenty-four hours in length. A day is 
any specified period of time. The twenty-four hour day, as is 
well known, is caused by the revolution of the earth on its axis. 
The evening and morning of such a day are caused by the sun's 
shining on each part of the earth half the time during the daily 
revolution. For this reason it seems clear that the creation days 
could not have been mere twenty-four hour days, because the 
record shows that the sun was not made to shine on the earth 
until the fourth creation day. Gen. 1:14-19. Those days were 
doubtless long periods, as geologists claim, and yet the principle 
is made the basis of our ordinary week. Why should there be 
seven days in a week rather than some other number? We regard 
it, of course, as of Divine arrangement. Attempts have been 
made to change it, as when the French arranged one day in ten 
for rest, but it proved a failure. This cycle of seven is not caused 
by astronomy, as are the length of the day and the year. We 
believe it is caused by the Divine impression of God's plan of 
salvation on the history of mankind. Can any skeptical friend 
suggest a better reason for this otherwise arbitrary arrangement? 

There are many reasons for believing that the seven days of a 
week are typical of the seven thousand years of the world's 
history. The statement that "One day is with the Lord as a 
thousand years, and a thousand years as one day" (2 Pet. 3:8), is 
not proof of the position taken, but it suggests that a thousand 
years, rather than a million or some other number, is one of the 
kinds of day used in God's plan. According to the Bible 
chronology, with which many of our readers are more or less 
familiar, the six thousand years from the creation of Adam 
ended in the year 1873, and the seventh thousand is therefore 
commenced. Not only is the number seven made prominent, but 
in many cases the seventh is made specially prominent. In six 
days the Lord made heaven and earth, but the seventh day is the 
Sabbath. This prominence of the seventh day holds good in the 



week of creation, the ordinary week and the week of thousands. 
The number seven is made prominent in several ways between 
the creation and the coming out of Israel from Egypt, but up to 
that time there is no Bible evidence that the Lord commanded 
the observance of the seventh day, or that anyone did observe it, 
or that anyone was punished for its non-observance. That the 
seventh day of the creation week is the rest-day of the Lord, and 
that He set it apart for some great purpose, are both true. Gen. 
2:2,3. That the same principle of six days of work and the 
seventh day for rest (not any day of the seven, but the seventh), 
was afterward made the basis of the ordinary week, is also true. 
Ex. 20:8-1 1. But there are reasons for believing that the grand 
object of the Lord in setting apart the seventh day, was to make 
it a type of the Great Sabbath, or seventh thousand years. It may 
be asked: "If the six thousand years are ended, and the seventh 
thousand is the Sabbath, why do so many of the conditions of 
the times past still continue? We believe even this is 
foreshadowed in the stated facts concerning the seventh day of 
the creation week. The work of the six days extended into and 
was ended in the seventh. "On the seventh day God ended his 
work, and He rested on the seventh day." Gen. 2:2. This double 
statement has often been overlooked, but the first is as true as 
the second, and there is a meaning in both. 

There are many evidences, which have been given from time to 
time, that the Millennium is to be introduced by a time of 
trouble, in which existing organizations are to be removed, as 
rubbish, to make way for the verdure of peace and righteousness 
which is to follow. But there is another phase of this subject in 
which we are specially interested. The closing work of the old 
creation, before the generation of the family began, was getting 
a wife for Adam, and it would therefore appear that this was the 
work extended into the beginning of the seventh day. It is often 
said that man is the noblest work of God; "but the woman is the 
glory of the man. " 1 Cor. 11:7. This progression, from the lower 
to the higher, in creation, illustrates the progression, in God's 
plan of the ages. The last work of the new creation, before the 
millennial work, is getting a wife-the 

R92 : page 5 

church— for the Second Adam, and, according to the evidences, 
this work is extended into the beginning of the seventh thousand 
years. With this in mind, we may see a significance in the 
promise of Christ to the overcomer: "I will give him the 
morning star." Rev. 2:28. Christ is called both the "Morning 
Star," and the "Sun of Righteousness," and these seem to be 
related to each other as the "day dawn" and the "perfect day." 
When Christ rose from the dead, on the first day of the week, it 
was "early, when it was yet dark." John 20:1. It was in the dawn 
of the day, (Matt. 28:1), and this, together with the many 
evidences, seem to show that the same is to be true of the church 



in the dawn of this great day. It is during this day-dawn, or 
transition between the Gospel Age and the Millennium, that 
Babylon is to go down to rise no more, as a millstone cast into 
the sea; and when this takes place, the holy apostles and 
prophets are called upon to rejoice over the destruction of that 
corrupt system. Rev. 18:20,21. The inference is, that the 
resurrection of these holy men of old takes place before Babylon 
falls. Then, indeed, they would have the "morning star," and it 
would be very early in the morning, while it is yet dark to the 
world at large. It seems that it will require the terrible events of 
the day of wrath to awaken the world from its stupor, and bring 
them to the consciousness of the presence of the "King of Kings 
and Lord of Lords." There are several otherwise dark sayings 

R92 : page 6 

of our Lord, that seem clear with the idea that the seven 
thousand years are known as seven days. In answer to the 
statement of the Pharisees, "Get thee out, and depart hence, for 
Herod will kill thee," He said: "Go ye, and tell that fox: Behold, 
I cast out devils, and I do cures to-day and to-morrow, and the 
third day I shall be perfected." Luke 13:31,32. These days could 
not have been twenty-four-hour days in any case. The third day 
could not have been the day of His death (even if that could 
have brought perfection), for in the next verse He added: 
"Nevertheless I must walk to-day, and to-morrow, and the day 
following, for it cannot be that a prophet perish out of 
Jerusalem. " This shows that He was not to be put to death until 
He had reached Jerusalem, and that it was not accomplished on 
the third day from the time He spoke. His use of the word day in 
two senses in the same connection, without an explanation, is 
similar to His use of the word death in two senses in the 
statement: "Let the dead bury their dead. " Even had He been put 
to death on the very day He used the language, He could have 
had no reference to His resurrection on the third literal day, for 
He did not do cures and cast out devils when He was dead. 
There was a complete suspension of both physical and spiritual 
healing from the time He left their house desolate until the day 
of Pentecost. Take the broad view that He spoke not merely of 
Himself, but of the body of which He is the Head, and that 
instead of twenty-four-hour days He meant thousand-year-days, 
and all seems plain. 

It was near the beginning of the fifth thousand years that He 
spoke. That was the "to-day" of His language; "to-morrow" was 
the sixth thousand, and the "third day" is the seventh thousand. 
We cannot doubt that the physical cures that Jesus performed 
while in the flesh were used, partly, to represent the higher work 
of the healing of spiritual maladies. On this principle, He, in and 
by His body— the church-has been doing His work, but in only a 
limited and imperfect manner. The mortal phase of the church is 
always called His body- even "the whole body;" Eph 4:16 -but 



it is so only in a preparatory and representative sense. He is not 
perfected until all, both the living and the dead members, are 
glorified with Him. As Eve was the glory of Adam, and his 
complement, so of the church in relation to Christ. 

While doing the work of Christ during the fifth and sixth 
thousand-year-days, the church has also been called upon to 
suffer with Christ, and to have conformity to His death. Phil. 
3:10. Another dark saying of Jesus seems to represent this phase 
of the experience of His church. "Destroy this temple and in 
three days I will raise it up." John 2:19. 

We are told that He spake of the temple of His body. This had of 
course, its primary fulfillment in Jesus personally. He often 
showed that He would rise the third day. But what was true of 
Him personally on the third day, of twenty-four hours, is true of 
His body-the church-in the third day of a thousand years each. 
Jesus was talking of the temple and this was what confused the 
minds of His hearers. But the temple was a type of the church as 
well as a type of each member of the same. Jesus was the temple 
of God, for God dwelt in him. The body of each Christian is the 
temple of God, by the indwelling of the Holy Spirit. 1 Cor. 6:19. 
And the whole church groweth into a holy temple for the 
habitation of God. Eph. 2:20-22. The words that Jesus used 
referred to the type, but the spirit, or meaning, of those words 
was the antitype. All through the period of their sufferings, the 
church could be comforted with the assurance that when they 
suffered He, the sympathizing Friend, suffered with them. "Why 
persecutest thou me?" Acts 22:7-8. "Inasmuch as ye did it unto 
one of the least of these my brethren, ye did it unto me. " Matt. 
25:40. 

Paul declares that Jesus "rose the third day according to the 
scriptures." 1 Cor. 15:4. He must have referred to the Old 
Testament, for the New Testament was yet unwritten. But what 
scriptures foretold that Christ should rise the third day? None 
directly, that we can find; but indirectly it is taught, like many 
other things. 

When asked for a sign, the Savior referred to Jonah as a sign, 
and the only one that wicked generation could have. The time 
that Jonah was in the deep, the Savior Himself applies to the 
period of His own death. It was not thirty-three years and a half, 
but "He died, and rose again the third day. " But there can be no 
doubt that it has a broader if not a deeper meaning as we have 
applied it to the church. We are satisfied that the reason that 
Christ rose the third day, instead of any other, was to represent 
the days of the great plan, each day being a type of a thousand 
years. What is true of the glorification of the church of Christ, as 
to time, has been shown to be true also of the restoration of 
Israel. And if anyone who believes the many scriptures which 
teach the idea of their restoration, will read the prayer of Jonah, 
while he was buried in the deep, as recorded in the second 



chapter of the book of Jonah, he will have but little difficulty in 
seeing a type of the history of the nation of Israel since Jesus left 
their house desolate. Another prophecy of the same thing and in 
very plain words may be found in Hosea 6:1-3. "He hath torn, 
and He will heal us; He hath smitten, and He will bind us up. 
After two days will He revive us: in the third day He will raise 
us up, and we shall live in His sight. Then shall we know if we 
follow on to know the Lord &c. " The third day has come since 
Jesus cut them off, and we can see the cursed fig tree beginning 
to put forth its leaves. By this we know that summer is near, and 
also that our redemption draweth near. Of Number Seven more 
anon. 

J. H P. 



R92 : page 6 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

QUES. Is it true that the Greek word anastasis always means a 
resurrection to spiritual life? 

ANS. Our English word resurrection signifies to raise up again 
and it does not indicate whether the body or thing raised has any 
life. The Greek word anastasis translated resurrection seems to 
have a similar meaning— to raise up again. In scriptural use it is 
understood to imply that the ones raised up have life since it is 
so stated sometimes, but that it always means a resurrection to 
spiritual life, is not true. There shall be a resurrection (anastasis) 
both of the just and unjust- All shall live again, but to rise 
spiritual beings, immortal &c, is promised only to those who 
have part in the first resurrection. "Blessed and holy are all they 
that have part in the first [anastasis] resurrection; On such the 
second death hath no power. " The natural inference is that those 
who arise in subsequent resurrections, are not blessed and holy 
and that over these the second death has power. In other words 
the teaching is, that the first class are raised with such a life as 
cannot die, (immortal) while all others are raised to a life which 
can be forfeited. 

In the teaching of Jesus and the Apostles the difference between 
these resurrections is clearly discernable as expressed in the 
Greek. (Our regular English version fails to show it properly.) 
Thus, Jesus says that in THE resurrection (i.e. the special 
resurrection) they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but 
are like unto the angels &c. Paul knew that all would rise, but 
says, "If by any means I might attain unto THE resurrection" - 
the first— the prize. He knew that because Jesus had ransomed 
all, all must be released from death, but he knew also that to the 
realization of the "exceeding great and precious promises" of 
"being like Him," and "like unto the angels "-possessing 



"immortality" i.e. such a condition of life that he could not die 
any more, nor be hurt of the second death; all these, as well as 
the sitting in the throne depended upon his attaining the "first"- 
"THE resurrection. " 

The following texts show that the word anastasis does not 
always mean raising to spiritual life. Matt. 22:23. "Scribes say 
that there is no (anastasis) resurrection." Luke 20:27. "Deny that 
there is any {anastasis) resurrection." Luke 2:34. "This child is 
set for the fall and {anastasis) rising again of many in 

R93 : page 6 

Israel. " Israel stumbled and fell as a nation as well as 
individually and is to rise again. They did not fall from being 
spiritual bodies nor are they to rise in that way. Again, Heb. 
11:35, "Women received their dead {anastasis) raised to life 
again. " Were they raised to spiritual life or to natural? The latter, 
certainly, Christ Jesus being the first born to the higher plane. 
We read further- "Others were tortured... that they might obtain 
a better {anastasis) resurrection." Better than what, if anastasis 
means a giving of spiritual life? 

QUES. In the text- "Woe unto them that desire the day of the 
Lord"-how are we to understand the Prophet? Why is there a 
woe on them? 

ANS. It cannot refer to those who are "accounted worthy to 
escape;" they are to "lift up their heads and rejoice." I suppose it 
has reference to the great mass of the human family which Paul 
says is waiting and expecting— "The earnest expectation of the 
creature waiteth for the manifestation of the Sons of God. " Yet 
mankind will be subjected to a great time of trouble before their 
expectations are realized. Before the morning of joy, comes the 
night of weeping. 

Woe [trouble] to the great mass of the human family desiring 
and expecting that day. 

Yet by their woes they'll be, 
Brought nearer, my God, to thee. 



R93 : page 6 

Quicken Your Mortal Bodies. 

QUES. Please give me your explanation of the text, "He that 
raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal 
bodies by His spirit that dwelleth in you. " Does it refer to the 
resurrection of the saints at the coming of Christ referred to in 1 
Cor. 15. If so, how shall we harmonize this statement with the 
one there made, viz. : "It is sown a natural body; raised a 
spiritual body. " "It is sown in corruption; it is raised in 
incorruption. " Now, if God merely makes alive (quickens) the 



mortal body, would it be anything more than a living mortal 
body? Can it be properly termed "a spiritual body?" 

ANS. Undoubtedly a living mortal body is not a spiritual body; 
and Paul is not in the text quoted referring to the same thing as 
in 1 Cor. 15. But before we explain, please read the text referred 
to, Rom 8:1 1. Now read the ten preceding and the five 
succeeding verses. 

Christians die literally and will have an actual resurrection, as 
mentioned in 1 Cor. 15, and elsewhere but they are frequently 
spoken of as dying in another sense, as in Rom. 6:1 1: "Reckon 
ye yourselves to be 

R93 : page 7 

dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Let not sin, therefore, reign in (control) your mortal 
bodies, ...but yield yourselves [while still mortal bodies] unto 
God, as those that are alive from the dead." So also in the text 
you quote. The preceding verse declares that "If Christ be in 
you, the body is dead," but the spirit is alive, and in this verse 
1 1 , he assures that the power of God, which was mighty enough 
to raise up Jesus, is able and "shall quicken our mortal bodies by 
His spirit which dwelleth in us." In other words, the same spirit, 
by which we crucify the flesh and reckon ourselves dead, is able 
to so subdue and control this mortal body, that it will be alive 
and active, in harmony with our new or spiritual nature. Would 
that more of God's children knew, experimentally, of this death 
and this quickening. We become alive toward God just in 
proportion as we become dead to sin. 

QUES. Can the term church be properly applied to any but that 
company of saints who will have part in the first resurrection? 

ANS. The term church signifies congregation. The Greek is 
ekklesia, and signifies the called-out ones. It would be, 
therefore, proper enough to apply it to any called-out company. 
In the New Testament use of the word, however, it is almost 
invariably used in reference to the first resurrection saints, of 
whom it is said: "God did visit the Gentiles to take out of them a 
people for His name. " An exception to this rule occurs in Acts 
7:38, where the word congregation— ekklesia-is applied to 
fleshly Israel. 

QUES. Will dead saints be resurrected in their mortal bodies, 
and afterward changed along with the living? 

ANS. We think not. Paul is our authority for saying "It is raised 
a spiritual body "-"raised in incorruption" -"power," and 
"glory." (1 Cor. 15:42-44.) 



R93 : page 8 



OUR AUTHORITY. 

Some facts relative to the return of the Jews mentioned in our 
last, seemed to directly point to the fulfillment of the prophecies 
relative to their return, that some seem disposed to question the 
reliability of our information, Bro. H. A. King writes, "what is 
your authority for saying that Russia has enacted laws 
compelling the Jews to leave that country?" (The peculiarity 
noted, was, that just as God had opened up Palestine so that the 
Jew might return and enjoy a measure of liberty, He, at the same 
time, was forcing them from Russia where about one-third of all 
that people are living.) We answer, as Brok, that the public press 
is our authority and it certainly is a disinterested witness; for 
instance, we clip from The Pittsburg Dispatch of to-day (March 
29th) the following: 

"Instead of the concessions expected before the anniversary of 
the Czar's accession to the throne, regarding the position of the 
Jews, there is increased severity. The Jews are driven to 
represent themselves as Protestant Christians, to escape 
expulsion from St. Petersburg. In the Governments of Tula, Orel 
and Charkoff, Jews in business for many years, are ruthlessly 
expelled. " 



R93 : page 8 

THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS. 

When we speak of a sin forgiven it implies that a sin has been 
committed, and that the one who committed it is a sinner. And 
when of Jesus it is written: "Behold the Lamb of God that taketh 
away the sin of the world," we realize somehow that the whole 
world are sinners and that Jesus is their Redeemer from all sin. 
This is Paul's thought when he wrote: "All have sinned." John 
1:1-10, says: "If we say we have not sinned, we make him (God) 
a liar." As all are sinners and "The wages of sin is death," we 
read: "Death hath passed upon all men in that all have sinned. " 
We are in a bad condition in two ways; first, our characters and 
lives are stained with sin— and secondly because so marred by 
sin we are cut off from life and placed in the grasp of death. We 
are apt to take a superficial view of the matter and to think of 
being released from death as the thing chiefly to be desired, but 
this is a false view. If released from death and not from sin 
which causes death, you would again die. You would die 
because as a sinner you would have no right to life. The wages 
or legitimate end of sin is death. "Sin when it is finished 
bringeth forth death and if you could be released from death a 
thousand times yet not forgiven the sin, you would again be 
obliged to die. 



Our real aim and desire should be to get forgiveness of sins, for 
then the penalty-death-can be removed legally. And in fact 
when we are forgiven or justified in God's sight, he is bound by 
his own justice to release such a forgiven and justified one from 
death. But can we obtain forgiveness of sins if God's 
punishment for sin was a just penalty? Could he be just and 
forgive or excuse sin? We answer, no; God's mercy and love can 
never be exercised at the expense of his justice. How then can 
we be forgiven? We answer: "The Lamb of God taketh away the 
sin of the world." John 1:29. Yes says John (1:35) "Ye know 
that he was manifested to take away our sins and in him is no 
sin. " First, he was manifested, tried in all points yet without sin, 
that he might after being thus proved, act as our High Priest and 
"put away sin by the sacrifice of himself." Heb. 9:26. He who 
knew no sin was made sin for us," i.e. on our account he was 
treated as though he were the sinner (2 Cor. 5:21), and God 
"Laid upon him the iniquity of us all," and "We have redemption 
through his blood, even forgiveness of sins." Col. 1:14. "The 
blood (life given i.e. death) of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all 
sin." 1 John 1:7. "We have redemption through his blood, the 
forgiveness of sins." Eph 1:7. Thus "Jesus Christ by the grace 
of God tasted death for every man;" therefore "God for Christ's 
sake hath forgiven you;" (Eph. 4:32.) because 

Jesus paid it all, 
All the debt we owe; 
Sin had left a crimson stain, 
He washed it white as snow. 

And because thus ransomed and bought from sin with a price, 
even the precious blood of Christ, the "sins are blotted out when 
the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord 
and He shall send Jesus etc." Acts 3:19. For 

R94 : page 8 

as God was just to punish for sin and would by no means clear 
the guilty, so also "He is just to forgive us our sins and to 
cleanse us from all iniquity" since Jesus paid for us the price of 
our sins. And if the sin is forgiven will not its wages-death -be 
abolished? Yes, by ransoming us from sin Jesus obtained the 
right to destroy death; and when sin is abolished, it may well be 
asked- "O death, where is thy sting? For the sting of death is 
sin. " THANKS be to God who giveth us the victory through our 
Lord Jesus Christ. Verily, as in Adam all die so, in Christ shall 
all be made alive. All were condemned to death because of sin 
and all are justified to life again because "Jesus paid it all. " 

But what shall we say of those who claim that Jesus was a 
sinner, who claim that he died for himself, that he appeared in 
the world on the "lowest round of the ladder," a sinner among 
sinners merely to set us an example and by working his way up 
to life to show humanity how they could work their way up and 



each win life for himself?" We say: God pity them and show 
them the value of "the blood of the cross," (Gal. 1 :20.) that it 
was because the penalty of our sin was death that "He became 
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross" that we might 
be forgiven. Oh no; Add nothing to their burden, they will have 
enough to bear; They will find it a difficult task to do as he did- 
keep the whole law blameless, and thus work their way up to 
life. They will in time find a necessity for "forgiveness through 
His blood," of whom it was written -"Ye shall call his name 
Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sin." By and by 
they will learn- 

What grace was in the Lamb of God, 
Who died to make them free. 

The doctrine of "forgiveness of sins through his blood" (Col. 
1 : 14) is the one on which the whole fabric of Christianity is 
built. It is the basis of all our faith and hopes as Christians. If we 
are not forgiven, we cannot approach God as "Our Father." He is 
not the father of sinners. Unless forgiven we cannot approach 
God in prayer, for "God heareth not sinners." We must first have 
his forgiveness before any of the blessings are ours, as it is 
written: "Being justified by faith (in the perfection of his 
offering) we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus 
Christ. " And we must first be forgiven before we can receive the 
Holy Spirit, as Paul says: Eph. 1:13. "In whom ye also trusted 
after ye had heard the word of truth-the gospel (good news) of 
your salvation, (from sin, i.e. forgiveness.) In whom also after 
ye believed that ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise. " 

Brethren, "Let us draw near (to God) with a true heart in full 
assurance of faith, (that our sins are forgiven) having our hearts 
sprinkled from a consciousness of evil, (sin) and our bodies 
washed in pure water" (our fleshly nature cleansed by, and 
brought into harmony with the truth.) (Heb. 10:22.) and "Let us 
hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering," for, in 
this— God's way of forgiving sin. "The righteousness of God is 
manifested" most beautifully and his justice, mercy and love all 
find harmonious expression for, "Herein is manifested the love 
of God, in that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us." 



R94 : page 8 

CHRIST OUR PASSOVER. 

Christ, our Passover, is sacrificed for us; therefore, let us keep 
the feast." (1 Cor. 5:7). The Passover was one of the most 
important of the types given to the Children of Israel, and was 
ever observed by them as one of their most solemn feasts. They 
kept it in remembrance of the passing over of their first-born 
when the tenth plague was visited upon the first-born of Egypt. 



They commemorated it every year on the anniversary of the 
event, slaying a lamb each year on the fourteenth day of the first 
month. They saw only the type: We, instructed by the Holy 
Ghost through the apostles, are able to recognize the antitype as 
"Christ our Passover Lamb slain for us"-"the Lamb of God." 
Death would pass upon us, were it not that our Lamb's blood is 
sprinkled upon us, but in Him we have life. 

As the typical lamb was put to death on the fourteenth of the 
first month, so our Passover Lamb was put to death on the same 
day. No other day would fulfill the type, and so it was, as we 
read, Luke 22:7. As they feasted on the typical lamb, we feast on 
our Lamb. It was on this same day that Jesus gave to the 
apostles the symbols of His broken body and shed blood, saying: 
"THIS do in remembrance of me;" i.e., keep this feast hereafter, 
thinking of me as your Lamb. 

It has for several years been the custom of many of us here in 
Pittsburgh to do this; i.e., remember the Passover, and eat the 
emblems of our Lord's body and blood, and it has ever been an 
occasion of solemn pleasure and communion, and was 
particularly so this year. We met on the night of March 24th, as 
usual, at the house of Brother and Sister Conley (it being the 
most commodious); and ate together the unleavened bread- 
eating, meantime "the truth" which it symbolized, viz: That 
Jesus was unleavened (without sin), holy, harmless, undefiled, 
and therefore food "of which, if a man eat, he shall never die." 
We said, with Paul, "Christ, our Passover is slain; therefore, let 
us keep the feast. " We saw clearly that because we had Christ 
within, therefore (soon, we believe), all the church of the first- 
born will be passed over, and spared, as it is written: "I will 
spare them, as a man spareth his only son that serveth him, " and 
we said one to another, "Watch that ye may be accounted 
worthy to escape all these things coming upon the world, and 
stand before the Son of Man." 

We read, also, how that if we are Christ's, we are part of the 
same loaf; to be broken as He was; to die, as He did to the flesh- 
-crucifying the flesh. "The loaf, which we break, is it not the 
communion of the body of Christ? For we, being many, are one 
loaf and one body." (1 Cor. 10:17.) We saw, also, that if we 
would count ourselves parts of that loaf, and be broken, we must 
first "purge out therefrom the old leaven" of sin, that we may be 
like our Master, "who knew no sin. " 

After supper, we took the cup— the wine. As we took it, we 
remembered that it was not represented by the type, the Passover 
supper, but that it was the symbol of joy and life. After supper, 
He took the cup,... saying, "Drink ye all of it," and we realized 
that, when the present night of eating the Lamb with bitter herbs 
(afflictions) has passed, our Lord will give us the new life and 
new joys, saying, "Enter thou into the joys of thy Lord," And we 
realized, even now and here, a foretaste of those joys of 



Paradise. Thus, the wine of our feast was but typical of the joys 
of the kingdom, when we shall drink it new with Him, in our 
Father's kingdom- "after supper." 



R94 : page 8 



"i 



'Day Dawn" or the 
Gospel in Type and Prophecy. 

This is the title of the new book referred to in our Feb'y No. we 
are pleased to know that it will soon be ready— probably about 
May 1st. The table of contents before us, show it to contain 28 
chapters (probably from 350 to 400 pages.) on subjects of 
deepest interest to all of us. It will we doubt not supply a long 
felt want, viz: A book containing a connected and well 
expressed account, of our understanding of the prophecies their 
import and teaching as well as their harmony with the other 
teachings of God's word. In a word "The Law," "The Prophets" 
and "The Gospel" and their unity. 

We cannot but be benefited and strengthened by going over the 
Time arguments which establish our whereabouts on the stream 
of time. Our foundations are so strong, the evidences so many 
and so weighty, that when fully comprehended, it is easier to 
believe than to doubt, the presence of the heavenly Bridegroom. 
It will strengthen and build you up in your most holy faith, we 
hope. Again it is a pleasure to have a book to hand to your 
neighbor and friend written in a simple but scholarly manner. 
(Though we have not seen the MSS. we have reason to expect 
all of this from our brother's pen.) Bro. Paton of Almont, Mich., 
one of our regular contributors is the author. Bro. A. D. Jones, 
Pittsburgh, Pa., also a correspondent is the publisher. 

It is unnecessary to say that the book is not gotten out for money 
making purposes, but for the glory of God and blessing of the 
household of faith. We are authorized to say that any interested 
but unable to pay can have the book FREE. To those who can 
pay, the price will be 

In paper covers postage prepaid each, $ .50 

6 copies paper covers by express 2.00 

12 copies paper covers by express 4.00 

Cloth covers, postage prepaid 75 

6 copies cloth covers postage prepaid. . . 3.50 
12 copies paper covers by express 7.00 

Orders should be addressed to 

A. D. Jones, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



R95 : page 1 

VOL. I. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., MAY, 1880. 

NO. 11. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 
L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R95 : page 1 



"TO EVERY SEED HIS OWN BODY." 

Paul in 1 Cor. 15 has given us the clearest and most explicit 
account of the resurrection to be found anywhere in scripture. 
He commences with Jesus and His resurrection and shows that 
we have many and reliable witnesses "that Christ died for our 
sins, and that he was buried and was raised the third day, (after 
his death,) &c. He thus proves Christ's resurrection as an 
evidence of the power of God to raise the dead in general, for 
remember this was the general proclamation of the Apostles— 
viz: "They preached through Jesus, (the value of his death as our 
redemption price) the resurrection of the dead;" With close 
argument Paul reaches the conclusions of verses 20-22. 
(Diaglott,) -"But now Christ has been raised from the dead a 
first fruit of those having fallen asleep. For since through a man 
there is death, through a man also there is a resurrection of the 
dead; for as by Adam all die so by the Anointed, also, will all be 
restored to LIFE. " Not merely to the measure of life now 
possessed by men, but gradually to the "perfect" human life as 
illustrated in first Adam before sin and death began their work. 

"But each one in his own rank, Christ, a first fruit. " God has 
time and order for everything, and He has wisely arranged for 
various ranks or orders or companies in the resurrection. All are 
to be raised, but each in his own rank: Christ first, afterward, 
they who are Christ's in (or during) his presence. Only these two 
are specifically mentioned, and yet that the others will be raised 
afterward in their own orders is certain, since it is positively 
stated, (vs. 22,) "All will be restored to life." This work of 
restoring progresses during the millennial age which is called 
"the times of restitution of all things," and when the work of 
restoring to life and all that was lost through sin and death is 
complete, then the end of that age will come. "Then cometh the 
end when he shall deliver up the kingdom to God, even the 
Father," Jesus, during that age having put down all enemies. 
"Even death, the last enemy will be rendered powerless." 

This concludes Paul's argument, but he pauses to answer some 
questions, (vs. 35)— "But some one will say: How are the dead 
raised up, and in what body do they come?" Will it be the same 
particles of matter that once constituted their bodies? Hear 
Paul's answer: You have illustrations before you in nature; the 
grain you plant never comes up again; it dies and wastes away, 
but God gives another grain just like it, of the same kind and 
likeness. If you sow wheat you will get wheat; if you sow tares 
you will get tares. God will give "to every seed his own body." 
Now apply this same principle to the resurrection. What body 
you will have depends upon what seed you are of when buried. 
If you are "of the earth, earthy," when you die you will be raised 
up to the standard of the head of your kind -the perfect natural 
man. But if with Jesus you have given up the flesh life, crucified 
the flesh, and through him become a new creature, a "partaker of 



the Divine Nature, you are no longer of the natural seed but of 
the Spiritual." "THE seed of Abraham," (Gal. 3:29.) And if in 
the resurrection God gives "to every seed his own body," then 
all who are of the spiritual seed will get a spiritual body, just as 
surely as the natural seed will have its own body. "Of what kind 
the earthy one, (Adam) such, also, (will be) the earthy ones, 
(when raised) and of what kind the heavenly one, (Christ,) such, 
also, (will be) the heavenly ones" (when raised). ["Diaglott."] 
"There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body," and 
which you will have, depends on which seed you are of when 
buried. 

Vs. 39:— This need not seem strange to you, for though you have 
never seen a spiritual body, yet, you can see this to be 
reasonable, and in harmony with God's dealings generally as 
you see them every day— even of fleshly bodies, there are 
different sorts and grades-the fowl, fish, beasts, &c, different, 
yet all flesh; so God has diversities, and you have no reason to 
dispute, when I, Paul, say that there is a grander body than any 
of these, a spiritual or heavenly. 

Vs. 40:-Man, when restored to the glory of the earthly again, 
brought back to perfection, though he will then be a truly 
glorious being, will yet be far different from a heavenly body. 
Both will have glory, but the glory of the heavenly is one thing, 
and the glory of the earthly is quite another thing, just as the 
glory of a star is beautiful, yet different and less than the glory 
of the sun. When our change takes place, we shall shine forth as 
the sun in the kingdom of our Father. (Matt. 13:43.) 

While it doth not yet appear what we shall be, for we have never 
seen the glory of the heavenly, yet Paul gives us certain general 
characteristics of those who will have part in THE resurrection, 
(the chief or first.) The Greek language has a peculiar way of 
expressing emphasis by the use of the article the. It is used here 
by Paul to distinguish between the resurrection of the "little 
flock," the "blessed and holy" who have part in the "first 
resurrection," and the resurrection of the natural seed. He says, 
(vs. 42-43. Diaglott.)- "Thus is THE resurrection of THE dead: 
It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in 
dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised 
in power; it is sown an animal body, it is raised a spiritual 
body." 

Thus closes Paul's argument regarding the resurrection; but lest 
some should be perplexed and wonder how any could become 
spiritual bodies, if they should be alive when their Lord comes, 
he explains: "Behold, I show you a mystery, we shall not all 
sleep, but we must all be changed. " 

The overcomers-church of the first born-are represented as 
becoming "dead to sin," "crucifying the flesh," even during the 
present life, and yet though dead to sin, alive toward God 



through Jesus Christ. Here, the figure used represents the body 
dead, but the spirit (will or mind,) alive. Thus every overcoming 
Christian has a germ of spiritual life in a dead body. "I live, yet 
not I, (I am dead,) but Christ liveth in me. " If such an one loses 
the present life, is it his death? No, that took place before. Was it 
the death of the spiritual life within? No, it cannot die. "He that 
believeth on (into) the Son, hath everlasting life. " Such only 
"sleep," but we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed in 
a moment," (vs. 53,) and instead of living in this dead body, fast 
decaying away, we shall have it changed, for this corruptible 
must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on 
immortality. " Thus our death takes place before we enter the 
grave, and our life begins and grows for a while before we get 
the body which God has designed for us, "like unto Christ's 
glorious body. " 

The succeeding verses, as before considered, show the grand 
work upon which we enter when our seed gets its own body: 
and, the prophecies which will then begin to be fulfilled. 



R95 : page 1 

THE SIN OFFERING. 
Lev. 9. 

As we found in Lev. 16, a detailed account of the work of 
atonement, (March No.) so in chapter 9, we have a brief outline 
of the same which shows some of the features of the work quite 
prominently. Chap. 8, closes with an account of the seven days 
(or complete) consecration of the priests, (Feb. No.) and this 
ninth chapter pictures the work which follows the consecration 
of each individual priest. It began with the Head, and continues 
until it is true of every member of "the body"-i.e. after complete 
consecration comes sacrifice. 

In this scene the entire work of the Gospel Age (the sacrificing,) 
as well as the beginning of the work of 

R95 : page 2 

the Millennial Age (the showing of God's glory) are represented 
as though accomplished in a few hours. 

Let us now consider the sin offering, omitting the Peace and 
Burnt offerings. Vs's. 2 and 3. Moses said unto Aaron: "Take 
thee a calf for a sin offering," and unto the children of Israel, 
"Take ye a kid of the goats for a sin offering." "And Moses said, 
this is the thing which the Lord commanded that ye should do 
and the glory of the Lord shall appear unto you." Ver. 6. That is 
this work of sacrificing, &c, must be done before God can 
reveal himself to you in glory. The sinless pair in Eden could 
and did commune with God, but sin entered and God broke off 



the intercourse of the sinner, and as long as man is thus a sinner 
it cannot be restored, consequently it became necessary to 
introduce the Gospel Age as a "Day of Atonement"-a time 
during which Jesus Christ, by death, is made a propitiation- 
mercy seat-for our sins, and through the death of His thus 
ransomed body (the church), he is a propitiation "also for the 
sins of the whole world. " 

When the sacrifice of Head and body is complete, God will 
recognize the whole world as justified freely, as he now 
recognizes the church, and then as at first, "The glory of the 
Lord shall be revealed and all flesh shall see it together. " When 
the sacrifice for the world is ended, the results of harmony with 
God will flow to them. Just as when the sacrifice of the "head" 
for the church was complete, the Holy Spirit was given to all the 
church at Pentecost, so when the work of "atonement," sacrifice 
for the world is over, they will be similarly blessed, 

R96 : page 2 

as it is written- "After those days I will pour out my spirit upon 
all flesh. Pentecost was merely a first fruit of the Spirit, the 
remainder will be like it, but more general. Pentecost was the 
early rain, but God has promised- "I will give you the early and 
the latter rain. 

The first sacrifice was Aaron's- typical of how Christ's must 
precede all others and his blood must consecrate the altar. Aaron 
therefore went unto the altar and slew the calf of the sin offering 
which was for himself, (Ver. 8.) i.e., which represented himself. 
Our high priest did not offer a calf for himself, but actually 
"offered up himself." Lev. 16. (March No.) showed us that this 
offering of himself was as a sin-offering for himself— the body, 
the little flock— and his house— the Levites, the great company. 
"And the sons of Aaron brought the blood unto him and he 
dipped his finger in the blood and put it upon the horns of the 
altar and poured out the blood at the bottom of the altar." (Vs. 
9.) The horns are typical of the power of the altar; their being 
covered with blood, seems to say that none can fully appreciate 
the power of this altar of sacrifice, without first recognizing the 
blood. Thus seen, all the power of the altar was attained only 
through the blood. The horns of the altar reached in every 
direction— north, south, east and west; so God's power to all men 
is unlimited, but he chooses to cover all the power with the 
blood of atonement. And if we understand the type aright, it 
teaches that God's power toward all men to save them, is 
exercised only through the sacrificed life— the death of Jesus 
Christ our Lord, and "I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, 
(that Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every 
man,) for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that 
believeth. " 



The blood poured at the bottom of the altar, shows that there 
was an abundance; it covered the altar and plenty to spare. The 
action of the Priests in bringing the blood, seems to show that all 
who will be priests, will, as an individual matter, recognize the 
value of the blood of Jesus, and personally realize the power of 
God in Christ, (the horns under the blood.) 

The fat and kidneys were not offered upon the altar, probably 
representing the inward and outward affections of Jesus. These 
affections were not things condemned in man, and consequently, 
were not given as a part of the ransom The gall was added, 
possibly, representing some of his bitter experiences in 
connection with the sacrifice; these, God accepts as a Burnt 
offering, or sweet savor, but the flesh and blood, (man's fleshly 
nature and life,) being forfeited by sin, Jesus gave his natural life 
and fleshly nature, upon which sin had no claim, with it to 
redeem from the condemnation of sin, man's natural body and 
life, 

These things, the fleshly nature represented by the flesh and 
hide- were burnt, destroyed— without the camp. All mankind 
was under condemnation of complete destruction of life and 
body, when Jesus came forward and gave his life for ours, and 
his body for ours-the Father giving him another life and body, 
viz: spiritual, when he raised him up. And now we preach 
through His name, that because He thus gave himself a ransom, 
man will be released from the condition of death, and that in 
God's "due time," there will be "a resurrection, both of the just 
and unjust"-and that the merit of his obedience, "even unto 
death," is as far-reaching in its effects upon the human family 
for its release from death, (and all that word means,) and the 
restoration of life, as it was before sin and death were known. 
As far-reaching, we believe, as was the disobedience of Adam to 
destroy that life and produce this death. And as through the 
disobedience of one man, many were constituted sinners, so, 
also, through the obedience of one, many will be constituted 
righteous, i.e., justified. Rom. 5:19, "Diaglott." 

Vs. 15: "And he brought the peoples' offering and took the goat 
which was the sin-offering for the people, and slew it and 
offered it for sin as the first," (the calf.) This goat of the sin 
offering, we think, represents the church, which, by faith and 
obedience even unto the crucifying of the fleshly nature, 
becomes "His body." (See March No.) Vs. 22: "And Aaron 
lifted up his hand toward the people and blessed them, and came 
down from offering of the sin-offering, &c." "And Moses and 
Aaron went into the tabernacle of the congregation and came out 
and blessed the people. " Jesus, our head, entered the holy of 
holies, 1800 years ago as "our fore-runner," and this word fore- 
runner, indicates that we are to follow him there; that he went in 
first with the blood (evidence of death,) of the bullock and 
sprinkled, then came out and took in the blood of the goat, 



representing our entrance with him, we saw illustrated in Lev. 
16, but the picture we now consider, shows not the separate 
entering of the head and body, but their entrance when united- 
made one. Aaron stands at the altar and slays both bullock and 
goat, and when all sacrifices are ended, (the close of the gospel 
age,) he goes into the tabernacle representing head and body 
complete. When our sacrifices are ended, and head and body are 
complete, we shall come into the presence of our Father, and the 
work being accepted of him, He authorizes us to go forth and 
bless the people- "In thy seed shall all the families of the earth 
be blessed, which seed is Christ, and if ye be Christ's, then are 
ye Abraham's seed and heirs"— of this promise to bless all the 
people. 

Here it is that the Aaronic priesthood ends and the Melchizedek 
priesthood begins, the one typical of our career of suffering and 
death, the other represents our exalted condition as, with Jesus, 
"a King upon His throne," blessing all people. "And the glory of 
the Lord appeared unto all the people. " ("The glory of the Lord 
shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together.") Vs. 24: 
"And there came a fire out from before the Lord and consumed 
upon the altar the burnt offering and the fat, which, when all the 
people saw, they shouted and fell on their faces." A fire from the 
Lord indicates his acceptance and perfect satisfaction with all 
the work of atonement as done, and no wonder all the people 
prostrated themselves before God. We believe it will be so in the 
next age when the world can- 
see what God hath wrought, 
Then they'll praise him, praise him as they ought: 
Looking back we'll praise the way, 
Jesus led us, led us day by day. 

And we will rejoice that we were accounted worthy to suffer 
with him and to be glorified together. 

Moses directs in all the affairs of this type; probably 
representing "the law" which indicates to us, God's will. What in 
the other picture was indicated by the taking in of the blood, is 
here represented by Moses' going in with Aaron. So to speak, 
"The Law" goes into the presence of God with us, declaring: 
The sacrifice is complete, the price paid, the full ransom of the 
world. "The righteousness of The Law is fulfilled in us." It 
would seem further to teach that when the church leaves the 
world and enters the presence of God, (the holy of holies,) law 
and order leave also, which would of necessity produce anarchy 
and confusion, and this part of the type seems to agree with the 
statements elsewhere made of the "time of trouble" and reign of 
terror which will be upon the earth after the Bride leaves it. 
When "the salt of the earth" is removed, the mass become 
greatly corrupted, but when the glory of the Lord shall be 
revealed at the close of this day of wrath— when "He shall 
appear," and "we also appear with him," the blessing will 



commence and with us comes law and order, (as typified by 
Moses, appearing again,) and assists in blessing the people. 

But while thinking of our glorious work of blessing the world in 
the future, we should not forget, nor neglect our present 
privileges in this direction, for remember, Aaron blessed the 
people before he went into the holy place: So all who, as 
members of that body, have crucified themselves, should seek, 
so far as they have ability, to "Do good unto all men, especially 
unto those of the household of faith." Let us bless now, as in the 
future, temporally and spiritually, as we may be able. We can all 
certainly bless some, spiritually. May not "the deep things of 
God" be equally as blessed to others as to you? Be not selfish, 
be not negligent, be not slothful servants. Freely we have 
received, freely let us give. 



R97 : page 2 



WRITE AT ONCE. 



The editor purposes making a trip east from Pittsburgh as far as 
Lynn, Mass. It will afford him pleasure to stop off at different 
points not too far from the main roads and meet with the "two's 
and three's" in a private way; or if deemed advisable, would be 
glad to address public meetings on "Things pertaining to the 
kingdom of God. " 

Our readers are much scattered, some places 2 and 3, and on up 
to 50. Many places they are totally unacquainted with each 
other, and thus lose the sympathy and comfort which our Father 
designed should come to them by "The assembling of 
themselves together as the manner of some is." It is His design 
that we should "Edify one another," and build each other up in 
the most holy faith. The proposed meetings we would hope, 
might conduce to personal acquaintance. 

Those desirous, should address, at once, so that we can lay out 
our route, &c. [No charge made nor money taken.] 



R96 : page 3 



THE TIME OF TROUBLE. 

The time of trouble nears,-"it hasteth greatly;" 
Even now its ripples span the world-wide sea; 
Oh! when its waves are swollen to mountains stately, 
Will the resistless billows sweep o'er me? 

Or, terror-stricken, will I then discover 
A glorious Presence 'twixt the sea and sky, 
Treading the waters!— Earth's Imperial lover, 
His words of cheer,-"Be not afraid,-'tis I!" 

Will a hand, strong, yet tender as mother's, 
From the dark surging billows lift me out? 
With soft rebuke, more loving than a brother's; 
"Of little faith! O, wherefore didst thou doubt?" 

Montrose, Pa. 
A. L. F. 



R97 : page 3 



CHRIST AS A SOWER. 



In the thirteenth chapter of Matthew, are given two parables, in 
which the Son of Man is represented as a sower. The first of 
them is usually called the parable of the sower, and the second 
the parable of the tares and the wheat. These parables are related 
to each other, but should not be confounded. We may learn 
something by comparing them; and in the application of these 
two parables, we have the advantage of the fact that the Savior 
explained them both. We must regard it as a fundamental 
principle in the interpretation of parables, that when the Lord 
explained them they need no further explanation. It is probably 
true that no two parables teach, or illustrate, exactly the same 
thing. So, after having given the parable of the sower, and 
explained it, when the word says, "Another parable put He forth 
unto them" (Ver. 24.), we may safely conclude He had 
something more to communicate— that some additional truths 
were to be illustrated. 

Christ is the sower in both parables. It is stated so of the second 
parable (Ver. 37.), but we learn that He is the sower of the first 
parable by the nature of the seed sown. We think all admit this. 

In the first parable the seed sown is the "word of the kingdom" 
(Ver. 19), and in the second "the good seed are the children of 
the kingdom." (Verse 38.) In the first it is truth, and in the 
second, persons. Some one has called this distinction a foolish 
one, and said that the Son of Man does not sow persons. This 
only proves that such an one does not understand the parables. 
Whoever calls the distinction foolish charges the Savior with 



folly, for it is His own explanation. The reasonableness of the 
distinction between the two kinds of seed will be seen when we 
consider the distinction in the fields. 

In the first parable the field of operation is the heart of each 
individual, who hears the word of the kingdom (Ver. 19.), and in 
the second "The field is the world." (Ver. 38.) 

We, be it remembered, are not responsible for this distinction- 
these are the Lord's own words. The word "world," above 
quoted, is not aion, as in the next verse— "The harvest is the end 
of the world" (aion-age), but it is translated from the Greek 
word, "kosmos. " This word is used when the general order of 
things is meant, as when the "world that then was" (before the 
flood) is referred to. (2 Pet. 3:6.) It is also used when the people 
are meant, as "God so loved the world;" "Behold the Lamb of 
God, that taketh away the sin of the world;" and all similar 
passages. There is another shade of meaning in the word, as 
used in several places, as: "God sent not His Son into the world 
to condemn the world." John 3:17. "Christ Jesus came into the 
world to save sinners. (1 Tim. 1:15.) "Love not the world, 
neither the things that are in the world." 1 John 2:15. Any 
thoughtful reader will readily see the difference between the 
world as a place, as used in these several scriptures, and the 
world of mankind who live in that place, and whom Jesus came 
to save. 

"The field is the world"-that is, Christ planted His church in 
this world to accomplish a certain work which Christ came into 
this world to do, or to set in motion. 

Any one might see that there is a clear difference between 
sowing the word of the kingdom in the hearts of men, which 
work began where the personal ministry of Christ began, and the 
planting of the church in the world, which did not take place 
until the day of Pentecost. As the church of Christ was to be 
composed of converted sinners, it was necessary that the word 
of the kingdom, as a converting power, should be preached, for 
a time, before the founding of the church. For proof that the 
word, understood, is the converting power, see verse 15. The 
sowing of the word, in parables, and the explaining of them to 
some, went on during the ministry of Jesus, but He spoke of the 
building of the church as future. "On this rock I will build my 
church." Matt. 16:18. The foundation was not even laid until 
Christ was risen-a spiritual being. The building is a spiritual 
house, and is built on a spiritual rock. The true church has 
always recognized and worshiped a living spiritual Christ-there 
is no other. Keeping in mind the above facts, we will see that the 
parable of the sower must have begun to be fulfilled three years 
and a half sooner than that of the tares and wheat, and we may 
see why it is never said, "The kingdom of heaven is likened to a 
sower." It is simply, "Behold, a sower went forth to sow." In the 
other parables it is "the kingdom of heaven" that is represented. 



The reason is obvious: there was no church of Christ, or 
kingdom of heaven, until the day of Pentecost. The work of 
sowing the word was to prepare for the establishment of the 
church in its due time, and the "holding forth the word of life, " 
or preaching to the unconverted, has been carried on through the 
whole dispensation, for the purpose of converting them, and so 
preparing them for a place in the kingdom. The relation and 
harmony between the two parables can be seen far more clearly 
by preserving the distinctions made by the Savior, between the 
two kinds of seed, and the two fields, than by confounding them. 
The first parable prepares the way for the other. The first deals 
with the individual; the second, with the church collectively. 
The first parable has only one kind of seed-the world. Three out 
of four classes of hearers brought forth no fruit. In the one class 
that received the word in good ground ("an honest and good 
heart;" Luke 8:15), there is a variety in the amount of fruit- 
"Some an hundred fold, some sixty fold, and some thirty fold." 
Ver. 8. All who bear fruit in any degree, are evidently "the 
children of the kingdom"- the branches, weak or strong, of the 
living Vine, for "Every branch in me [says Jesus] that beareth 
not fruit, He taketh away." John 15:2. 

In the parable of the tares and wheat there are two sowers and 
two kinds of seed, both explained by the Savior. The Son of 
Man sowed the good seed— "the children of the kingdom," as we 
have seen, and the devil sowed the tares- "the children of the 
wicked one. " There is a clear contrast between the "children of 
God" and "the children of the devil." There is, as we have 
admitted, a variety among the children of God— some are babes, 
and some are more fully developed, but the Bible recognizes no 
such absurdity as that the children of the devil are at the same 
time Christians, and it is passing strange that any Christian ever 
should have invented or promulgated such an idea. 

The apostle John speaks of the variety among Christians-little 
children, young men and fathers- (1 John 2:12-13), but makes a 
contrast between the Church and the world. "We know that we 
are of God, but the whole world lieth in wickedness," (literally 
"in the Wicked One"). 1 John 5:19. "In this the children of God 
are manifested, and the children of the devil: whosoever doeth 
not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loveth not his 
brother." 1 John 3:10. 

It is true that Paul recognizes the fact that Christians have the 
old man-the flesh-to contend with, and hence the warfare 
spoken of in Rom. 7. But Paul clearly shows that whoever has 
the Spirit of Christ is a son of God, and "if any man have not the 
Spirit of Christ, he is none of His. Rom. 8:9-14. "Ye are not in 
the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in 
you. " Those in whom the good work of the Spirit is ever begun, 
are counted on the living side- "risen with Christ, "-and not on 
the side of death and the devil. This is our encouragement, and 



also makes us debtors, not to live after the flesh but after the 
Spirit. Ver. 12-13. 

When Jesus says, "the tares are the children of the wicked one," 
let no one say, the tares are errors, sown in the hearts of 
Christians, or that the tares are carnal Christians- "babes in 
Christ." If the tares are errors, then the tares are not persons at 
all; so if the wheat be truths, they are not persons at all. But 
again, if the wheat mean truths in the heart and the tares mean 
errors in the same heart, then the harvest is not a separation of 
persons at all, but simply a cleansing of the hearts of Christians 
from error; but this would neither agree with the teachings of 
Jesus nor with the theories of men who make such applications. 
The harvest is a separation of two classes of persons, who were 
permitted to "grow together until the harvest." Ver. 30. But if 
the tares are of the world, are all the world tares? No; only men 
of the world, who get so far out of their place as to profess to be 
Christians, are tares. The tares are the unconverted men in the 
Church— sown among the wheat. Ver. 25. If a farmer sows a 
field with chess, the chess is not then a weed, but it is a weed 
when sown among the wheat. It has always been the duty of 
Christians, to grow in grace and in knowledge, and no person 
can advance in knowledge 

R98 : page 3 

without discarding some error or mistaken ideas. The Apostles 
were constantly exhorting and warning the early Christians 
against errors, and those who advanced them. "Prove all things, 
and hold fast that which is good, " has always been both the duty 
and privilege of Christians. But if wheat be truth, and tares, 
errors then these Apostles contradicted the Savior. How would 
his words sound thus paraphrased: "Shall we root up the error? 
He said nay, lest while ye root up the error, ye root up the truth 
also. Let both truth and error grow together until the harvest, and 
then I will say to the angels, gather ye together first the errors, 
and bind them in bundles to burn them, but gather the truth into 
my barn. " And the errors are to be cast into a furnace of fire, 
where there is wailing and gnashing of teeth. If we would escape 
such absurd conclusions, let us cling to the Savior's own 
explanation of wheat and tares. But, it may be asked, has it not 
always been the duty of the Church to cast out unconverted 
men? I answer, no. Men who committed outrageous sins, could 
be known, and were to be dealt with; but merely for not being 
Christians, they could not be dealt with. An unconverted man, a 
man who loves not our Lord Jesus, might be outwardly 
consistent in conduct, and yet give no real evidence of being 
spiritual. But man is not competent to judge in such cases. 
Hence Paul says: "Therefore judge nothing before the time, until 
the Lord come, who both will bring to light the 

R98 : page 4 



hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the councils 
of the hearts." 1 Cor. 4:5. And yet, in the next chapter, he tells 
them to deal with the fornicator, "To deliver such an one to 
Satan for the destruction of the flesh," &c. Man could deal with 
sinners, but when it was a heart work, a question of motive, they 
could not deal with it. They might make a mistake, and men 
have often made such mistakes. Of such Jesus said: "Nay, lest 
while ye gather up the tares, ye root up the wheat also. Let both 
grow together till the harvest." Then the angels, of superior 
power and wisdom, will do the work of separation. In harmony 
with this, Paul says, "If any man love not our Lord Jesus Christ, 
let him be anathema maranatha," that is: Let him be cut off. The 
Lord cometh. 1 Cor. 16:21. 

This may be an additional proof that the coming or presence of 
the Lord and the angels is due in the time of the harvest. 

As the parable of the sower begins sooner than that of the tares 
and wheat, so it ends sooner. The first does not include the 
harvest work, while the latter does. The harvest of the Jewish 
age was the beginning of the gospel age; so the harvest of the 
Gospel age is the beginning of the Millennium. 

There was a sense in which the Jewish age ended at the Cross, 
and another sense in which it was extended 37 years. So, we 
believe, there is a sense in which the gospel age ended in 1878, 
and another sense in which it is extended 37 years, or until 1914. 

The closing work of the Jewish age included the burning of the 
chaff; Matt. 3:12, and the closing of the gospel includes the 
burning of the tares; Matt. 13:40. In this there is a parallelism, 
but there is one grand event here that had no pattern at the dawn 
of the gospel- that is, the translation of the saints. "Watch ye, 
therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to 
escape those things that shall come to pass, and stand before the 
Son of Man. " The saints shall execute the judgments written, as 
did Aaron with Moses. "Then shall the righteous shine forth as 
the Sun." 

J. H. P. 



R98 : page 4 



THE SIGN OF HIS PRESENCE. 

The disciples ask, "What shall be the sign of Thy parousia, 
(presence, Emp. Dia.) and of the end of the world?" (Matt. 
24:3.) The first words of the recorded answer show the need of a 
sign. Take heed, let no man deceive you, for many shall come in 
My name saying, "I am Christ," and shall deceive many, (Vers. 
4-5.) A sign will enable those who obey this injunction to 
discern between the false and the true. 



Again, a sign will be needed because of the obscurity which 
marks the period of his return. His presence is not to be 
accompanied by such physical demonstrations as shall make all 
aware of it. But as the days of Noah were, so shall also the 
presence of the Son of man be. For as in the days that were 
before the flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and 
giving in marriage, and knew not until the flood came and took 
them all away, so shall also the presence of the Son of man be, 
(Vers. 37-39.) All things will indeed continue as from the 
beginning. How then will the church be aware of His presence, 
except by a sign? 

This sign will not be given to all. Only those can see it who have 
obeyed his commands, and these cannot show it to the 
unfaithful. They are the ones whose hearts are not overcharged 
with surfeiting and the cares of this life. Their hands are clean 
and their hearts pure. Paul calls them "children of the light," and 
says that because they are of the light, that day shall not 
overtake them as a thief. 1 Thess. 5:4. 

We are now prepared to consider the nature of this sign. Christ 
describes it in answer to the question asked by His disciples, 
"What shall be the sign of Thy presence. " He says: "Then if any 
man shall say to you, Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe it not, 
for there shall arise false Christs and false prophets, and shall 
show great signs and wonders, inasmuch, that if it were possible 
they shall deceive the very elect. Behold, I have told you before, 
wherefore if they shall say unto you, behold, He is in the desert, 
go not forth; behold, He is in the secret chamber, believe it not. 
For as the lightning cometh out of the east and shineth even unto 
the west, so shall also the presence of the Son of man be, (Matt. 
24:23-28). This "lightning" cannot be natural light, else His 
presence would not be likened to the days that were before the 
flood. Spiritual light is divine truth. Hence a great and 
wonderful unfolding of truth is all that the Bible gives us a right 
to expect during the presence of the Son of man, and before 
translation. Some teach that He may appear to us before we are 
made like Him. But we know not where the Bible gives us any 
warrant for such expectation. On the contrary it is written, "It 
doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when He 
shall appear we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is, 
(1 John 3:2). Again, when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, 
then shall we also appear with Him in glory. (Col. 3:4). Hence, 
we urge on those who are "looking for that blessed hope and the 
glorious appearing of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ," the 
Savior's command, "Take heed let no man deceive you." The 
light of truth made plain by the Spirit, is the only promised 
guide, while here we wait. And this to us, is far more convincing 
than any physical manifestation could be. 

L. A. A. 



R98 : page 4 



GOD'S PURPOSE. 



It is God's purpose to save a lost world. This work is 
committed into the hands of Jesus Christ, whose work is 
expressive of the wisdom, power and love of God. The end 
gained is the fruit of God's love. An imperfect view of the fruit, 
must cause an imperfect idea of the love itself, and the effect 
must be an injury to us. "A child is known by its doings," and 
"A tree is known by its fruit." The Lord says, "Come let us 
reason together," "are not my ways equal?" An appreciation of 
His ways and doings is akin to sympathy and fellowship. 
Knowledge and love are certainly related to each other;— love 
appreciated, produces love. "We love Him because He first 
loved us," and love makes obedience cheerful. Gratitude and 
love are the springs of successful human life. Oh, that we may 
be in sympathy with God's purpose. That purpose is variously 
expressed. "Her seed shall bruise thy head." Gen. 3:15. This 
threatening of death to the serpent means blessing to mankind. 
He destroys the enemy to deliver the captives. Heb. 2:14-15. 
The opening chapters of Genesis give the entrance of the curse 
of sin and death, and the last chapters of Revelations reveal the 
success of God's plan,- "There shall be no more curse." Rev. 
22:3. "There shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, 
neither shall there be any more pain, for the former things are 
passed away." (21 :4). The history of the past is in harmony with 
human experience, and the hope revealed is in harmony with 
human necessities, and the Bible is thus shown to be in harmony 
with facts and with itself. What was implied in the threatening 
against the serpent, was expressed two thousand years later in 
God's covenant with Abraham: "In thy seed shall all nations- 
'kindreds' --'families'—of the Earth be blessed. " From that time 
dates the promise of God, which the law, given four hundred 
and thirty years after, could not disannul. Gal. 3:17. The divine 
nature or spirit is the basis of the success, and is imparted, not 
by law, which cannot give life (Ver. 21), but by the "exceeding 
great and precious promises." 2 Pet. 1:4. The going forth of the 
word of the Lord, in all ages, or in all stages of its development, 
must have reference to the great end; as when man builds for a 
home and its comforts, he keeps that in mind when the stones 
are being quarried, the timbers hewn, the foundation laid, and 
through all the steps of building. Of His own word the Lord 
says: "It shall not return to me void, but it shall accomplish that 

R99 : page 4 

which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent 
it." Isa. 55:1 1. "When thou shalt make his soul an offering for 
sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the 
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, he shall see the 
travail of his soul and be satisfied." 53:10-1 1, "He shall not fail 



or be discouraged, until he shall have set judgment in the Earth, 
and the isles shall wait for his law. " "He shall not quench the 
smoking flax nor break the bruised reed until He bring forth 
judgment unto victory." "The Lord shall make bare His holy arm 
in the eyes of all the nations, and all the ends of the earth shall 
see the salvation of our God. " 52:10. "All the ends of the world 
shall remember and turn to the Lord, and all the kindreds of the 
nations shall worship before Him, for the kingdom is the Lords 
and He is the Governor among the nations." Ps. 22. 

"When Thy judgments are in the Earth the inhabitants of the 
world will learn righteousness." Isa. 26:9. These are but a 
sample of the prophetic utterances dictated by the spirit of 
Christ, and the New Testament takes up the strain and carries it 
forward to the glad climax. "Behold the Lamb of God that taketh 
away the sin of the world." John 1:29. "That was the true light 
that lighteth every man that cometh into the world." "Behold we 
bring unto you glad tidings of great joy which shall be unto all 
people." "Glory to God in the highest, and on Earth peace and 
good will toward men. " 

"He must reign until He hath put all enemies under His feet. The 
last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. " "He gave Himself a 
ransom for all to be testified in due time. " "Because of His 
humiliation and obedience unto death, even the death of the 
cross." "Therefore God also hath highly exalted Him, and given 
Him a name which is above every name, that at the name of 
Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven, in earth, and under the 
earth," &c. Phil. 2:9-10. 

"All nations shall come and worship before Thee, for Thy 
judgments are made manifest." Rev. 15:4. These broad and 
sweeping statements are the common utterances of the Bible, in 
reference to the ultimate result of the work of Christ, and the 
only exception to the final salvation of all, is in the case of those 
who sin willfully after they have come to the knowledge of the 
truth; or who having been begotten of the spirit by the word of 
truth, fail to come to the second birth, and so are not counted. 
All who ever come to perfect spiritual manhood, that is, the 
image of God, will retain it, and when the work is finished sin 
and death will be unknown. 

God's work is one of order as well as love, overlooking which 
the love is obscured. The consummation is to be reached by the 
various steps, called ages, each age having its own 

R99 : page 5 

part of the work to do. No age has been too short for its purpose. 
The succession of ages indicates the progressive character of the 
plan. Before the flood but little law or light was given, and men 
were left to work out the natural life of sinful flesh to its 
legitimate consequence —death. The great fact must be proved 
that "All flesh is as grass." Until man has learned this lesson he 



knows not how truly to lay hold on the arm of the Lord extended 
to help. Sin existed, but was not imputed, nevertheless death 
reigned, even over the irresponsible. Rom. 5:13-14. Sin was not 
properly known, as "exceeding sinful," but was counted as in a 
dormant or "dead state. " The sinner was conceited, until the law 
came. Says Paul: "I had not known sin but by the law, for I had 
not known lust unless the law had said: 'Thou shalt not covet.' 
But sin taking occasion by the commandment wrought in me all 
manner of concupiscence. For without the law sin (existed but) 
was dead. For I was alive, without the law once, but when the 
commandment came, sin revived (lived again) and I died. " Rom. 
7:7-9. 

It is clear that Paul is not speaking of the original entrance of sin 
and death, for sin revived but of the effect of the "law that was 
added because of transgression," to give the "knowledge of sin" 
and show it in its true character as "exceeding sinful." Ver. 13. 

In the Patriarchal age the Promise of a Deliverer was given, and 
in the Jewish age, in addition to the giving of the law, which 
condemns man and cannot save, there was developed by types 
and prophecy much light in reference to the coming Savior. God 
only dealt with the Jewish nation during that age, and they 
gained the impression that He cared little or nothing for the 
other nations. They were as the literal descendants of Abraham 
through Isaac, the "seed according to the flesh." But "the 
children of the flesh," says Paul, "are not the children of God, 
but the children of the promise are counted for the seed;" Rom. 
9:8, and adds: "We, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of 
the promise." Gal. 4:28. From all of which it is evident that the 
church of Christ is the Seed, that the gospel dispensation is the 
period for its development, and therefore the real work of 
bruising the serpent and blessing the nations belongs to an age 
after Christ comes and gathers His church to Himself and to a 
share of His glory. During this gospel dispensation the church 
has quite naturally fallen into a similar error as that of the Jews, 
that their dispensation was final, and that none could be blessed 
beyond. While the truth is that God, in the gospel age, has been 
"taking out a people for His name," for the very purpose of 
sharing with Him in the greater work of saving the world. That 
the church have been objects of His special care and love is true, 
and all the angels of heaven have been to the "heirs of salvation" 
ministers of mercy. Heb. 1. We can, with these facts before us, 
more fully appreciate what it is to be "called according to His 
purpose. " That purpose is to bless the world in the ages to come. 
Eph. 2:7. Here is the High Calling of God in Jesus Christ. And 
to fit us for our work, we are called unto holiness, and called to 
pass through trials and peculiar difficulties, as fire to refine and 
purify us. "These light afflictions work out for us a far more 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory." "And all things shall 
work together for good to them that love God;— to them that are 
the called according to His purpose. " 



In view of the exceeding weight of glory promised, we may 
well, like Paul, count all else loss that we may win Christ and be 
found in Him. 

Oh, that we may forget the things that are behind, and keeping 
the eye on the mark, press on for the heavenly prize. Phil. 3:13- 
14. 

J. H. P. 



R99 : page 5 



LIVING SACRIFICE. 



"I Beseech you, therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that 
ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto 
God, which is your reasonable service." Rom. 12:1. 

This is Paul's exhortation to the church-a comprehensive 
sermon in one verse. They were "brethren" in Christ, having 
been "planted together in the likeness of his death" (6:5), and yet 
had not made a complete sacrifice. They had not yet 
apprehended that for which Christ had apprehended them. Phil. 
3:12. 

That condition is the "mark"— the winning post- "for the prize 
of the high calling," toward which all in Christ are urged to 
"press." 

This is attainable, but a sacrifice is demanded-the crucifixion 
and death of the "sinful affections and lusts." Death by 
crucifixion is a painful process. "They that are Christ's have 
crucified the flesh,"- "the old man," "that the body of sin might 
be destroyed." Rom. 6:6; Gal. 5:24. This is Christ's object in 
reference to us, and we are urged to keep this object ever in 
view. "He that is dead is freed from sin. " Now if we be dead 
with Christ we believe that we shall also live with Him: 

"Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead, dieth no more, 
death hath no more dominion over Him. For in that he died, he 
died unto sin once, but in that He liveth, He liveth unto God. 
Likewise reckon ye yourselves also to be dead indeed unto sin, 
but alive unto God. " 

"Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should 
obey it in the lusts thereof." Rom. 6:7-12. The practical import 
of all this is, that we sin not, keeping the body under subjection 
to the law of the spirit, the new nature in Christ Jesus, and so 
bring forth fruit unto holiness. This kind of dying is indeed a 
painful process, but it is a voluntary sacrifice which is required. 
This is not the curse which was pronounced on Adam: "Dying 
thou shalt die." That death "passed upon all men," "even upon 
those who had not sinned, after the similitude of Adam's 
transgression." Rom. 5:12-14. From that curse reconciliation is 



effected by the death of Christ, who gave Himself a ransom for 
all. Rom. 5:10. It is the voluntary offering of redeemed life 
which God seeks and which is pleasing to Him. He, by the price 
paid, had become rightfully possessor. "Ye are not your own, ye 
are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body and 
in your spirit, which are His." He is Lord and Master we are 
called upon to admit his claims, and thus be at agreement with 
God. "Be ye reconciled to God," may be applicable to the 
unconverted, but it was addressed to Christians. See 2 Cor. 5:20. 

It is not to be inferred that because Christ's death is presented as 
an example of voluntary obedience to the will of God, which we 
are to follow, that therefore this was the only feature or object of 
his death. His death is as a ransom, meritorious, but it is none 
the less exemplary on this account. He gave His life, on which 
the law had no claim, to redeem man's life, on which the law 
had a claim, and thus made it possible for man to make a willing 
sacrifice to God, as He Himself had made, 

R100 : page 5 

and hence it is that "if we suffer we shall also reign with Him. " 

The service which the Lord requires is "reasonable," because He 
is Lord. He claims but His own when He asks all. The process of 
mortifying the deeds of the body involves a separation from the 
world. "Be not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed 
by the renewing of the mind." (Ver. 2). "Though the outward 
man perish, the inward man is renewed day by day. " "Daily 
bread" is provided by the word of God to enable us to grow, and 
to overcome self and the world. The maxims and pleasures of 
the world are not friendly to grace to help us on to God, and the 
command to be separate is not so unimportant as it seems to be 
estimated by many professed followers of Christ. Non- 
conformity is the safeguard against shipwreck of faith. 

The motive to make the sacrifice is "The mercies of God. " There 
is reference by the word "therefore" to the merciful dealing of 
God with Israel, recorded in the eleventh chapter. Oh, that all 
knew something of the plan of the ages, by which God's love 
and mercy is manifested, but now we deal with the principle that 
the goodness of God leadeth to repentance. Rom. 2:4. 

That goodness is revealed in Christ. The plan of ages is the work 
of Christ. He is indeed the Rock of Ages. The Cross of Christ- 
His sacrifice— is central and from it emanates the world's life and 
hope. Hence Paul could say: "God forbid that I should glory 
save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. " In referring to the 
mercies, Paul appeals to gratitude and love, and these are the 
springs of true human life. His love shed abroad in our hearts- 
known and appreciated— is the cause of the greatest victories. 

We know only in part, but the little we know is great. What He 
has done for us, is the reason of the call for return. His sacrifice 



is both the reason and the pattern for ours. Both His and ours 
look to God and then to man. His satisfies justice; ours is a 
grateful offering, giving evidence of His success and the power 
of the gospel over us. The object of his, humanward was to save 
mankind. Ours should be the same— He is the Way; while we 
point the way to others. His was complete, no reserve; we must 
withhold nothing. Have we not lived for self long enough. Let 
the time past suffice in that direction. 

Love so amazing so divine, 
Demands my soul, my life, my all. 

The condition of the surrendered heart is: "Lord what wilt Thou 
have me to do?" "Present your bodies"- All powers; talents, 
time and property. We are stewards for the Lord. Where? On the 
altar of God's appointing, and as he may direct. The good 
Samaritan feature of Christ's life may indicate the altar of human 
hearts. God will give the willing worker something to do. The 
spirit of the Gospel both in this age and that to come, is to give 
light and to bless mankind. The spirit of the present should be as 
the spirit of our hope: to save mankind. Here we have but the 
earnest of grace and power. "Then shall the righteous shine. " 
With all consecrated to Christ and exercised in his service we 
may reasonably expect his smile and fellowship. The fellowship 
of Christ is the fellowship of the sons of God. 

J. H P. 



page 5 

PREACHING NOTICE. 

Invitations to hold meetings may be addressed either to the 
editor (mentioning whom you wish to have) or, direct to the 
brethren. 



ORDERS for "Day Dawn" or the "Gospel in type and 
Prophecy," by Bro. J. H. Paton, (paper 50 cents cloth 75 cents,) 
should be addressed to the publisher, Bro. A. D. Jones, 
Pittsburgh, Pa. 



OWING to advance in price of paper the books advertised 
some time since must be advanced in price. Hereafter they can 
be furnished you as follows (postage paid,) 

Emphatic Diaglott, cloth bound.. ..$2.95 
best binding... 3.60 

Tischendorf New Testament 80 

American Bible Union" 70 



R100 : page 6 



THE TABERNACLE. 

The law being a shadow of good things to come, it is 
necessary, if we would grasp the substance, to trace very closely 
the outline there given. While our Father has granted us, as a 
part of his children, a great deal of light we believe there are 
mines of wealth in His precious word, that are, as yet, but little 
known. We think The Law is a whole mining district. Paul has 
opened some large crevices in it, through the letter to the 
Hebrews and in other places, and we can see the gems sparkling 
brightly as he lets the light in upon them; but these are given 
only, it would seem, to lead us on, to incite us to search as men 
search for hidden treasures. 

We wish, at this time, to look at the Tabernacle and its contents, 
and before entering into details, will first glance at its general 
appearance. The outer inclosure was called the court of the 
tabernacle. It was surrounded by posts or pillars, evidently of 
wood, with bases of copper, [incorrectly brass in A.V.] and caps, 
hooks, &c, of silver, from which hung a continuous curtain of 
fine twined linen. Within this was the tent or tabernacle, 
constructed of gold-covered boards on three sides, with posts 
and a curtain on the front or east end. Ex. 26:18-27, covered 
above with curtains of goats' hair, of rams' skins dyed red, and 
uppermost, of badgers' skins. The inside of the tent was hung 
with curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and 
scarlet adorned with cherubim. 

This beautiful curtain evidently formed the ceiling and hung 
down each side within the tabernacle. The tent was divided into 
two compartments by a vail of the same description as the 
curtains. We are not given the position of the vail, but probably, 
as in the temple, [1 Kings, 6:2,17,20,] the holy place was twice 
the size of the most holy. 

Outside the tabernacle, near the door, and apparently directly in 
front of it, stood the altar of burnt offering. Between the altar 
and the door stood the laver of brass, [copper.] 

In the holy place were: the table of show-bread, upon the north 
or right hand side; the golden lampstand opposite on the south, 
and the altar of incense directly in front, close to the separating 
vail. Ex. 40:5-30. Within the vail stood alone the ark of the 
covenant, hidden in the secret place, unseen by the common 
priest, and shrouded in impenetrable darkness. Even when 
approached by the high priest once a year, although then 
probably illuminated with the shekinah of glory, it must still be 
covered from him by a cloud of incense. Lev. 16:12-13. 

THE COURT OF THE TABERNACLE 

was 100 cubits long by 50 cubits wide, with posts 5 cubits high 
and 5 cubits apart; standing, as it were, within reach of each 
other, yet too far apart to lean upon one another. Their only 



connection was the curtain, which, hanging upon each, tied them 
all together. The curtain was apparently without seam for the 
whole length of each side, excepting, perhaps, the front. It was 
made of fine twined linen and symbolized, we believe, the 
righteousness of Christ. Being without seam, it reminds us of the 
seamless linen robe that Jesus wore. John 19:23, 22:25. A robe 
that cannot be put on by inches, and when it covers, covers 
completely. The posts of corruptible wood firmly set in bases of 
incorruptible brass, would seem to symbolize the church, 
composed of weak mortals liable to fall, yet standing by the 
power of God; not built on the sand of the desert, but having a 
sure foundation. Their caps, fillets and hooks were of silver. As 
we are told to search for truth as for silver, and as David likens 
the words of the Lord to silver purified seven times, we 
conclude that truth is symbolized by silver, which thus adorned 
the posts, clothing their heads with beauty, forming the 
ornaments of the body, and being the hook or connection which 
bound them to the curtain of linen, and by it to each other. 

What has been the work of the church in the past ages, what can 
it be in the future, but simply to hold up to the view of the world 
without, the spotless righteousness of Christ? Hidden behind 
that snowy curtain, covered by that seamless robe, standing 
alone by divine power, linked together by the truth, they form a 
long united row, reaching down the stream of time. 

"A glittering host in bright array," or, as Peter says: "A chosen 
generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people," 
living for what purpose? to "show forth the praises of him who 
hath called you out of darkness into his marvelous light. " Truly, 
as Paul says, we are surrounded by a "cloud of witnesses." 
Within the court there were solemn mysteries transpiring, and 
many beautiful sights which it was not lawful for those without 
to even catch a glimpse of. They must first see and appreciate 
the righteousness of Christ. "For he who cometh to God must 
believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of those who 
diligently seek him. " 

Being drawn toward Christ by what we have already seen, we 
come to the gate of the court. "And for the gate of the court shall 
be a hanging of twenty cubits, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, 
and fine twined linen, wrought with needlework." Ex. 27:16. 

Here we behold Christ as the Door, and as we draw near, we 
find him radiant with beauty. What mean these colors? "A True 
Blue" is the synonym for a faithful one. The blue of the national 
flag of many countries stands for fidelity. We think the symbol 
is of divine origin. In Num. 15:37-41, we find that the Lord 
commanded Moses to make a ribbon of blue on a fringe for their 
garments. They were to look upon it and remember their duty to 
God. It was to inspire their fidelity by recalling his faithfulness. 
Purple is the badge of royalty. The purple robe that the mocking 
soldiers placed on Christ, was an emblem that had its origin in 



very early times. In Judges 8:26, we find the kings of Median 
robed in this color. Scarlet was also worn by kings, but we think 
it spoke of blood when used under the law. Thus the beautiful 
gate of the court pointed to Christ, as the "Faithful and True," as 
the "King of Kings," and as the great "High Priest," the 
"Redeemer" and "Savior" of the world. 

R101 : page 6 

Passing through the door and advancing towards the tabernacle 
we come to 



THE BRAZEN ALTAR. 

The altar of Burnt Offering was made of shittim wood covered 
with plates of brass [copper]. It was a beautiful type of Christ. 
Christ as the man of sorrows, as the Lamb of God. Christ in his 
human nature [corruptible wood] clothed with power divine [the 
copper plates]. The wood alone must have burnt up -Adam fell. 

It was four-sided, presenting a full breadth of side to every 
quarter of the earth. Being square it typified the perfection of 
Christ. It was five cubits long, five wide, and only three cubits 
high. Its dimensions speak chiefly of length and breadth as a 
Savior of all men, who saves to the uttermost. It was 
comparatively low, typifying one easy of access, and a free 
salvation. 

It had four horns to which the victims could be tied that were to 
be sacrificed, and to which persons in danger of being slain 
might flee for safety. Ps. 118:27, 1 Kings 2:28. These evidently 
pointed to Christ as our Refuge, and to his abundance of power 
and grace to all who should come to him. The fire continually 
burning upon it, and never allowed to go out (Lev. 6:13) speaks 
of consecration complete and continuous. 

Fire is used as a symbol of love. Here it would be love 
unceasing and unchangeable. Not that we first loved him, but 
that he first loved us. Not that he loves us because we are good, 
or since we began to be good, but "God commendeth his love 
towards us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for 
us." Oh that not only the world, but the church might understand 
the meaning of the words, "GOD IS LOVE." The words by the 
last prophet ring down through the ages. "For I am Jehovah, I 
change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. " As 
the altar of burnt offering, consuming whatever was laid upon it, 
it points to the absolute devotedness of Christ to his Father's 
will; and also to what is required of his followers who profess to 
lay themselves upon that altar. "Whatsoever toucheth the altar 
shall be holy." "The altar sanctifieth the gift." 

Fire is a purifying agent, but it purifies by destruction. Jesus 
came in a body prepared, and offered himself a whole burnt 
offering. His sacrifice was not the stepping down temporarily 



from a higher to a lower plane. That was necessary as a part of 
the preparation for the sacrifice, as was the presentation of the 
victim to the priest at the door of the tabernacle. Or as Paul says: 
"We see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels for 
the suffering of death... that he by the grace of God should taste 
death for every man." Heb. 2:9. "For verily he took not on him 
the nature of angels; but he took on him the seed of Abraham. " 
2:19. Why? For the simple reason that angels cannot die. Luke 
20:36. "Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh 
and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same, that 
through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, 
that is, the devil, and deliver them, who, through fear of death 
[same kind of death] were all their lifetime subject to bondage." 
The son of Mary— not the pre-incarnate word, as such— was 
called Jesus; not because he had, but because "he shall save his 
people from their sins." Jesus came to die. "He is brought as a 
lamb [dumb] to the slaughter." He made his "soul [life] an 

offering for sin He hath poured out his soul unto death." 

What death? After "being found in fashion as a man, he 
humbled himself, [not humbled himself to be a man] and 
became obedient unto death, EVEN THE DEATH OF THE 
CROSS." Phil. 2:8. We pity those who profess to be Christians 
and despise "the death of the cross." Yes! the altar spoke of 
death; and when the high priest went into the holy of holies he 
did not carry in the restored life of the victim by any means; he 
rather took in the sure proof of its utter destruction; so, "though 
we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know 
we him no more." 

From the golden altar inside the tabernacle, every morning and 
evening there floated heavenward a cloud of sweet incense- 
making acceptable the prayers of the saints- but that altar itself 
was only acceptable because it had been sprinkled with the 
atoning blood taken from the side of the altar of burnt offering. 
In other words, the risen Savior- the golden altar-was only 
acceptable because of the work [obedience unto death] of the 
man Christ Jesus -the altar of wood and brass. " Woe to those 
who despise "a dead Christ" in their prayers. We do pray in the 

R101 : page 7 

name of him who was dead, but now ever liveth to make 
intercession for us. Christ was our forerunner, and we too must 
lay ourselves upon this altar; our old nature is doomed to death; 
while we are separated, delivered from this body of death 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. 

Christ by the pouring out of "his own blood" has redeemed us 
from the condition in which Adam's sin placed us and so a 
resurrection is assured us. "For as in [or through] Adam all die, 
even so in [or through] Christ shall all be made alive. " If any 
would attain to the Divine nature and life, they must take their 
sinning nature-the old man-and bring it to this altar, Jesus, and 



put it to death: crucify it with the affections and lusts. Gal. 5:24. 
"Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy 
nakedness be not discovered thereon." Exod. 20:26. 

We cannot come to Christ by steps. We must come as we are 
and come at once. When we realize our degradation and sin, 
human nature says: do not present yourself in that condition, 
tone up, break off bad habits, try to be good, and after climbing 
up a few steps, come to Christ. Vain resolve! ending only in 
broken vows and bitter disappointment; and as the pure light of 
Heaven streams upon us, we realize our own weakness and 
nakedness and poverty; that our righteousness is but filthy rags, 
and that our great want is the spotless robe of Christ's 
righteousness to cover us completely, that the shame of our 
nakedness do not appear. 

In antitype, the fire of this altar has not yet gone out. We see a 
groaning creation loaded down with sin and sorrow, waiting, 
hoping for a better day. We expect to see the dross all burned 
up, with every vestige of miasma and taint of sin: and to rejoice 
in the joy of a purified world even though purged by "the fire of 
his jealousy," for "our God is a consuming fire." 

W. I. M. 



R101 : page 7 

"THE BAG AND BAGGAGE POLICY." 

The recent elections in England which involve a change in the 
ministry and the removal from office of the world-renowned 
Hebrew, Lord Beaconsfield, might at first sight appear to be a 
hindrance to the restoration of Israel to Palestine. For several 
years have things seemed particularly favorable to the Jew, and 
one of the principal aids in this direction seemed to be the 
interest, statesmanship, and political opportunity afforded by the 
high standing of this celebrated man. Now but a short time after 
he has procured for his race much relief from persecution, &c, 
in Palestine and Turkey, and caused Great Britain to be 
appointed Protector of the Holy Land, and while he seemed in a 
fair way to be more useful to them, he is removed from power. 
At first this may appear disastrous, but perhaps it is not so after 
all. 

Mr. Gladstone, who succeeds Lord Beaconsfield, gave utterance 
some time since to his sentiments regarding Turkey— viz: That if 
the Turks cannot and do not, carry out the reforms demanded by 
the Berlin Treaty, they and their government should be turned 
out of Europe, bag and baggage. Since the probability of his 
coming into power, these sentiments are being discussed 
considerably in diplomatic circles, and it is generally understood 
that he will put the "Bag and baggage policy" into force. The 



simple announcement of the drift of the elections is said to have 
produced almost a panic at Constantinople. While this does not 
bear directly upon the Jew, it may do so indirectly by placing 
Palestine more directly under England's control. We may rest 
assured, however, that God is working all things after the 
counsel of his own will, and 



His purposes will ripen fast, 

Unfolding every hour; 

The bud may have a bitter taste, 



But sweet will be the flower." Not Lord Beaconsfield, but Our 
Lord Jehovah it is who said: "The waste places shall be rebuilt," 
and "Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited. " "Thus saith the Lord 
God....O mountains of Israel, ye shall shoot forth your branches 
and yield your fruit to my people of Israel; for they are at hand 
to come. "..."I scattered them among the heathen and they were 
dispersed through the countries; according to their way and 
according to their doings I judged them.... But I had pity for my 
holy name. Therefore say unto the house of Israel, thus saith the 
Lord God: I do not this for your sakes, but for my holy name's 
sake.... I will take you from among the heathen and gather you 
out of all countries, and I will bring you into your own land. 
Then (not before, but after their return,) I will sprinkle clean 
water (truth) upon you and ye shall be clean; a new heart also 
will I give you, and I will put my spirit within you and cause 
you to walk in my statute, and ye shall keep my judgments and 
do them. And ye shall dwell safely in the land that I gave to your 
fathers, and ye shall be my people and I will be your God. " 
(Ezek. 36.) "Moreover, I will make a covenant of peace with 
them, and it (the New covenant,) shall be an everlasting 

R102 : page 7 

covenant with them,... and I will set my sanctuary in the midst of 
them forevermore. " (Ezek. 37:26.) The kingdom of God, (the 
glorified church,) which cometh not with observation, neither 
shall they say lo here, or lo there, shall be in the midst of (or 
among) them. The Spiritual Israel, (Luke 17:20.)- God's 
Sanctuary. 

The restoration comes first; afterward, the Lord will "pour upon 
them the spirit of grace and supplication, and they shall look 
upon me whom they have pierced, and shall all mourn for their 
sins and turn unto the Lord." "In that day there shall be a 
fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness." (Zech 12:10. and 13.1.) 
Yes, says Paul, (Rom. 11:26.) "There shall come out of Zion the 
Deliverer, (the Christ, head and body,) and shall turn away 
ungodliness from Jacob: For this is my covenant (agreement,) 
unto them when I shall take away their sins." Their sins will not 
be taken away until the gospel age of sacrifice for sin, (Day of 



atonement,) is ended and we with our "head"— Jesus come forth 
to bless the people. 

Then not only shall Israel after the flesh" "obtain mercy by 
YOUR mercy," but all the families of the earth are to be blessed 
through this Seed.- But "to the Jew first and also to the 
Gentile." 



R102:page7 



EXPEDIENT FOR YOU. 



"Nevertheless I tell you the truth; it is expedient for you that I 
go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto 
you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you." John 16:7. 

The speaker is Jesus. The disciples are addressed. The 
circumstances are peculiar and interesting. They were sad, 
because He had said He was going away. "Little children, yet a 
little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me; and as I said unto 
the Jews, Whither I go, ye cannot come; so now I say to you." 
Ch. 13:33. The time for His departure was drawing near. They 
were gathered to eat their last Passover. After the supper, He had 
broken the bread and poured the wine, for them to eat and drink, 
and had said "This is my body;" and "This is my blood;" and 
"Do this in remembrance of me. " True, He had said, "Let not 
your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me. " 
He also had said, "I will come again, and receive you unto 
myself; that where I am, there ye may be also." Ch. 14:1-3. But 
while it remained to them an unsolved mystery, is it any wonder 
that sorrow filled their hearts? Ch. 16:6. Until after He had risen, 
they knew not, often as He had told them, what even the rising 
from the dead should mean. How then could they understand 
His going away and His coming again? He sought not 
needlessly to make them mourn, but as the time drew near, He 
sought to prepare them for the ordeal. Not only was He going 
away, but they were to suffer persecution and be put to death. 
Ch. 16:2. This was so much different from what they had 
expected, in a kingdom of earthly glory, no wonder they were 
despondent and silent. Vs. 5-6. "But," He says, "these things 
have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may 
remember that I told you of them. And these things I said not 
unto you at the beginning, because I was with you. " Ver. 4. 
What a blending of tenderness and wisdom, in His dealings with 
them! There were, it will be seen, several very natural reasons 
for their sadness. They were to all human appearance about to 
lose by death, a friend whom they had learned to love. We can 
all, on account of our own experience, sympathize with them in 
this. But their grief was intensified by a terrible disappointment. 
"We trusted that it had been He which should have redeemed 
Israel." Luke 24:21. They expected earthly glory, and instead of 



this, He whom they loved and trusted now spoke to them of 
suffering and death. It was not merely the disappointment, as of 
those who bury their hopes in a premature grave, but there must 
have been coupled with it a terrible fear that He had deceived 
them; that they had loved and trusted an imposter. Most terrible 
of all fears! And while it remained unexplained, the language of 
our text only deepens the mystery. Not only going to die and 
leave us, they might have thought, but He goes so far as to say it 
is all for our good: "It is expedient for you that I go away." The 
Comforter will come. You will have Him, instead of me, says 
Jesus, and it is better for you. He had been their Teacher, and 
thus their Comforter, for He says, "I will pray the Father, and He 
shall give you another Comforter, that He may abide with you 
forever; even the Spirit of truth." John 14:16-17. The Spirit is a 
Comforter, because He is a Teacher, as was Jesus Himself. Ch. 
16:12-15. But Jesus gives them to understand that the other 
Comforter would be better for them than was He, and not 
merely a help, partly to make up their loss. Their loss of His 
presence and teaching was to be their gain. There were doubtless 
other reasons, not here expressed, why He should go away, but 
the reason He gives for its being better for them that He should 
go is: "For if I go not away, the Comforter will not come. " The 
disciples probably did not comprehend this until after the Spirit 
came, and it may not be understood by all yet, but it is only 
using our own words to express His statements, when we say 
that the church is better off under the teachings and comforting 
influences of the Holy Spirit than they could have been under 
the instructions, and enjoying the presence of Jesus in the flesh. 
His going away included the fact of His entrance on the higher 
life. He was put to death in the flesh, and quickened by the 
Spirit, and "That which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. " 1 Pet. 
3:18 and John 3:6. The Holy Spirit is the representative of 
Himself and His power in that spiritual 

R102 : page 8 

life. Hence He could say "Lo I am with you always, even unto 
the end of the world." Matt. 28:20. He is absent in body yet 
present in Spirit. 

The work of the Spirit is two-fold neither part of which could 
have been done as well by Jesus in the flesh. The two objects to 
be gained, were the teaching and comforting of the church, and 
the reproving and enlightening of the world. Ch. 16:8-15. 

He was limited, as a man in the flesh, to the ordinary means of 
travel, and could only be in one place at a time, but the Spirit 
can be everywhere, and with any number of people at once. 
However great the seeming loss, and the sorrow of the embryo 
church must have been, when He was taken from them, certainly 
the wants of the church in all succeeding generations have been 
far more fully met by the presence of the Spirit than they could 
have been by His presence in the flesh. Thousands upon 



thousands, all through these centuries, and all over the world, 
have been blessed according to the promise: "Where two or 
three are met in my name, there I am in the midst. " 

It was necessary that Christ, as our great High Priest, (having 
shed His own blood, as represented by the High Priest under the 
law shedding the blood of the beast-the lower nature,) should 
enter into the Holiest in virtue of what He had done, in order to 
secure the outpouring of the Holy Spirit. But this is not the only 
reason that it was expedient that He should go away. What has 
been said above, shows the greater value of the Spirit as Teacher 
and Comforter, than He could have been. Here arises a question: 
If it was expedient that He should go away, on account of the 
superiority of the Spirit as Teacher, Comforter and Guide, would 
the same law of expediency not require that He should remain 
away? This thought, based upon our text, has been urged by 
many against the doctrine of the return of Christ, and against the 
quite popular view, among those looking for the Lord, that He is 
coming the second time in the flesh. We regard the objection as 
unanswerable. Should He so come at Jerusalem, He would not 
be in Europe or in America. He would be limited as before. 
When the work in the Most Holy is done, it is true He comes 
into the Holy place, but not in the flesh. "Yea, though we have 
known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we Him 
(so) no more." 2 Cor. 5:16. The Sanctuary or holy place, 
represents the church, not in its fleshly phase, but in its spiritual 
state, in which we are counted on account of the Spirit of Christ 
dwelling in us. Rom. 8:9. We are still actually in the flesh, 
however, (and hence the warfare,) and we can only discern the 
presence of Christ in the spiritual body, by faith. The only light 
in the typical holy place, was from the lamp; so we walk in the 
light of the lamp, by faith. This walking by faith must continue 
until we cease to be in the flesh actually, as we are now counted; 
or in other words, until we are changed, and made like Him, and 
then we shall see Him as He is. 1 John 3:2. When He appears to 
the world, we shall appear with Him. 

The prophetic argument based on the 2300 days (years,) of Dan. 
8:14, and the parallelisms of the Two Dispensations, show that 
Christ was due to come from the Most Holy place in 1 844. 
Some tell us when He comes through the inner vail, He will and 
must be visible to men in the flesh, and that He will so appear to 
them that look for Him in 1881. If the supposition that Christ 
will be visible to men in the flesh when He leaves the most Holy 
place be correct, and if the parallelisms are correct, then Christ 
should have 

R103 : page 8 

been visible from 1844. And if the parallelism is not correct, 
then there is certainly no ground for expecting anything in 1881 
more than in any other year. The advocates of the 1881 point 
have never claimed any more in favor of that date than a parallel 



to the last half of the 70th week of Dan. 9. They know as well as 
we that there is no prophetic period that ends in 1881. 

We do not say that the covenant week will not have a parallel 
here. As the gospel began to go to the Gentiles at the end of the 
70th week or three and one-half years after the cross, so the 
advanced truth here may begin to reach Israel in 1881. There 
was no coming of Christ three and one-half years after the cross; 
why should we expect such an event in 1881, admitting the 
force of the parallelism? There was no change in the condition 
of believers three and one-half years after the cross; why then, 
on such ground, expect a change in the condition of believers 
here? The only change we can see as taking place three and one- 
half years after the cross, was in the condition of the nominal 
Jewish church and the gospel turning to the Gentiles. A 
corresponding change in 1881 would affect the condition of the 
nominal Christian church and the gospel turning in some special 
sense to the Jews again. 

To claim that Christ will appear as a man in 1881, on the ground 
of His coming through the vail between the Holy Places, is to 
ignore the prophetic arguments and the parallelism on which the 
claim for 1881 is based. Such claims remind us of the 
illustration of a man using a ladder to reach an important 
eminence, and then, throwing the ladder down, exclaiming: 
"Here I am, and I can now go higher, but no thanks to the 
ladder." 

We are quite well assured that those who wait until they see 
Christ in the flesh, will not be included among the little flock. 
He has already appeared to every one who is able to discern His 
presence, and answer to His knock, and open the door to Him 
To such, the feast has been a great blessing. But did He not 
visibly appear on His way in, i.e., after His resurrection? Yes, 
He did, because He wanted witnesses of His resurrection. We 
believe He could appear visibly now, if there were any such 
reason, but there is no promise that He will. But did He not wash 
His flesh in the Holy place on His way in, and will He, indeed, 
must He not do the same on His way out? We think it remains to 
be proved that there was any place or provision for washing in 
the typical Holy place. The laver was in the court and not in the 
sanctuary. Before Christ died, He said to His disciples: "Now ye 
are clean, through the word which I have spoken unto you. " 
John 15:3. We do not assert that this was the washing of Christ's 
flesh. We would rather leave it to others to make reckless 
assertions. It may be that the washing of the typical high priest's 
flesh was to represent the purity of Him who knew no sin, and 
yet was made sin (a sin-offering) for us. We do not consider it a 
reckless assertion, when we say that Christ will never appear in 
the flesh, for the purpose of completing the education of His 
church. If He should, it would be a contradiction of His own 
promise that the Spirit would guide them into all truth. The 



Spirit's work for us will not be finished until we are born of the 
Spirit, and then we will be Spirit, (John 3:6,) and being like 
Him, we shall see Him as He is. 

Man says we must believe that He will appear as He did in the 
upper chamber, or we are foolish virgins, and will be shut out 
from the High Calling. Jesus says: "If they shall say unto you, 
behold, He is in the desert; go not forth; behold, in the secret 
chamber; believe it not." Matt. 24:26. We being forewarned, 
should not be deceived. We do not expect to see Him until we 
are like Him. 

J. H. P. 



R103 : page 8 

EARLY AND LATTER RAIN. 

We have for some time understood the Scriptures to teach that 
the "early and latter rains" refer to special outpourings of 
abundant blessings of the Spirit upon the church-the early at 
Pentecost and since; "the latter" in the close of the present age. 
This seems to correspond with Peter's remark about the light of 
Divine revelation being shed "on us upon whom the ends of the 
(age) world are come." (The beginning and closing end.) This 
imbuement of the spirit is not upon all professed Christians, but 
upon a "little flock. " While the general church seems to daily 
become more worldly, it has the effect of more perfectly 
separating the few who are deeply earnest. In harmony with this 
thought, we have ever expected increase of light and knowledge 
upon the pathway of the just, and our expectations are 
wonderfully realized. We have also felt that it was possible that 
to some might be given, by the same spirit, gifts of faith and 
miracles. 

Our experience would not lead us to expect "miracles," &c, 
from those who have other gifts of the spirit, such as "teaching," 
&c, for it is said to divide to each. While we would be very 
cautious how we call everything miraculous which is 
uncommon, yet our expectations in this direction lead us to be 
cautious how we call anything a "fraud," or of the devil, which 
might be of God. 

The following item, clipped from a newspaper, seems to bear 
the impress of truth: 

"WYTHEVILLE, VA., April 15. --For some weeks past the 
people of Scott county have been excited over the miracles 
which have been performed by Richard Miller, of that county. 
His fame has extended all over that section of the state, and 
hundreds of the afflicted are daily visiting him. Miller is a 
middle-aged man, employed as the keeper of McMullen's mill, 



near Estellville. He is deeply religious, and claims to have had a 
dream a month ago in which the idea was impressed upon him 
that with God's help he could perform wonderful cures simply 
through faith. He states that the next day, after fervent prayer, he 
healed a sick man by touching him. The intelligence of the 
miracle went all over the country, and the afflicted of all kinds 
came to him and were healed simply by the touch of his hand. 
Yesterday G. N. Wertz, a photographer at Abingdon, visited 
Miller, in company with a paralytic uncle, the seat of paralysis 
being in the mouth, which deprived him of both the power of 
speech and hearing. Miller looked at the afflicted man, and, after 
a short prayer, touched and told him that before he reached 
home he would be well. Last night, as Mr. Wertz entered the 
door of his house on his return his hearing and speech came 
back to him, and to-day he is apparently hale and hearty. Miss 
Irene Newton, of Bristol, Tenn., helpless from rheumatism, was 
brought to Miller last week, and when an attempt was made to 
lift her in the carriage she rose from the sedan chair and said she 
was entirely well. One of the most wonderful miracles of 
Miller's was the cure of Mr. Peter Whitesell, who has been for 
some years afflicted with cancer. The cancer was touched, and 
in three days had disappeared. The miracle- worker is an 
exceedingly modest man, and always declines any compensation 
for his services, alleging that he is but the humble instrument of 
God. He takes no credit to himself for the performance of these 
miracles." 

If true, the above is wonderful, but if the church lost some of the 
"gifts" of the spirit when her candlestick was removed (Rev. 2) 
by her leaving her first love and its simplicity, would it be 
unreasonable to suppose that as the little company of separated 
ones return to primitive simplicity and love, the candlestick may 
be restored, and, as a result, some of the gifts of the spirit? We 
certainly do not have a desire to oppose anything of this nature. 
Neither will we "forbid them because they follow not us." We 
shall expect, however, that all "gifts of the spirit" shall be 
(during this gospel age) poured out upon God's servants and 
handmaids, and prepare the way, so that in the next age the spirit 
may be dispensed to the world, as it is written, "Afterward that I 
will pour out my spirit upon all flesh." (Joel 2:28) 



R104 : page 1 

VOL. I. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JUNE, 1880. 

NO. 12. 

page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 
L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R104 : page 1 



"ECCE HOMO"--BEHOLD THE MAN. 

This exclamation by Pilate (John 19:5) concerning Jesus, seems 
to express his admiration of the perfect man. Pilate saw that "for 
envy" the Jews had delivered Jesus up to death, and Roman 
though he was, and alien and stranger to the covenants and 
promises-without God- yet he had sufficient justice in his 
nature to cause him to shrink from taking the life of so noble a 
specimen of humanity; yet he as governor, must keep the peace 
of the country, and preserve the good will of the people. 

Thinking that by scourging him the clamor would cease, he did 
so, and declared that he found no cause of death in him, and 
would let him go. But when the people cried out the more— 
"Crucify Him! " he brought Jesus forth before them, as though 
thereby he expected to move to reverence the stony-hearted 
crowd, and exclaimed, "Behold the Man!" as though he would 
say to them: Could you really put to death such a man? 

And as we look back, every action of his life, from first to last, 
marks Him as THE man, "one above all others." When first 
brought before the governor, charged with claiming to be a king, 
Pilate seems to have been so much impressed with His personal 
appearance and majesty that for a time he was almost a convert, 
and inquires: "Art thou a king, then?" Our grandest conceptions, 
we believe, fall far short of the reality when we try to picture to 
ourselves what none of us have ever seen— a perfect man. There 
he stands, the embodiment of physical, mental and moral 
perfection.-"BEHOLD THE MAN." 

But not before Pilate only, does He thus appear to tower above 
all other men. As a child, when among the Doctors of the Law, 
He was a marvel. When a man, as a natural leader, He had but to 
say, "Follow Me," and His disciples forsook their nets and 
obeyed. As a teacher, the common people and Israelites in 
whom there was no guile, heard Him gladly, for "He taught 
them as one having authority," and they said, "Whence hath this 
man this wisdom?" How His superior mental acumen shone out 
when the Scribes and Pharisees sought to catch Him in His 
words, and were defeated with their own argument- "Why 
tempt ye me? [It is utter folly for imperfect men to seek or 
expect to entrap the perfect one.] Give me a penny. Whose 
image and superscription is this upon it?" They answer, 
"Caesar's." He said, "Render unto Caesar the things that are 
Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's." No wonder 
that they marveled at such an answer, and thousands who have 
read it since have marveled, and said: "Whence hath this man 
this wisdom?" 

Even the soldiers, when about to take Him in the Garden, were 
so worked upon by the majesty of His presence, that like as wild 
beasts shrink from the eye of their keepers, these went 
backward, and fell to the ground, and could not take Him until 



"He gave Himself" into their hands. No; they had often, during 
the three and a half years of His ministry, "sought to take Him, 
but could not, because His hour was not yet come." This 
influence and power was not exercised over the poor and 
unlearned soldiery only, but also over the learned and noble, for 
when the rulers and Pharisees had sent certain of their number to 
take Him, they returned without Him. In reply to their question- 
"Why have ye not brought Him?"-the answer was: "Never man 
spake like this man. " Why was there this difference between 
Jesus and all other men? Because, we answer, all other men 
have had their mental, moral and physical power impaired by 
sin, some more and some less, according as sin has gained more 
or less control of each. 

Adam, the head of our race, was created a perfect man— perfect 
mentally, morally and physically. Not that he had ever yet tried 
or used these perfect qualities, but still he possessed them, and 
could, as time and opportunity presented, make use of them. He 
was what phrenologists would term a perfectly balanced man. 
But how sin, which entered so quickly, has marred this 
perfection! Adam's disobedience brought him under the penalty- 
- "Dying, thou shalt die. " And from that moment, Adam, as a 
whole, mentally, morally and physically, began to grow weak 
and die. In fact, the physical nature of man is so far the basis of 
the others that he cannot be either mentally or morally perfect if 
physically imperfect. Thus death has passed upon all men, and 
all we can do is to hasten or retard the effect. To this end, men 
establish medical colleges, hospitals, etc., to inform themselves 
as to the best way to prolong physical health; schools of learning 
and science, to prolong and increase mental power or health, and 
schools of law and theology, to hold in check, as much as 
possible, immorality and vice, and to develop moral health. And 
in all these things men are more or less successful, yet none may 
ever expect to restore the race to perfection in any of these 
respects. Perfection can and will be accomplished only in "the 
times of restitution of all things," when Jesus and His Bride, 
made one with Him, "shall restore all things." 

But what does all this prove? It shows "that God hath made man 
upright, but he has sought out many inventions." The futile 
efforts of men to bring themselves back to perfection should 
also prove God's word true: "Thou hast destroyed thyself, but in 
Me is thy help. " God has arranged to help or bring mankind 
back to the condition of the first man-perfect manhood, 
mentally, morally and physically. This is restoring what was 
lost-a restitution of all things through Christ. We are well aware 
that many of God's dear children differ with us on this matter 
and regard Adam an imperfect creation, and claim that, when it 
is declared, "God saw that it was good, " He must have been 
looking down to the "New Creation," and that it was this New 
Creation that God declared to be in His image and likeness. If 
this be true, then the spiritual man is but the development of the 



natural man; i.e., the natural reaching its full proper perfection. 
But the scriptures teach us that these two natures are distinct and 
separate: the one, earthly and fleshly; the other, spiritual and 
heavenly. The one, begotten and born of the flesh; the other, 
begotten and born of the spirit. The first partakes of the nature of 
man; the New Creation become "partakers of the Divine nature. " 
As well might we say that God looked upon a grain of corn and 
called it very good, because it would eventually develop into a 
man, as to say that God called the natural man very good 
because He saw that he would develop into a spiritual being. 
They are totally different natures. The Divine nature is not 
developed out of the human nature, but was first, and the 
expressed conditions for the obtaining of the new nature is, not 
to develop and perfect the old, but to crucify it. 

We, on the contrary, hold that while the New Creation will 
certainly be the express image of God, yet this does not interfere 
with the fact that the natural man, Adam, was created in God's 
image also; not physically, for God is a spirit, but in the qualities 
of mind. God had created the fish, fowl and lower animals, and 
yet of them all there was none that could appreciate and 
recognize Him and His great works; none that could 
comprehend His wisdom and power. 'And God said: Let us 
make man in our own image and in our own likeness. [One upon 
whom the higher qualities of reason, justice, mercy, love, &c, 
will be bestowed.] Let him have dominion over every living 
thing. " Let man bear the same relationship to all earthly 
creatures which God bears to the whole creation; i.e., be its ruler 
and governor. 

R104 : page 2 

Thus man, a lord of earth, having dominion, is a type or likeness 
of the Lord of all, and in his perfection we believe that man was 
recognized by all the lower animals as their lord. Doubtless his 
character as well as his personal appearance made him the 
worthy object of their respect and veneration. Even to-day, 
notwithstanding the fall, and that all are at least half dead, we 
find men possessed of sufficient willpower, &c, to command 
and obtain the obedience of even savage beasts. What power 
may not have been possessed by the perfect man? 

Now to return to our subject— Jesus. Behold the Man! We 
understand the scriptures to teach that Jesus, having laid aside 
the glory, took upon himself the form of a servant and was 
found in fashion as a man; not in the fashion of a sin-blighted 
man, physically, mentally and morally depraved, but in fashion 
as a man such as God made Adam —a "very good," a perfect and 
upright man. We believe that Jesus was as much a direct 
creation of God when born of Mary as Adam was when born in 
the womb of the earth, and that He partook no more of a sinful 
nature by His association with Mary, than Adam did by his 
previous association with the earth. 



Thus God sent His Son in the likeness of sinful flesh. All men 
are said to bear the image of the earthly Adam (1 Cor. 15:49). 
Although, as a matter of fact, we have lost much of the grandeur 
and beauty of character, mind and form, yet we are in his 
likeness. So Jesus, in taking the form of a perfect man, would, of 
necessity, be in likeness to sinful flesh. We may be sure He was 
not born with a depraved nature, for He was ever in harmony 
with the Father. "For the carnal mind is enmity against God, for 
it is not subject to the laws of God, neither, indeed, can be." 

Another thing assures us: "In Him was no sin" -"He knew no 
sin. " And this being true, it follows that He could not know or 
experience any of the penalties of sin except as He did so 
voluntarily. For the same justice that says, "The soul that 
sinneth, it shall die," and that can, by no means, clear the guilty, 
also guarantees life to the obedient and innocent. Jesus' life, 
then, was not forfeited, but was guaranteed. All the powers of 
heaven stood pledged to defend the "Just One. " He Himself said: 
"I lay down My life; none of you taketh it from me. I could ask 
My Father, and He would give me more than twelve legions of 
angels to defend it. " 

Sickness and pain are as much a part of the penalty of sin as 
death 

R105 : page 2 

itself; in fact, they are the beginning, and therefore a part of 
death. And if Jesus, being free from sin, was, as we have seen, 
free from death, by the same law of justice He must also have 
been created free from sickness and pain. But is it not written, 
"Himself took our infirmities and bear our sicknesses?" Was He 
not "a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief?" Yes, truly, 
He was, and let me say that if, while on earth, He had been 
unmoved by the sorrow and pain which surrounded Him, it 
would have proved that He was not a perfect man, for that being 
who can live in a world of sorrow, wrapped up in self and 
oblivious to the sufferings of his fellows, has lost the first and 
grandest distinction between a man and inferior animals. Yes, 
Jesus did take our infirmities; but how? Were they laid upon 
Him from His birth? Did He grow up afflicted with the various 
maladies and loathsome diseases which beset sinful men, 
especially men on the lowest round of the ladder, covered with 
moral and physical pollution? Was He thus corrupt? No; our 
minds revolt at such a thought, as we consider Him who was 
"holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." No, they 
were not laid upon Him, but "Himself took our infirmities and 
bear our sicknesses." When we read, "He hath laid upon Him the 
iniquity of us all," we understand it to mean that when Jesus 
voluntarily became our ransom, the Father accepted it, and laid 
upon Him the chastisement of our sin. But did that chastisement 
consist in sufferings? By no means. Thousands of the human 
family have suffered intensely, and the sufferings and groanings 



of the whole creation from Adam down would make amends for 
a vast amount of sin if suffering could expiate sin, but it cannot. 
The wages of sin is death, not suffering. Therefore, "Christ died 
for our sins, ...even the death of the cross." But "Himself took 
our infirmities and bear our sicknesses." Let me illustrate how I 
think He, being perfect, could take of our ailments: Brother M., 
living in Vermont, a man of great faith, and an earnest, loving 
child of God, moved by strong sympathy for a brother who had 
been crippled with a lame back for a long time, made him a 
subject of prayer, and feeling convinced that it was the Lord's 
pleasure to heal through his instrumentality, he went to him and 
laid his hands upon the lame back. The man was instantly cured, 
but so great had been Brother M.'s sympathy for him that the 
lameness went to his own back, and it was several days before 
he fully recovered from it. Brother M. has not unlimited power 
of healing, but has been used several times since the above, 
which was his first. And he informed me that at each time it is 
accompanied by intense sympathy for the afflicted and some 
pain to himself, but that as he learned to govern and control his 
sympathy it has the less effect upon himself. This first started 
the thought in my mind— May not the miracles of Jesus have had 
such effect upon his grandly sympathetic and loving nature? We 
remember well the case of the poor woman with an issue of 
blood, how that coming near the Savior and touching the hem of 
his garment, she was immediately made whole. And Jesus 
turned him about, and said: "Who touched me, for I perceive 
that virtue (power, strength) is gone out of me." (Luke 8:46.) 

Yes, we believe that every cure performed by Jesus served to 
exhaust, to some extent, his very life forces, yet He gave 
Himself-spent His life in acts of love and kindness to poor 
fallen humanity. Thus, He shared our sorrows, sickness and 
pain. Weeping with those who wept, He was touched with a 
feeling of our infirmities. Already perfect as a man, He was, by 
these self-imposed sufferings, "made perfect" as our High Priest. 

Think of Him— nobly grand in character, form and deed, and 
both Christian and infidel to-day will agree with the decision of 
God and of Pilate 1 800 years ago, viz. : "I find no cause of death 
in Him. " Having proved Himself entitled to life, "He gave 
Himself a ransom for all," "He tasted death for every man, even 
the death of the cross." "BEHOLD THE MAN." "He hath set us 
an example that we should walk in His footsteps." 

"We did esteem Him, smitten, stricken of God and afflicted" 
(Isa. 53:4), just as the prophet declared many would do, but 
now, examining carefully the record, we find that God created 
Him perfect, and "Himself took our infirmities and bear our 
sicknesses." 



R105 : page 2 



KEEPING THE LAW. 

The Law is a great measuring line which God has let down to 
humanity. In the pride of the natural heart, many lay hold of it 
and think they measure pretty nearly what God wants. The Jew 
thus took the letter of the law and found it a difficult matter to 
commend himself to God even by that, but when the great 
teacher, Jesus, showed us the spirit of the Law, all who 
understood his teaching, saw that they were far too imperfect 
ever to measure themselves with it. According to Jesus' 
definition, it is murder to hate a brother, and adultery to desire. 
In a word, "The Law, " as Jesus defined it, is the full measure of 
a perfect man's ability. And as since sin entered the world, all 
men are under its penalty, "There is none righteous, no, not 
one. " Then, since all are imperfect, surely none can keep the 
perfect law, and so Jesus declared: "None of you keepeth the 
Law;" and Paul says that if the law could have been kept, Christ 
would not have died. Gal. 2:21. Again: "That no man is justified 
by the law is evident." Gal. 3:1 1. None can keep it, because sin 
has blemished all whom it has touched; all are imperfect. 

Does some one say that he can keep the Law? Come with me to 
Palestine and see perhaps a copy of yourself. A certain young 
man came to Jesus, saying: "Good Master, what shall I do to 
inherit eternal life?" Jesus takes advantage of the words "Good 
Master," to show him that he has acknowledged His authority, 
so that when he should afterward tell him what to do, he could 
not make the excuse that he doubted his authority to so instruct. 
Jesus then said to him: "Thou knowest the commandments" — 
That is to say, you know that God has arranged and promised 
that those who keep the commandments may live forever. "They 
that do those things shall live by them. " This young man 
evidently had expected this answer, for with joy he replied: "All 
these have I kept from my youth up. " He was indeed an 
exemplary man. "And Jesus beholding him loved him. " And he 
answered him, "One thing thou lackest." He was almost perfect 
says some one. He almost kept the whole law. No, we think not; 
the one thing he lacked, was, in Jesus' estimation, the chief 
commandment of all;-viz: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, 
with all thy heart, soul, mind, and strength. " This chief 
commandment he had not kept. Instead of loving the Lord with 
all his powers, he was loving his wealth with a part of his heart; 
and with a larger part too, it would seem, since he was willing 
rather to cling to it than to obtain eternal life. His heart divided 
its attention between God and earthly riches, and Jesus gave him 
such a command as would most quickly show him where his 
heart's affection centered. Another might have no riches to 
divide his heart, but he might have instead, a good name, or 
worldly fame, and either of these might be sharer of much of the 
love of the heart so as to prevent his loving the Lord with all his 
strength. This young man concluded that the Law, as Jesus 
interpreted it, was more than he could keep. Let any one who 



thinks he is keeping the whole law, begin with this first 
commandment, repeat it slowly and apply it to himself.— "Thou 
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy mind, 
with all thy soul, and with all thy strength. " A perfect man can 
do no more; an imperfect or sinful man cannot live up to this 
perfect standard of love and obedience. A man even on the 
upper rounds of the ladder, and nearest perfect, could not keep 
this perfect law, to say nothing of the poor degraded beings 
pushed by sin down to the lowest round. 

No, there is but one who ever kept it or could keep it. Think you, 
was he a perfect man, or a degraded one on the lowest round of 
the ladder as some have claimed? O, he was the perfect one of 
whom the all wise Father could, and did say: "This is my 
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. " And as we scan his 
words, his acts, his character, we exclaim, 

Fairer is he than all the fair 
Among the sons of men. 



R103 : page 3 



MY SONG. 

For the "Watch Tower. 

So long have I dreamed of the beautiful goal, 
That a touch of its sunshine has lit up my soul; 
Its chords are all thrilling with music divine, 
And its song is forever, "Dear Jesus is mine!" 

The Bird, when the tempest is raging with power, 
Flies in haste to her dear little nest in the bower; 
Thus safe 'neath his wing I can sweetly recline, 
And sing on forever "Dear Jesus is mine!" 

When beautiful Eden awakes from the fires, 
And the conflict of ages of sorrow expires; 
In the great restitution, of glory divine, 
I'll still sing in Paradise, "Jesus is mine!" 

VESTA N. JOHNSON. 



R105 : page 3 



PRE-EXISTENCE OF CHRIST. 

For some time past, by letter and otherwise, questions have 
been asked me like the following: "Brother Paton, do you, or the 
other writers for ZION'S WATCH TOWER, deny the conscious 
pre-existence of Christ?" I would answer all such queries 
through the paper. 



For myself, I answer, I not only do not deny it, but I most firmly 
believe it, and have invariably taught and defended it, both in 
preaching and writing, not only as true, but as a very important 
fact. Since the doubt has been set in motion in the minds of our 
readers (I am quite sure it was never caused by anything which 
has appeared in the WATCH TOWER), it has been my privilege 
to converse on this subject with all in our list of "Regular 
Contributors," who have written for the paper, and also with 
Brother Russell, the editor, and, if I know the meaning of words, 
there exists among us, on this subject, the most perfect oneness. 
What puzzles me is, how any one ever originated the thought 
that we do not believe it. I think that some one must have been 
very anxious that we should deny it, and that the wish has been 
father to the thought. I cannot expect to counteract fully the false 
impression made by such a report, 

R106 : page 3 

unless those who have circulated it among the people will be fair 
enough to circulate our correction. When a Christian brother has 
unintentionally misrepresented another, it should be considered 
not only a duty, but a privilege to correct the mistake. Should 
this not be done, and a part of our brethren who do not read this 
paper, are allowed to think that Brother Paton and other brethren 
have so far lost their light as to deny the conscious pre-existence 
of Christ, we will be compelled to ask the Lord for patience and 
courage to bear it, as we have often done during these months of 
misrepresentation. If there were no danger of harm to others by 
such reports, it would be but a small matter to us individually. 

That we meet with some whom we believe to be Christians, and 
in some respects seem to be well advanced, who do not believe 
in the conscious or personal pre-existence of Christ, is true. 
Though never having doubted this great truth for a single 
moment, even when reading the arguments offered against it, yet 
we have never been disposed to make our opinions on this 
subject a test of fellowship. We rejoice that it has been our 
privilege to convince some of the truth of our position. We have 
often said that the statements of the Bible are on the side of the 
pre-existence, but the opposite view has been sustained in many 
minds by unanswered questions as to how this or that could be. 

We regard this subject and several others as revealed, but 
without the philosophy being given. It is not explainable, and 
yet it is true. "No man knoweth the Son, but the Father" 
(knoweth). Matt. 1 1 :27. All we can know is what is revealed. 
"Without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness: God 
was manifest in the flesh." 1 Tim. 3:16. He is the root of David, 
as well as his fruit, or "offspring." Rev. 22:16. He is David's 
Lord, as well as David's son. Matt. 22:42-45. These and other 
scriptures teach us, that in Christ was combined the Divine and 
human. He is called both "Son of God" and "Son of Man." 
Perhaps some one supposed we were denying His personal, 



conscious pre-existence, when, some time ago, we stated that, so 
far as we know, He was not called a Son until He came into the 
flesh, but that He was called the Word. If His being called the 
Word, in His pre-existent state, proves that He was not a Person, 
then He is not now and never has been a Person, for He was the 
Word and Truth when in the flesh, (John 1:14 and 14:6), and in 
His future glorious manifestation as Conqueror, "His name is 
called the Word of God." Rev. 19:13. If the statement is 
unscriptural, we will gladly be corrected. But we believe that 
Person, who was called the Word, had a conscious existence 
before "the Word was made flesh" (John 1:14), or before He 
took on Him the seed of Abraham. Heb. 2:16. He that took our 
nature, should not be confounded with the nature which He 
took, though in Him, they were mysteriously blended. We 
believe His action in taking upon himself human nature and 
human form was voluntary, and is a grand exhibition of 
benevolence and love on His part, and therefore used as a 
motive for the Christian. 

"Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: who, 
being in the form of God,. ..made Himself of no reputation, and 
took upon Him the form of a servant and was made in the 
likeness of men. " After which, "being found in fashion as a man, 
He humbled Himself, and became obedient unto death, even the 
death of the cross." Phil. 2:5-8. 

The reason assigned by some, why we ignore the pre-existence 
of Christ, is that we might oppose the proposition that Christ's 
real death was in leaving the glory and becoming a man. We 
will ignore no such glorious doctrine for the purpose of 
opposing so absurd a proposition. The above scripture of itself 
overthrows the assumption, by giving the order of events. He 
left the glory, took human form, and afterward humbled Himself 
unto death. Some have supposed, on account of the influence of 
an assumed human leadership, that the Bible asserts that Christ 
left the life He had with the Father, instead of the glory. 
Brethren, no person can be infallibly led of the Spirit who 
ignores the distinction between the glory of a life and the life 
itself. Christ did not die by becoming a man, but He became a 
man that He might die. Hence, "we see Jesus, who was made a 
little lower than the angels, for the suffering of death... that He, 
by the grace of God, should taste death for every man." Heb. 
2:9. The incarnation, or coming in the flesh, was before the 
death. See, also, vs. 14,15. He voluntarily accepted the work. 
The body was prepared for sacrifice, and He says, "Lo, I come 
to do Thy will, O God. " After which the body, which was 
prepared for sacrifice, was offered (sacrificed). Heb. 10:5,7,10. 

It was not the pre-existent One, but "the man Christ Jesus" that 
gave Himself a ransom for all (1 Tim. 2:5,6), and yet He left the 
glory for the purpose of becoming a man, or taking upon himself 
human nature and form, that He might become a sin offering. 



The same spirit of benevolence that moved Him to leave the 
glory controlled Him throughout. So we can say, as did Paul: 
"For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though He 
was rich, yet for your sake He became poor, that ye through His 
poverty might be rich. " 2 Cor. 8,9. 

We would neither belittle nor magnify the physical or mental 
sufferings of Christ's life or death. We know not how much He 
suffered. That all His sufferings were necessary there can be no 
doubt. "For in that He Himself hath suffered, being tempted, He 
is able to succor them that are tempted." Heb. 2:18 and 4:15. We 
freely assert, however, that the Bible nowhere teaches that the 
pain He suffered made atonement. In the type, a perfect beast 
had to be slain, not tortured. "Christ died for our sins." 
"Reconciled to God by the death of His Son. " 

Christ's coming in the flesh and His death are related to each 
other, but they are not identical. Perhaps we go farther than 
some by saying we believe in the dual, or double, nature of 
Christ. In the atonement work (Lev. 16), He was represented by 
a double type-Priest and Sacrifice. He was both Priest and 
Sacrifice. As the priest took the beast (a lower being) and 
offered it as a sacrifice, so we have seen that Christ took our 
nature and form, a body prepared for sacrifice. The priest killed 
that which he took; was it not so with Christ? Christ "was made 
of the seed of David, according to the flesh, and declared to be 
the Son of God, with power (or powerfully declared) by the 
resurrection." Rom. 1:3,4. The resurrection did not make Him 
the Son of God, but declared the fact. If He was the Son of God, 
and also Son of Man, He had two natures. He was "put to death 
in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit." 1 Pet. 3:18. "And you 
hath He reconciled, in the body of His flesh, through death. Col. 
1:21,22. 

It was not the blood of the priest that was required, but the blood 
of what the priest offered. The two being combined in Christ, 
has made it more difficult to grasp. "Every Spirit that confesseth 
not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God. " 1 John 
4:3. 

If the Lord Jesus, when on earth, was nothing but flesh-a mere 
man —then He could not be truly said to have come down from 
heaven. His flesh was of the earth, earthly, as much as ours, and 
yet it is repeatedly stated that He came down from heaven. See 
John 3:13 and 31. "He that cometh from above is above all: he 
that is of the earth is earthly and speaketh of the earth: He that 
cometh from heaven is above all. And what He hath seen and 
heard, that He testifieth." 

Christ was the true bread, that came down from heaven. Ch. 
6:33,38,50,51,58. "The Second Man is the Lord from heaven." 1 
Cor. 15:47. A mere human being, having our fallen nature, as 
some tell us Christ was and had, should not have received 



worship, and could not have forgiven sin, both of which Christ 
did. Having taken our humanity, without its sin, He was in that 
nature made a sin offering. He then ascended on high to apply 
the merit of the work He had done, just as the priest, having 
slain the beast, carried its blood in to secure the object for which 
it was shed. 

He did not make atonement with the priest's blood, but with 
what was shed. Our object in writing this article is not to oppose 
new or advanced truth, but to defend long established truth 
against old error dressed up in a new form. We defend the pre- 
existence of Christ, and also the relation between His coming in 
the flesh and His death in the flesh. The first prepared the way 
for the second; the second was the ransom. Both were necessary, 

R106:page4 

and parts of the same plan, and both express God's great love for 
man. Take the pre-existence of Christ out of the plan, and there 
was no condescension on His part, and no motive to 
benevolence for us, as the apostle presents it. Take the death of 
Christ out of the plan, and the types of death are useless, and 
there is no ransom, and therefore no restitution. He came down 
to die, and having done the work, then He returned to the glory 
He had with the Father before the world was. John 17:5. Christ 
is our Redeemer, by the Ransom. His earth life is our Example. 
He is our Forerunner into the perfect life, and the Regenerator 
by that life imparted. In Him all fullness dwells. He comes 
again, but not as a Sin Offering, and hence not in the flesh, but 
in a spiritual body, and all who, by the Spirit, have fellowship 
with His sufferings and are made conformable to His death, 
shall be made like Him and share the glory of His reign. Here, 
we know in part; there, we shall know as we are known. "When 
that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be 
done away." 1 Cor. 13:9-12. Meanwhile, let charity prevail. 

J. H P. 

[This article was sent in April 10th, intended for last month's 
paper, but was crowded out. -EDITOR.] 



R107:page4 

Casting Away and Receiving. 

Rom. 11:15. 

Bible students of the past, as well as those of the present day, 
have noticed that the dispersion, and ultimate restoration of the 
Jewish nation- literal Israel-is the subject of considerable 
portions of both old and new testament prophecies. As prophecy 
cannot be understood with any great degree of clearness until 
about the time of its fulfillment; the subject has necessarily been 



enveloped in a good deal of mystery in the past; and it is still, 
with those who do not keep pace with the development of 
prophecy. Various attempts have been made, by those who 
discard the millennial reign of the kingdom of God, to show that 
these prophecies would never have a literal, but a mystical 
fulfillment. Some have taken the position that they were 
conditional, and that the conditions have not been met; and 
others affirming that they were all fulfilled at the restoration 
from the Babylonian captivity. But it will be observed that the 
prophecies of Haggai and Zachariah were made after that; and 
those of the new testament, several hundred years after. Jesus, in 
giving the signs which would precede the complete development 
of the kingdom of God, says: And when ye shall see Jerusalem 
compassed with armies, then know that the desolation thereof is 
nigh.... For these be the days of vengeance, that all things which 
are written may be fulfilled. ...For there shall be great distress in 
the land, and wrath upon this people. And they shall fall by the 
sword, and shall be led away captive into all nations; and 
Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles [Ethnon 
Nations] until the times- years-of the Gentiles be fulfilled. 
Luke 21:20-24. 

This prophecy involves the inference that the times-years-of 
the Gentiles, have been foretold, or they could not be fulfilled; 
that Jerusalem represents the Jews among the nations; and that 
the treading down will cease, when the times are fulfilled, and 
the kingdom established— vs. 31. As has been many times 
shown, the times of the Gentiles last about thirty-five years from 
the spring of 1880; and the return of the Jews to Palestine is 
rapidly becoming an indisputable fact. 

It is not designed to enter into an exhaustive argument as to the 
probability of the complete fulfillment of the large class of 
prophecies in regard to this wonderful people; but to glance at a 
few passages which state clearly the reason why God has dealt 
with them as he has; covering a period of hundreds of years; 
which will explain what has puzzled so many, why their national 
identity has been preserved. In the 16th of Jer., where their 
dispersion and ultimate gathering, after they had been 
recompensed double for their sins, is foretold; the Lord explains 
how they will be preserved, for the fulfillment of the prophecy, 
in the 17th verse: For mine eyes are upon all their ways; they are 
not hid from my face, neither is their iniquity hid from mine 
eyes. The double, in this connection, gives a positive clue, not 
only to their dispersion at the 1st Advent, but also to their 
gathering at the 2d. Advent, and the year when the comforting 
words of Is. 60:1-2 would begin to be spoken, as has been 
shown, was fulfilled in 1878. Amos, 9th chapter, speaks of their 
being sifted among all nations, and of their permanent 
upbuilding. James, in quoting this prophecy, seems to 
understand that the rebuilding of the tabernacle of David, which 
fell after Jesus left their house desolate, would take place at the 



2d Advent. There must be a purpose in it all, worthy of an 
allwise and loving Father, who formed and will carry out the 
great plan of salvation; and it is stated by Jesus, in part, at least: 
That the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the 
Gentiles —nations—, upon whom my name is called, saith the 
Lord who doth all these things-Acts 15:13-18. The work of the 
gospel age is expressed in the 14th verse:— taking out of the 
nations a people for his name-the wife of Christ; selecting the 
kings and priests, to reign with Christ. 

The kingdom was taken from them, to be given to a people 
bringing forth the fruits thereof-Matt. 21:43. The same is 
expressed by Paul: Now if the fall of them be the riches of the 
world, and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles, 
how much more their fullness-Rom. 11:12. That their fullness 
will finally embrace the dead as well as the living, is intimated 
in verse 15: For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of 
the world, what shall the receiving of them be, but life from the 
dead? See, also, Ezek. 37, where it is positively stated that the 
whole house of Israel will be brought up out of their graves, and 
placed in their own land. 

Paul says further: For I would not, brethren, that ye should be 
ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own 
conceits, that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the 
fullness of the Gentiles is come in; and so all Israel shall be 
saved; as it is written, (Ps. 14:7.) There shall come out of Zion 
the deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob; for 
this is My covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins. 
As concerning the gospel, they are enemies for your sakes; but 
as touching the election, they are beloved for the father's sakes; 
for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. (He has 
promised, and He will perform.) For as ye in times past have not 
believed— obeyed God, yet have now obtained mercy through 
their unbelief; even so have these also now not believed— 
obeyed, that through your mercy they also may obtain mercy. 
For God hath concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have 
mercy upon all-Rom. 1 1 :25-32. 

That they will remember and turn unto the Lord, after their 
restoration, is clearly taught in both old and new testament 
prophecies. The Hebrew word translated heathen; like the Greek 
word rendered Gentile, means nation. 

But I had pity for mine holy name, which the house of Israel had 
profaned among the heathen, whither they went.... And I will 
sanctify my great name, which was profaned among the heathen, 
which ye have profaned in the midst of them; and the heathen 
nations shall know that I am the Lord, saith the Lord God, when 
I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes; for I will take you 
from among the heathen, and gather you out of all countries, and 
will bring you into your own land. Then He says He will 
sprinkle clean water upon them to cleanse them; and give them a 



new heart; and put his Spirit within them, and cause them to 
walk in his statutes; then adds: And ye shall dwell in the land 
that I gave to your fathers; and ye shall be my people, and I will 
be your God. 

And not only that, but the land which has been so long desolate 
and unproductive, will return to its former fertility. And I will 
call for the corn, and will increase it, and lay no famine upon 
you; and I will multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of 
the field, that ye shall receive no more reproach of famine 
among the heathen— Ezek. 36:21 to end of chapter. Read also the 
37th chapter. After speaking of the valley of dry bones, which is 
explained to be the whole house of Israel, to be brought up out 
of their graves; the prophet is told to take two sticks, and write 
upon them; and the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thine 
hand before their eyes; and say unto them: Thus saith the Lord 
God: Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the 
heathen, whither they be gone, and will gather them on every 
side, and bring them unto their own land; and I will make them 
one nation in the land, upon the mountains of Israel; and one 
king shall be king to them all; and they shall be no more two 
nations, neither shall they be divided into two Kingdoms any 
more at all.... My tabernacle also shall be with them; yea, I will 
be their God, and they shall be my people; and the heathen shall 
know that I, the Lord, do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary 
shall be in the midst of them for evermore. 

Also the 38 and 39 chapters of Ezek., after speaking of trouble 
with God-Russia, after their return, and are dwelling in the 
mountains of Israel; gives the purpose for which it is all brought 
about; their own good, and the good of the nations, in clear, 
positive language. 

Daniel 12:1, speaks of their deliverance in a time of trouble, 
such as there never was since there was a nation. 

Zech. 8 teaches of their return; the building of Jerusalem; and a 
time of trouble, when every man's hand will be against his 
neighbor; and closes with a thus saith the Lord. In those days it 
shall come to pass, that ten men shall take hold out of all 
languages of the nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him, 
that of him that is a Jew, saying: We will go with you: for we 
have heard that God is with you. Zech. 14 tells us of the 
gathering of the nations against Jerusalem; that the Lord will 
come with all the saints, and fight against the nations; that He 
will be King of all the earth; and that the left of the nations 
which came against Jerusalem, shall even go up from year to 
year, to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, and to keep the 
feast of tabernacles. In Ezek. 21, we read of their last king- 
Zedekiah: And thou, profane, wicked prince of Israel, whose 
day is come, when iniquity shall have an end; thus saith the Lord 
God; remove the diadem, and take off the crown.... I will 



overturn, overturn, overturn it; and it shall be no more, until he 
come whose right it is, and I will give it him- 25:28. 

R107 : page 5 

They were overturned, 1st at the Babylonish captivity, 606 
B.C., where their treading down began; 2nd, at the destruction 
of Jerusalem, A.D. 70; the 3rd time will be the one spoken of in 
Zech. 14, and right there he will come whose right it is: or will 
then complete the conquering of the nations; and the kingdoms 
of this world will become the kingdom of our Lord and his 
Anointed ones. And so we might quote largely from Is., Jer., 
Ezek., Amos, Zeph, Zech., and other prophets, showing that the 
children of Israel will return to their own land. And the united 
testimony of Prophets and Apostles is that it was 

R108:page5 

designed of the Lord to prove a glorious blessing to themselves 
and all other nations; bringing them to acknowledge that God is 
the Lord. 

And how could it be otherwise? When such a vast amount of 
prophecy becomes a fact, it will prove the scriptures true; and 
when they are proved true by fulfillment, it can but be a terrible 
blow to scepticism and infidelity. Jesus said: I tell you before it 
come, that, when it is come to pass, ye may believe that I am he- 
John 13:19. 

And so the result will be to the nations, when they see so much 
come to pass; and probably on this account Israel were scattered 
among all nations. Then it will be true that: The wayfaring men, 
though fools, shall not err therein-Is. 35:8. The apology for 
presenting this subject, is, that the return of the Jews, and the 
time of trouble are becoming apparent facts; and it is believed 
that the two facts will be the means, in the next 35 years, of the 
conversion of the 144,000 Jews, and the great multitude of all 
nations, who will come up out of or after the great tribulation, 
with their robes washed white in the blood of the Lamb-Rev. 7. 

B. W. K. 



R108:page5 



NUMBER SEVEN. 

(CONTINUED.) 



The fact has been noticed that the number seven is made very 
prominent in the Bible-both Old and New Testaments. It is the 
basis of reckoning, and nearly everything is complete by sevens. 
It may be both interesting and profitable to look at the many 
places where it is used. 



We have seen already that seven is the basis of the creation 
week, the ordinary week and the week of thousands. The wave 
sheaf, and its antitype, the resurrection of Christ, were "when 
the Sabbath was past"-the eighth day, or first day of a new 
week. Lev. 23:1 1, and Mark 16:2. The wave loaf and its 
antitype, the descent of the Holy Spirit, were on Pentecost, or 
the fiftieth day, and hence also on the first day of the week. Lev. 
23:15-16, and Acts 2:1. And the perfect new creation is not 
reached until the week of thousands is past, or the beginning of 
another cycle. 

The types of the old creation are seventh day types, and the 
types of the new creation are first day types. By observing what 
is said of these types in Lev. 23, it will be seen that these first 
days were to be holy convocations and rest days, though not by 
the fourth commandment, which related exclusively to the 
seventh day. Those who are more interested in commemorating 
the old creation, will of course observe the seventh day of the 
week, and those who are more interested in commemorating the 
dawn of the new creation will observe the first day of the week. 
But in the New Testament there is no command to observe 
either. The Christian has been drawn to the first day of the week 
by the law of association, which is one phase of the law of the 
Spirit. 

The seventh day finds its antitype in the seventh thousand-the 
Sabbath that remains. When we have entered the Millennial 
reign, it will not be as it was in the typical observance, one day 
in seven, but a continual Sabbath. That will be the fulfillment of 
the Sabbath, or keeping it in the Spirit. There is a sense in which 
believers now are keeping that continual Sabbath; the same 
sense in which we are now the body, or bride of Christ; the same 
sense in which we are now said to have eternal life, and to be in 
the kingdom. In this sense the gospel age is the age of 
fulfillment of the seventh day, and we believe the rule will hold 
good that no type given in the old dispensation, to be entirely 
fulfilled in either the gospel or millennial ages is to be observed 
during the gospel age. 

But to come to other features: Enoch, "the seventh from Adam," 
(Jude 14), was translated. He seems to be a type of the perfect 
earthly man; and we suggest that this case indicates God's way 
of disposing of such men, during the seventh thousand years. If 
not for this, why did it happen to be the seventh, 

R109 : page 5 

and why tell us anything about it? We would not be too positive 
on such points. 

Clean beasts went into the ark by sevens. Gen. 7:2. Seven days 
was the period fixed for the entrance into the ark, and on the 
seventh day the waters began to come on the earth. Verses 4:10. 
It was in the seventh month the ark rested. Gen. 8:4. Noah sent 



out a dove which returned to him, because it could find no rest; 
"And he stayed yet other seven days," and sent her out again. 
Verse 10. This time she brought the olive leaf, then "he stayed 
yet other seven days" when he sent her out and she returned no 
more. Verse 12. And it was with Noah's seventh century the new 
world began. Verse 13. Do all these things come by chance? 
Others may see more of their meaning than we do. 

Jacob served seven years for each of his two wives, Leah and 
Rachel. Gen. 29:18-30. Jacob is typical of Christ. He stood at 
the head of the Jewish dispensation with his twelve sons as 
Christ with His twelve apostles stands at the head of the gospel 
dispensation. These two equal periods seem to represent the 
equality of the two dispensations. Jacob served for a wife and 
got the one first that he did not want, and afterward the one he 
really loved. 

Some one has said there is not even a type of the Jewish church 
being the bride of Christ in any sense, or that He came to them 
as the Bridegroom. Will those who accept of the allegorical 
character of the writings of Moses repudiate this case of Jacob? 
The Jewish church is often spoken of as the Lord's wife, and as 
not being true to Him. Jesus says, "All that the Father hath is 
mine. " "He came to His own and His own received Him not. " 
John introduced Him as the Bridegroom. John 3:29. Jesus 
speaks of Himself as the Bridegroom with them. Mark 2:19-20. 
There is as much evidence of Christ being the Bridegroom to 
that typical church, as that He was the Reaper in the harvest of 
that typical dispensation. 

In Pharaoh's dreams which Joseph was called to interpret, there 
were "seven well favoured Kine," eaten up by "seven other 
Kine" ill favored and lean fleshed; and "seven ears of corn" on 
one stalk, rank and good, devoured by "seven thin ears." The 
dream, as interpreted and fulfilled, referred to seven years of 
plenty, followed by seven years of famine, God's mercies and 
His judgments are complete, but mercy rejoiceth against 
judgment. 

In Leviticus 26, the expression "seven times" is four times 
repeated in reference to the duration of the rule of its enemies 
over Jerusalem. It has often been shown that this is the basis and 
key of the Times of the Gentiles (Luke 21 :24), or the duration of 
Gentile rule over Jerusalem. A time is a year; a prophetic year is 
360 common years and has been so fulfilled. "A time, times and 
a half" (i.e., 3-1/2 times) has been fulfilled as 1260 literal years 
in the Papal dominion over the nations, between A.D. 538 and 
A.D. 1798. 

If three times and a half are 1260 years, seven times are 2520 
years. From B.C. 606, where the desolation of Jerusalem began, 
2520 years reach to A.D. 1914. According to this application of 
the number seven, Jerusalem will be free at that time, and 



thence-forward be a praise in the earth. The application is 
clearly confirmed by the events of to-day-the trouble brewing 
among the nations, and the beginning of Jewish restoration. 

The prophetic argument on the Two Dispensations shows that 
favor was due to that people in 1878, and the door was legally 
opened for their return, by the Anglo-Turkish treaty of that year. 
From 1878 to 1914, is a period of 37 years for their rise, and is 
equal to the period of their fall, from the time Jesus left their 
house desolate in A.D. 33, until their complete destruction in 
A.D. 70. 

Their fall was from natural nationality, and they will rise to the 
same. "This child is set for the fall and the rising again of many 
in Israel. " Jesus has the work of restoring the natural, and also 
the work of imparting all manner of spiritual blessings. 

The long period of 2520 years and their bitter experience under 
the dominion of the beasts, (human governments, Dan. 7) is 
clearly represented in Dan. 4, by the "seven times" of 
Nebuchadnezzar and his bitter experience among the beasts. 
This being a type covers only seven literal years. Why, if there 
is nothing in all these things, can such a harmony be developed 
on the basis of number seven? 

J. H. P. 



R108:page5 



THE STRAIT GATE. 



Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for I say unto you, many will 
seek to enter in, and shall not be able. Luke 13:24. 

Christ's mission to earth was to save men. It has been truly said 
that the difference between the anti-Christian and the Christian 
religions is, that in all of the former, men are seeking after God; 
in the latter, God is seeking after men. In one sense, Christ has 
already accomplished the salvation of all. That is, all were lost, 
and He has found them. More than that, He has purchased them. 
But His work is not thus finished. He desires to raise them 
immeasurably above their lost condition, and to render them 
eternally secure. To do this work, He must have their co- 
operation. To be saved in the highest sense, men must come to 
the Savior. Hence, one important part of His mission was to win 
followers. 

Christianity now is presented to the unbeliever in the most 
attractive form, and every inducement that can be offered is 
presented to persuade men to come to Jesus. They are told that it 
is an easy thing to be a Christian; that they have only to say the 
word, to make the public confession, join the church, and they 
are safe. We do not question the benevolence of the motive 



which prompts this, but we do question both the authority and 
the wisdom of the plan. Will such work stand in the day that 
tries by fire? 

The Savior never urged men to come to Him. The truth He 
taught had sufficient power to draw those who were susceptible 
to its influence. His words possessed the peculiar property of 
satisfying the hunger of earth-weary, toil-burdened and desolate 
hearts. And these are they who are especially 

R108 : page 6 

invited. The only direct invitations given by Him who came to 
win ALL, were given to this class. "He that is thirsty, let him 
come to me and drink. " "Come unto me all ye that are weary 
and heavy-laden, and I will give you rest." Only those who feel 
the need of rest and life can appreciate the invitation. The rich, 
the popular, those absorbed in business; in brief, all who are 
content with the things of this life, are scarce likely to leave 
them for things for which they feel no need. As a rule, the more 
content we are with earthly things, the less we desire heaven; 
and God never gives of heavenly things except they are 
earnestly desired. 

When great multitudes followed Him, He turned and said unto 
them: "If any man come unto me, and hate not his father, and 
mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, 
and his own life, also, he cannot be my disciple. For which of 
you, intending to build a tower, sitteth not down first and 
counteth the cost, whether he hath sufficient to finish it? Lest 
happily after he hath laid the foundation, and is not able to finish 
it, all that behold it begin to mock him, saying, This man began 
to build and was not able to finish." Luke 14:25-30. 

There are many builders in this day of whom that saying is too 
true. Thrice better had they never begun. Could I be heard, I 
would say to all: Do not come without counting the cost. It will 
cost you all that you have and are or ever can be. "Whosoever he 
be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot be my 
disciple. " But if you can afford it, the investment will bring 
good returns. He would not be certain of success in any earthly 
profession, who did not apply time, means, heart and mind to 
the acquiring of his object. Can less be expected of him who 
lives for God, and who expects to be made like Him? 

Why did not Christ urge men to be Christians? Did His great 
heart feel no pity for the careless, the proud, the wise, and 
prudent, in their conceit? Why was the gate made so strait that 
only the most determined could win an entrance? Thank God, 
these questions can now be answered. 

He was working in harmony with God's plan. The plan is to call 
out and perfect the church first to be made a blessing to those 
who are left. 



God is not limited, in His dealings with us, to our life here. 
Man's sin consigned him to the grave. Christ's righteousness 
brings him back from the grave. Men have long advocated the 
far-reaching power of the Savior's death. They have taught that 
his blood could avail for all. Few have realized the revealed 
truth that His blood does avail for all. He who gave Himself a 
ransom for all, thereby has ransomed all, and the due time has 
now come for this to be testified. 

"Behold the Lamb of God who taketh away the sin of the 
world. " "God was in Christ reconciling the WORLD unto 
Himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. " The salvation 
here taught does not depend upon their acceptance of Him. He 
who laid the foundations of the gospel, laid them broad enough 
and deep enough to sustain the whole structure of human 
salvation. Jesus, who worked out His Father's will, had no 
occasion to be in haste. During the gospel age He is gathering 
out the jewels for His crown-the church of the first-born. 
Hereafter, He will take to Himself His great power and reign. 
Then all the nations whom He has made will come and worship 
before Him. If our work be guided by a knowledge of His plan, 
though the results may seem less, they will be more effectual. 
Above all, let us so live that He may do the work through us, 
now and hereafter. 

L. A. A. 



R109 : page 6 

Is Sin a Type or a Reality? 

It has been suggested by some one as an advanced truth, that 
the cleansing of our theology is the antitype of the bearing away 
of sin by the scape-goat, making sin a type of false theology. 
This is a novel if not a dangerous idea. Novelties are striking; 
new things are eagerly sought for, and too apt to be received as 
truth, without careful examination, or to be received as advanced 
truth because new. But if "faith is counted for righteousness, 
why is not false theology counted for sin?" we are asked. This 
seems plausible, and may carry conviction to many trusting, 
honest souls, but it is sophistical. It is not a proper contrast. If 
faith were a clean theology, then a false theology would be 
unbelief. Unbelief is one kind of sin. The Holy Spirit reproves 
the world of sin because "they believe not on Me," said Christ. 

But a personal faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is not to be 
confounded with a perfect knowledge of God's plan of salvation. 
Every babe in Christ has faith in Him. He could not be even a 
babe without this, but his knowledge of the plan may and should 
be a growth during his whole life. When Christ said to one who 
came to Him, "Oh, woman, great is thy faith," he certainly could 



not mean that she had an extensive knowledge of the plan of the 
ages. It would be presumption to think so. 

It has been the privilege of every Christian to have a strong faith 
in Christ, but it has never been the privilege of any Christian to 
have a perfect knowledge of God's plan. We do not underrate 
the value of knowledge, nor in any sense belittle the 
responsibility of the Christian to grow in knowledge. God 
forbid. But we believe, in order to have the right effect, it is best 
to call things by the right names. Sin is sin— transgression of law, 
and ignorance is not always sin. Jesus says: "If you were blind, 
ye should have no sin." 

The Holy Spirit was not promised to lead each individual into all 
the truth, but the church as a whole, as represented by the 
apostles, was to be led into all truth, and we can not doubt that 
the Christians of every generation have had all the truth due in 
their time. 

But the holiest and most enlightened Christians, even now 
living, may well adopt the language of the Apostle Paul, "Now 
we know in part, but when that which is perfect is come, then 
that which is in part will be done away." 1 Cor. 13. That 
certainly cannot be until after the marriage— the complete union 
and glory for which Christ prayed (John 17), when "we shall see 
as we are seen, and know as we are known. " The papacy claims 
infallibility, and therefore sets itself up as the judge of men. Let 
all beware of imitating the unworthy example. Intercourse with 
a great variety of Christian people has convinced us that many 
dear children of God have a strong faith in the Lord Jesus, which 
enables them to lay hold on many blessings, both temporal and 
spiritual, though in many cases their knowledge of the plan of 
God is deficient. Others, wiser in the mysteries of God, seem 
sometimes to have a weaker faith, less love and a less perfect 
life, 

"They that be wise shall shine as the firmament, but they that 
turn many to righteousness, as the stars." Dan. 12:3. The stars 
are brighter than the firmament. Oh, that we might be able to 
combine wisdom, love and Christian work in our lives. 

Faith is one thing; knowledge is quite another. "Add to your 
faith virtue, and to your virtue knowledge, " &c. Sin is one thing, 
and imperfect theology is another. "Now ye are clean" was 
spoken to the disciples in an early stage of experience, but it was 
their life-work to learn. He that is in Christ is counted "complete 
in Him," faith being counted for righteousness. A perfect 
theology is never counted for righteousness, though it is one 
important part of the disciple's work to grow in grace and 
knowledge. Faith is at the foundation, where but little 
knowledge is expected, while the knowledge comes gradually, 
as we advance. 



It would do violence to language to introduce the phrase 
"imperfect theology" where the word "sin" occurs, which would 
not be the case if they meant the same thing; and it must be an 
"imperfect theology" indeed, that assumes to confound them. 
"By one man an imperfect theology entered into the world and 
death by an imperfect theology." "By the law came the 
knowledge of an imperfect theology." "Until the law, an 
imperfect theology was in the world, but it is not imputed where 
there is no law." "Behold the Lamb of God, that taketh away 
the—" No, we will not write it, it is too absurd. But it is no more 
absurd than the idea that the scape-goat work associated with 
cleansing the sanctuary in the law, was a type of the cleansing of 
theology here. The removal of sin from the sanctuary, would, it 
seems to us, far more fitly represent the cleansing of the church 
from all the works of the flesh, so that they might bring forth 
more fully the "fruits of the Spirit." Gal. 5. The tendency seems 
to be to make too little of character by exalting theology. And 
the false application of sin as a type of false theology, while it 
does not lead us to think little of a clean theology, it does lead us 
more clearly to see that character is the ideal of Christian life— 
the "wedding garment." 

"No truth is vital, nor any error fatal, which, when believed and 
obeyed, does not affect character. " 

J. H. P. 



R110:page6 

POPULAR WITH ONE MAN. 

Major Whittle and P. P. Bliss, while engaged in evangelistic 
work for the Master, started for a new field of labor on a bitterly 
cold night. As they passed from the station-house towards the 
railroad train, they reached a gate before which a man stood, 
who said to the hurrying passengers, "Show your tickets." Of 
course the demand was annoying to many who were compelled 
to unloose their heavy wrappings, and to withdraw their hands 
from comfortable gloves; and it is not strange that expressions 
of discontent and of anger were loud and frequent. When the 
two Evangelists were going through the gate, the Major 
remarked pleasantly to the keeper, "You are not a very popular 
man with this crowd tonight. " "I don't care a cent for this 
crowd," was the surly reply; "I just want to be popular with one 
man." "Ah, my brother," said dear Bliss on entering the train, 
"that is a lesson for you and for me." 

Yes, and it is a lesson for every Christian in these last and 
perilous days. More men are making shipwreck of their faith on 
the coast of popular favor than in any other part of life's 
treacherous sea. They are seen all along the shore like dismasted 



and rotting hulks, instead of leading and pointing the way to the 
peaceful haven, that can not be far distant. Of too many who 
commenced their public ministry as faithful witnesses for Jesus, 
it can be said, as the lonely apostle wrote of a former friend and 
companion, "Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this present 
world." (2 Tim. 4:10). 

So in the last state of the professing Christian body described in 
the epistle to the church of the Laodiceans, 

R110:page7 

where the end and doom of Christendom are graphically 
portrayed, we have the same subtle and fatal spirit at work. 
Laodicea means "Justice for the people," and while the Church 
boasts that she is rich, and increased with goods, and has need of 
nothing, it is evidently implied that she is governed by popular 
clamor, and Christ is turned out of his own house, left standing 
at the door, knocking to catch the ear of any man, before the 
whole corrupt mass is spued out of his mouth. Rev. 3:14-20. 

Are not the evidences of this popular control of the Church 
increasing every day with frightful rapidity. Custom after 
custom, and doctrine after doctrine, sanctioned by divine 
enactment and sacred by the faith and observance of the saints 
through eighteen centuries, are yielded at the demand of public 
sentiment, until the pulpit, to a lamentable extent, has become a 
place for the delivery of popular lectures, and the Church 
building a place for popular entertainments. Let a preacher 
openly deny the Lord who bought him, disowning his divinity, 
ridiculing the necessity of his atoning blood, sneering at the 
authority of the Scriptures as superior to human reason, and at 
once the secular press, which in our cities at least is almost 
wholly in the hands of so-called "free thinkers," lauds him to the 
skies, as a man of genius, and broad culture, and large charity. 
Nay, multitudes in the Church unite with the enemies of Christ 
in celebrating his praise, especially if he increases the pew 
rentals, and attracts a crowd. 

Well, be it so. It is just what the word of God plainly tells us 
must come to pass in the last day of perilous times, when the 
church will contain "lovers of their own selves;... lovers of 
pleasures more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, 
but denying the power thereof." (2 Tim. 3:2-5.) "When they will 
not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they 
heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall 
turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned into 
fables," (2 Tim. 4:3-4); when "there shall be false teachers 
among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even 
denying the Lord that bought them." (1 Pet. 2:1.) 

But this furnishes all the stronger reason why those "who are 
kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, ready to 
be revealed in the last time, " should more and more make it their 



single aim "to be popular with one man." Let them not care a 
cent for the crowd out of the church, or in the church, but each 
say like the Apostle, with lofty and unswerving consecration: 
"None of these things move me, neither count I my life dear 
unto myself, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the 
ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the 
gospel of the grace of God. " (Acts 20:24.)-"The Truth. " 



R110:page7 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Q. If I understand you aright in your article on the "Ten 
Virgins" of last number, your view is that while overcoming 
Christians of all ages are virgins and will be joined to the 
Heavenly Bridegroom, yet the parable of Matt. 25, refers to 
those of that class living in our day, and who here and now as 
parts of the company have been used to represent the whole in 
the fulfillment of the parable. Am I correct? 

A. You are correct, we do not limit the virgins of all ages, but 
believe this parable to refer to virgins at the close of this age. 
We cannot say however that every Christian shall have the high 
honor of being united with Jesus as his bride and joint heir. The 
word, only authorizes us to say that "He that overcometh shall 
inherit all things." We will not judge who are "overcomers"-the 
King has come in, he will judge righteous judgment. 

Q. Your article in March No. "Three Covenants" states that the 
words covenant and testament are the same and from the same 
Greek word, and that the "New Covenant" is a thing of the 
future. To which covenant then does Jesus refer when He says: 
"This is my blood of the New Testament?" Matt. 26:28. 

A. In the article referred to we found that the Abrahamic 
Covenant was an unconditional promise and for that reason it 
needed and had no medium. God simply confirming it by oath. 
"For when God made promise to Abraham, because he could 
sware by no greater, He swore by himself" that by these "two 
immutable things"— the promise and oath-in which it was 
impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation. " 
Heb. 6:13-18. We found also that the Law Covenant which was 
430 years after did not disannul this one, that it was separate and 
distinct. "The Law" was not unconditional, but- "Whosoever 
doeth those things shall live by them. " And because it had these 
conditions binding on God on the one part, and Israel on the 
other, it required and had Moses as its mediator. Paul is intent 
on proving this distinction between the Law and the Abrahamic 
covenant and in Gal. 3:20, points out to us that the distinction 
between the unconditional and conditional is apparent from the 
fact that to the latter, God gave a mediator, while to the former 



none was given. -"For a mediator is not of one (or when there is 
but one party to the contract) but God is one. " Therefore a 
mediator being given with the Law, proves that it had bindings 
upon Israel as well as upon God. 

Rill : page 7 

Then we looked at the New Covenant and found that it has 
conditions binding upon God and the world, therefore it should 
have a mediator. God binds himself to "restore all things," to 
save men from death and to bring them to a knowledge of the 
truth, (1 Tim. 2:4), to "pour out His Spirit upon all flesh" (Joel 
2:28) and to put a new spirit within them (as it was in Adam 
before sin entered) (Ezek. 36:26) and to write his law in their 
hearts (more than Adam had) Jer. 31:33, and he will set his 
sanctuary (dwelling-the Church) in the midst of them 
forevermore. (Ezek. 37:26.) And the conditions upon the World 
are, that then, they shall obey the Lord's prophet or be cut off 
from life, (the second death). "Every soul shall die for his own 
sin." Jer. 31:30. "It shall come to pass that every soul that will 
not hear that prophet, shall be cut off from among the people. 
Acts 3:23. But who shall be the mediator of so great a covenant? 
Paul assures us that "Jesus (is) the mediator of the New 
Covenant. " Jesus accepted the high position and sealed or 
ratified that New Covenant with his own blood (death) just as 
Moses had ratified the Law Covenant, which was a shadow of 
this, with the blood of a bullock and a goat sprinkling 
(cleansing) all the people; so Jesus died but instead of sprinkling 
all the people at once, he waits 1 800 years to "take out a people 
for his name"- His "bride"-"His body"— to be associated with 
him in the work of sprinkling or cleansing all the people. 

He said to his disciples of old and to us now: "Take up your 
cross and follow me"— crucify the flesh —and the same thought 
is suggested when Jesus took the cup saying: "This is my blood 
of the New Covenant shed for many (the world in general) for 
the remission of sins." By passing it to each of us and saying, 
"Drink ye all of it," he virtually invites us to drink into his death, 
to "be made conformable unto his death. "-"Are ye able to drink 
of the cup (death) that I shall drink of, and to be baptised with 
the baptism (death) that I am baptised with?... Ye shall drink 
indeed of the cup that I shall drink of, and be baptised with the 
baptism that I am baptised with." Matt. 20:22. "We know that as 
many of us as were baptised into Jesus Christ were baptised into 
his death," (Rom. 6:2) and we know just as well what "the cup" 
signified when we find Jesus in the garden praying: "Father if it 
be possible, let this cup (death) pass from me." So when Jesus 
passes us "the cup," he says to us: Die with me, I will thus 
permit you to join with me in sealing the New Covenant and by 
and by when the body is complete, associate you with me in the 
glorious work of sprinkling (cleansing) "all the people," as parts 



or members of the "one mediator between God and men," when 
the New Covenant comes into operation. 

How very forcibly every feature of the law seems to shadow 
forth the fact that, "If we suffer with him we shall also be 
glorified together." We believe "that if we be dead with Him we 
shall also live with Him. " Let us then reckon ourselves dead 
indeed unto sin, and though in the world be not of it. 

Q. What are the two immutable things of Heb. 6:18? 

A. You will find our understanding of this question in the above 
answer, to be God's promise and oath to Abraham. 

Q. Are there any reasons for thinking that Jesus will appear in 
the flesh to his church? 

A. We know of no reason for so thinking but many reasons to 
the contrary. Brother Paton's article- "EXPEDIENT FOR 
YOU"— in this No. is so much to the point that we will not 
answer you further. If it does not fully satisfy you, we shall be 
glad to know of any points of difficulty and answer them. 



R110:page7 



TO OUR READERS. 



The present number of the WATCH TOWER ends the first 
volume, the first year of its existence. From the numerous letters 
containing kind and encouraging words, speaking of the light 
thrown on various scriptures through its teaching, we have 
reason to hope that our labor is not in vain in the Lord. While we 
labor not for human praise and thanks, but to receive, of the 
Master, "well done, good and faithful servant," yet these kind 
words from our fellow pilgrims are not to be despised. Like a 
cup of cold water, they greatly cheer and refresh us. 

We have felt called to a defense of the truth. During this harvest- 
time of shaking and sifting in which we are living, there is 
danger of throwing away with the rubbish some of the very 
foundation pillars of truth. Many of these fundamental truths are 
being attacked by the great enemy of truth, and the more of 
God's children he can enlist with him the more successful is he. 
It was needful, therefore, that we should exhort you to take unto 
you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
(stand against the evil attacks) in (this) the evil day, and having 
done all, to stand. (Eph. 6:13.) Our lamp shining on the 
Tabernacle service and types of the law has had the effect of 
confirming these old truths and establishing our hearts in the 
faith. As we have seen Jesus' death typified by the Paschal Lamb 
and the bullock of sin-offering, so we have learned that we (the 
church) have been filling, and must continue to fill, the type of 
the goat of sin-offering, thus being made "conformable unto his 



death" and "filling up the measure of the sufferings of Christ 
which are behind. " 

Many tell us by letter, and some by word, that we are in their 
prayers, and we now request that 

R110:page8 

during the coming year ZION'S WATCH TOWER may be the 
special subject of your prayers, and in the words of Paul, that 
you pray for us that God may open unto us a door of utterance to 
speak the mystery of Christ. (Col. 4:3). 

To those who wish the paper, but who cannot afford to pay, the 
terms for the next year are the same as for the past one— "Ask 
that ye may receive. " A postal card will do. If you send us the 
names of any you think would be interested and benefited 
thereby, we will send them sample copies free. You might, thus, 
to some extent, "do good and communicate. " 



Rill : page 8 

"The Day Dawn, or the 
Gospel in Type and Prophecy." 

The first copy of this work has just been received from the 
printer, and the entire edition of 4,000 copies will be ready for 
delivery by the time this paper reaches you. It is a more 
exhaustive and elaborate work than we had at first expected; 
more so by far than anything ever presented on the above topics, 
from our standpoint. It contains 334 pages in clear and distinct 
type. To give an idea of its size, we would say that it contains 
about three times as much matter as the "Three Worlds," a book 
familiar to most of our readers, now out of print. 

From the first hasty examination we should say it is a work 
which will do an inestimable amount of good, and to many, will 
be an instructor second only to the Word of God. It is written in 
a plain, unassuming manner, seeming to indicate that the writer 
had learned that "great I and little you" are no part of the Good 
News. Both the I and you are as far as possible dropped from 
notice, and the subject is made so beautifully plain and clear, 
that many, we believe, will bless God for having been permitted 
to read it. It is divided into twenty-nine chapters, and like God's 
book, contains things "both new and old. " 

We copy from the book, the following terms which are certainly 
low: "Price of Day Dawn, in paper covers, 50 cts. 

cloth .75 cts. 

Those interested and unable to pay, are welcome to a copy free, 
by asking for it. Our object is to spread the truth, and as we have 
freely received, we would freely give to such as need. 



Address the Publisher, A. D. Jones, Pittsburgh, Pa., or the 
writer, J. H. Paton, Almont, Michigan. " 

We hope that every reader of the WATCH TOWER will avail 
himself at once of these liberal terms. The time arguments alone, 
clearly and plainly stated, should do you fifty dollars worth of 
good if not more. Those who can afford to do so, should keep a 
dozen copies on their loan list. 



Rill : page 8 

Bible Class Department. 

Q. Please explain Mark 9:43-44. "If thy hand offend thee, cut it 
off: It is better for thee to enter into life maimed, than having 
two hands, to go into hell, into the fire that never shall be 
quenched; where their worm dieth not and the fire is not 
quenched. " 

A. The English word hell, (in Com. English version of N.T.,) is 
used to translate three entirely different Greek words: One of 
these, "tartarus," occurs but once-2 Pet. 2:4, and signifies, 
according to best Greek scholars, our atmosphere. (Satan-"the 
prince of the power of the air. ") Another Greek word translated 
by the word hell, is "hades." This is used eleven times in the 
N.T., and is ten times improperly translated hell. The word 
signifies the grave, or a state of death, or the dominion of death. 
The Author of the Emph. Diag., says: "To translate hades by the 
word hell, as it is done ten times out of eleven in the N.T., is 
very improper, unless it has the Saxon meaning of "helan"-to 
cover -attached to it. The primitive signification of hell only 
denoting what was secret or concealed. This perfectly 
corresponds with the Greek word, hades, and the Hebrew 
equivalent, sheol; but the theological definition given to it at the 
present day, by no means expresses it. It is said that in some 
parts of England to-day, it is not uncommon to hear the old 
Saxon use of this word, as when a man speaks of helling 
potatoes, (covering them,) and helling his house (shingling or 
covering it). 

The third and only other Greek word translated by our word 
hell, is "gehenna." It occurs twelve times. The same author 
quoted above, says of gehenna: "It is the Grecian mode of 
spelling the Hebrew words which are translated "The valley of 
Hinnom." This valley was also called "tophet," a detestation, an 
abomination. Into this place were cast all kinds of filth with the 
carcasses of beasts and the unburied bodies of criminals who 
had been executed. To consume these, fires were kept 
continually burning. Gehenna then, 

R112:page8 



as occuring in the N.T., symbolizes death and utter destruction, 
but in no place signifies a place of eternal torment. 

Kimchi, on Psa. 27:13 says: "It was a place in the land (valley) 
near to Jerusalem, and was a place contemptible where they did 
cast things defiled and carcasses, and there was there a continual 
fire to burn polluted things and bones, (Brimstone was thrown in 
to continue it) and therefore, the condemnation of the wicked in 
a parabolic way, is called Gihinnom. " 

One thing is sure, nothing was ever cast into this "Valley of 
Hinnom" to be kept in torment. Only dead bodies were cast into 
it as a mark of special ignominy, and what the fire did not come 
in contact with, the worms destroyed, so that in any case the 
result was destruction. See Isa. 66:24. (The Jews were not 
allowed to torture even dumb animals.) Jesus apparently made a 
lesson from surroundings, as was his custom. So now, he says: 
If any of your members— eye, hand, etc., so ensnare you as to 
endanger your being cast out from men as a criminal, and cast 
into this Valley of Hinnom, it is too expensive a member to 
keep, even though it be dear unto you as your eye or right hand. 
It would be far better to cast off the troublesome member and 
save your life. 

So, too, we can see that every Christian is called upon to— 
"Mortify" (put to death) therefore, your members which are 
upon the earth— uncleanness, covetousness, &c. (Col. 3:5). 
These evil members must be lopped off, else they will choke the 
life of Christ commenced, and prevent your entrance into that 
everlasting life, and render you a vessel fitted to destruction, 
symbolized by Gehenna- "Valley of Hinnom." 

But it may not be uninteresting to some to know that the 
following parts of the text of Mark 9 are interpolations, and are 
not found in the best MSS. Sinaitic and Vatican -viz: vs. 44 and 
46 are both entirely omitted; also, in vs. 45, the words "into the 
fire that never shall be quenched," and in vs. 47, the word "fire" 
is omitted. See "Emp. Diag. " and "Tischendorf. " 



Rill : page 8 



'SUBMIT AND COMMIT." 



I read in a friend's book, not long ago, an extract which 
commenced with the following words: "The longer I live the 
more profoundly am I convinced that the all-in-all of practical 
Christianity may be summed up in two words— 'submit and 
commit.'" Truer words have seldom passed from human pen; 
and this is the great lesson that grace by her gentle discipline 
teaches, and that the will of man has to learn. Submit —cease 
first from thy rebellious self-assertions, and next from thy proud 
efforts to correct and amend thyself; and then commit— cast 



thyself into the hands of Omnipotent Love. Claim it of the new 
Adam that He shall, dwell within thee, accomplish, as He has 
undertaken, what thou canst not do, and regulate in peace and 
harmony, under His scepter, the once jarring and conflicting 
forces of thy nature. So shall there indeed be a great calm, a 
stillness, a rest within thy consecrated heart, and thou shalt be in 
a position to make proof of all the wealth of thy promised land- 
the land that flows with milk and honey-as thou proceedest to 
live, not only soberly, but righteously and Godly. Only let us 
take heed lest it should be said of thee or me, reader, "We see 
that they could not enter in, because of unbelief. "-School of 
Grace. 



R112:page8 

The Editor's Eastern Trip. 

Invitations to stop and see the little companies at various points 
en route to and from Lynn, Mass., have been so numerous, that 
we have been obliged to forego the pleasure of complying with 
some five requests. In future, however, we hope to be able to see 
these also. 

The entire arrangement of meetings, etc., in each place, will be 
left in charge of the person mentioned below. Any arrangements 
they may deem proper will be agreeable to me. They may 
arrange for one, two or three meetings a day, and, if they 
choose, select my subjects, or announce the general topic as 
being "Things Pertaining to the Kingdom of God. " The route, 
committee of arrangement and time of my arrival are as follows: 

CHAMBERSBURG, PA H. E. Hoke. 

Wednesday, noon, June 2d. 

READING, PA LB. Kine, No. 102 N. 8th st. 

Saturday night, June 6th. 

NEWARK, N.J...Mrs. E M. Deems, 500 Washin't'n st. 
Tuesday night, June 9th. 

LYNN, MASS Amos Hunt, No. 13 Ingols st. 

Sunday, A.M. (early), June 13th. 

CLINTON, MASS Mrs. M. T. Miner. 

Wednesday, June 16th. 

SPRINGFIELD, MASS....R. W. Stearns, 96 Gardner st. 
Friday, June 1 8th. 

FT. EDWARD, N.Y..J. C. Sunderland. 
Tuesday, June 22d. 

MONTROSE, PA D. D. Lathrop. 

Friday, June 25 th. 



BERWICK, PA A. B. MacCrea. 

Saturday night, June 26th. 

JERSEY SHORE, PA S. M. Bond. 

Wednesday, June 30th. 

By the above, it will be seen that the stay at each place will 
average about two days. I shall expect almost continuous 
meetings while with you. 



R121 : page 8 

JESUS gave his perfect natural life to redeem fallen, natural 
men and to restore them to the perfect natural condition, so we, 
as his bride, members of his body are first by faith reckoned or 
accounted perfect through his sacrifice, and secondly, permitted 
to give this justified nature a "living sacrifice." Thus we are 
associated with Jesus in his death, the expressed conditions 
being, that if we thus give up all the Adamic, we may become 
partakers of the "Divine Nature"-be made "New Creatures in 
Christ Jesus." "For if we be dead with Him, we believe that we 
shall also live with Him. " "If we suffer with Him, we shall also 
be glorified together. " 



R121 : page 8 

BROTHER H. B. RICE writes that he, from temporary loss of 
business and sickness in his family, has been kept quite 
occupied of late, but has not lost his interest in the WATCH 
TOWER. He says: "I believe that the blood of Jesus Christ 
cleanseth us from all sin. It was certainly not laying aside 
immortality. It was shedding his blood— pouring out his soul (or 
life) unto death. " He says he finds time to preach the glad 
tidings, and recently delivered a series of eleven lectures in 
Stockton, Cal. He has again obtained a situation in San 
Francisco, and has removed there. 



R112:pagel 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JULY, 1880. 

NO. 1. 

page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 
L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R112:pagel 



YOUR REDEMPTION DRAWETH NIGH. 

Most of our readers are perhaps aware that our understanding of 
the word leads us to the conclusion that "The time of trouble" or 
"Day of wrath," covering the forty years from 1874 to 1914 is in 
two parts or of two kinds: first a time of trouble upon the church 
during which she (the nominal church) will fall from her present 
position of influence and respect with the world, and many will 
fall from truth and from faith. This trouble upon the church and 
also the fact that we shall be in it but protected and safe is 
shown by the 9 1 Psalm. 

We need not fear the terrors of darkness nor the pestilence that 
walketh in the darkness. That is, if we the "little flock" abide 
under the shadow of the Almighty and have Him for a Refuge 
we need not fear this dark hour coming upon the church; neither 
need we fear the pestilence (infidelity) that will stalk abroad 
during that time; neither need we fear the arrow that flieth by 
day— The arrow is the scornful speech of the Infidel and 
unbeliever —for as we are elsewhere told— "The wicked shoot 
out arrows at the righteous-even bitter words. " 

These arrows-bitter scornful words of infidelity and the 
pestilence of systems of error &c.~ are to cause "a thousand to 
fall at thy side and ten thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not 
come nigh thee. " Why will these influences so destructive to 
others, not affect the "little flock?" Let vs. 4 answer: "Under his 
wings shalt thou trust: His truth shall be thy shield and buckler. " 

Yes it is easy to see that the pestilence and arrows, &c, referred 
to here are not the literal, since we well know that the truth does 
not protect against such things. Truth has always been a shield 
against error and infidelity but how needful it will be— how 
needful it is in this evil day for it is evident that this great wave 
of ungodliness and infidelity has already commenced to sweep 
over the world and we will be in it as Paul said, referring to this 
very time. "The fire (trouble) of that day shall try every man's 
work of what sort it is. And again: "Take unto you the whole 
armor of God, that you may be able to stand in that evil day, " 
when "a thousand shall fall at thy side." But out from this fire 
God will gather His Gold and Jewels more polished and more 
separated from dross. "It shall not come nigh thee." You will 
have His truth for your shield against all the arguments and 
errors which will cause the fall of others during this "evil day." 

The trouble coming upon the world will follow the trouble on 
the church as a natural consequence and is the second part of the 
trouble of this "Day of wrath. " Will the saints be here during its 
continuance upon the world? No, we remember Jesus said: 
"Watch ye that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all those 
things coming upon the world and to stand before the Son of 
Man." A glorious anticipation is this, that we are to be gathered 
together unto our living Head— Christ, and to enter into His 



kingdom before the pouring out of the vials of wrath upon the 
world. 

This is in harmony too with the thought expressed by David. 
"To bind their Kings with chains and their Nobles with fetters of 
iron, to execute the judgments written, this honor hath all his 
saints." Again as Paul says: "Know ye not that the saints shall 
judge the world?" "Therefore judge nothing before the time." 

The thought harmonizes too with Daniel's expression: "In the 
days of these Kings (the ten powers representative of the Roman 
Empire before they are destroyed in this "Day of the Lord") 
shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom... and it shall break in 
pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand 
forever." (Dan. 2:4.) We remember how this harmonizes with 
the statement of Jesus: He represents his church now as His 
Kingdom (but not set up-not in power), and says: "He will 
gather out of His Kingdom all things that offend and they that 
do iniquity, and then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun"- 
be set up. They must be set up before the time of trouble fully 
comes upon the world, for "IT shall break in pieces and 
consume all these. " All can see, therefore, that our setting up 
must be before the plagues which are represented as destroying 
earthly kingdoms. 

But we have a beautiful picture of all this in 

REVELATIONS 21 :9. 

"There came one of the seven angels which had the seven vials 
full of the seven last plagues, and talked with me saying, come 
hither, 

R113:pagel 

I will show thee the bride, the Lamb's wife. And he carried me 
away in the spirit to a great and high mountain, and showed me 
that great city, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven 
from God." 

We have perhaps all seen by a previous article that John was a 
sort of representative of the church to be translated- "If I will 
that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?" When he was 
called to see the "Mystery Babylon" he was taken into the 
wilderness to see her. So with us, when we come to recognize 
the Babylon church in its true light as in God's sight, we must go 
into a wilderness, a condition of complete separation from the 
world, a condition of humility, alone with God, and when he 
feeds us and only then can we see the Nominal church as it is— a 
Babylon or Confusion company to be spewed out of the Lord's 
mouth. 

As to see Babylon-John went into the wilderness, so now when 
called to see the Bride of Christ, he is carried away to a great 
and high mountain. What does this show? That we, the church 



of translation must go up into the great Kingdom -enter into the 
joys of our Lord and be in His likeness before we can see as we 
are seen and know as we are known. The bride can only be seen 
from the standpoint of the Kingdom, "Except a man be born 
again he cannot see the kingdom of God" (the Bride). "Except a 
man be born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the 
(Mountain) Kingdom of God." (John 3:3 and 5.) 

This shows that we shall be changed and caught up to meet the 
Lord before we see the Church— the Bride. But it teaches more, 
if you examine closely it shows that we shall be taken up into 
the Mount or Kingdom before the seven last plagues are poured 
out on the world. Notice that it says that the angel who talked 
with him and took him up was one of those having the seven 
vials of wrath. Now were these vials full or empty; had they 
been poured out or were they to be, after John is shown the 
Bride in the mountain? We answer: The Word says they were 
full. In the Greek the word full is emphatic as if to call our 
attention to the matter. Oh, how very full of meaning is every 
word that God has given. 

Notice, too, how much this is in harmony with another type of 
the same thing given in the Law. You remember how Moses as 
the type of Christ had left the glory of the Court of Egypt to 
have part with his people. When he came to them, to deliver 
them the first time, he came to his own (natural Israel), and his 
own received him not. He went away, took the Gentile wife and 
returned again to deliver his people. Now remember, that as he 
came the second time and before the plagues were poured upon 
Egypt, Aaron came to meet him as we shall be caught away to 
meet our Lord. Aaron did meet him in the Mount of God. We 
are to go up into the Kingdom, and are to be joined to Christ 
before the plagues are poured out, and, like Aaron, we are to 
assist in pouring them out. 

Oh, how glorious the thought of soon entering into the joys of 
the Lord, soon entering the Mount of God. Are we prepared to 
enter in? Are we clothed in the pure white robe of Christ's 
righteousness? Is it clean, without spot, or wrinkle or any 

R113:page2 

such thing, or is it all besmeared with stains of earth? Be not 
deceived: If walking hand in glove with the world, minding 
earthly things, you are almost sure to get your garments crushed 
and stained, and to be unprepared for the marriage. And if left 
out of the marriage you cannot escape the things coming upon 
the world, but will be obliged to wash your robes and make 
them white, and to come up to the Kingdom through great 
tribulation. That will truly be a great blessing and favor to be 
one of "The Virgin's, companions that follow her," but not so 
grand will that be as to be a part of the bride, "The King's 
daughter all glorious within "She shall be brought unto the King 



in raiment of needle- work. " Blessed indeed will it be to be 
"called to the marriage supper of the Lamb," but more blessed to 
be the bride whose marriage (then past) will be celebrated. 

Oh, beloved brethren and sisters, let us lay aside everything else 
as an ambition, and bend all our energies to seeking first, or 
principally "the kingdom of God. It is too high and too grand to 
miss. All things else are not worthy to be compared with our 
high calling in Christ Jesus and the glory that will be revealed in 
us. 



R113:page2 



AS THE LIGHTNING. 

LUKE 17:20-24. 



Jesus had taught that he was the heir of the kingdom of Judah 
and Israel and that the kingdom was come nigh— was very close 
at hand and we remember that it was but a short time after this, 
that he came riding on the colt thus presenting himself as their 
King; in fulfillment of Zech. 9:9: "Behold thy King cometh unto 
thee." Thus he offered himself to them and was rejected as had 
been foretold; and consequently did not set up the kingdom. "He 
came unto His own and His own received Him not. " 

The Pharisees were talking together of this strange and queer 
man whose friends and disciples were poor and ignorant. They 
say to themselves, what nonsense this man talks; how he is 
deceiving these poor people, by raising in their minds the hope 
that He will some day be a King and then they shall share the 
kingdom with him; and these miracles which he has power to do 
seem to make the matter a settled fact with these his followers. 
Let us go to Him and in the hearing of his disciples, let us ask 
him how, when and where his kingdom will come &c, that his 
followers may see the impossibility of his claims being true. 

And when he (Jesus) was demanded of the Pharisees when the 
kingdom of God should come, He answered them and said: "The 
kingdom of God cometh not with observation: neither shall ye 
say, Lo, here! or Lo, there! for behold the kingdom of God is 
within you (or marginal reading will be among you.)" Jesus here 
made known something concerning his kingdom that must have 
astonished both the Pharisees and also his disciples, viz: That 
His kingdom when established would pervade all society and 
control all, but be seen by none, as he said again at another time 
to Nichodemus, "you must be born again," born to spiritual 
bodies before you can "see the kingdom of God" or "enter into 
it" just as we know also a man must be begotten of the "spirit of 
truth" before he can even understand the "things pertaining to 
the kingdom of God" as recorded in scripture. 



The disciples heard this account of the kingdom and probably 
did not comprehend it, for the Spirit, not yet being given, they 
could not understand spiritual things. (1 Cor. 2:10.) But Jesus 
takes advantage of the moment to drop a word to his disciples 
which the Spirit would afterward open to their understanding. 
And He said unto his disciples "The days will come when ye 
shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of man. " 

Jesus was looking far away into the future, to the time of the 
setting up of his kingdom just mentioned to the Pharisees, and 
he surely knew as he looked at our day and at us the disciples 
living in his days- "in the days of the Son of man," the days of 
his parousia— presence in which he says the world in general 
will continue at their customary employment, "eating, drinking, 
planting, building &c," all unconscious of him "and know not 
of his presence," (verse 26 and Matt. 24:37-39,) that our hearts 
would be longing so much for his communion and to "see him 
whom my soul loveth" that He foresaw we say, that our very 
intensity of longing, would open a tender spot for our enemy to 
attack. He knew too that our "enemy, the devil as a roaring lion" 
is continually seeking to overcome us and knows full well the 
points most easily attacked. Therefore he makes special mention 
of this, to put us on our guard, saying: ye shall desire to see one 
of the days of the Son of man (as you now see them— seeing me 
present and in the flesh), "and ye shall NOT see. 

And this is the more significant to us because the Lord informs 
us that there will be in these "days of the Son of man," false 
teachers who will be very powerful and exercise much influence 
upon the church, "For false Christs (deceptions) and false 
prophets (false teachers) shall arise and shall show signs and 
seduce (lead into confusion and error) if possible even the 
elect." "And then if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is 
Christ or lo, he is there, believe him not. Mark 13:21. So too we 
read in Matt. 24:23-28, that Jesus said: "Behold I have told you 
before [I have forewarned you] wherefore if they (false teachers) 
shall say unto you, 'Behold he is in the desert, go not forth.'" 
Since we must apply this scripture to the "days of the Son of 
man," "days of His (parousia) presence," we look about us to 
see if any are making such claims, and we believe we find these 
false teachers (We do not say that they may not, for all their 
falsity be Christians. We will not disfellowship any one.) We 
believe we find them in those who claim that Jesus is to appear 
shortly in the wilderness of Judea (Palestine) and that all who 
love him and expect to be part of his kingdom should go there 
and be on hand to receive and welcome him. In accordance with 
this claim, it is perhaps known to many of our readers that 
colonies are now being organized in New England and money 
raised to start a company to 

R114 : page 2 



establish this teaching and to prepare the way for others to 
follow. 

True Palestine is not a "desert" in the sense we generally use it 
but it is, in the sense of being a wilderness -or a place deserted 
as we read of Jesus when he went to pray "he went into a desert 
place alone. " And we regard this as the thing against which 
Jesus warned us saying, "go not forth." But there is to be more 
than one of these deceiving teachers; While one says He is 
coming in the desert, another says: "Behold he is in the secret 
chambers." Do we find teaching of this kind now, in the days of 
the Son of man? Yes, it seems to us that this is being fulfilled; a 
brother whom we knew well and loved much, thinks that God 
has given him what he terms "New Oil" (perhaps he does not 
notice that the virgins of Matt. 25, do not get any new oil; it is 
the same oil they had at first). But this brother is we think 
fulfilling this scripture. He is teaching that after 1881, Christ 
will appear in the flesh secretly, to be seen only by himself and 
those who believe exactly as he believes. This teaching not only 
leads to unscriptural expectations, but seems to open the minds 
of those who receive it to a perilous snare of the devil, which 
snare is referred to in the "Three Worlds," a book written by this 
very brother, in 1876, now out of print but possessed by many of 
our readers, extracts from which will follow this article. The 
wide diversity of views as stated in that article, and his present 
view as stated above seems to make good his claim that he has 
new oil; but it does not commend itself to us as being as good as 
the old "The old is better. " Nor does it answer the conditions of 
the parable for no new oil was given. 

But what does Jesus say to us; are we to expect to see Him in the 
secret chamber? No, he said "believe it not. " Well, Lord, tell us 
then, how and where shall we meet you. Jesus' answer is: 
"Wheresoever the carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered 
together. " As the eagles seem instinctively without call or noise, 
or warning, to assemble from every different point, near and far, 
so, we understand the Lord to teach, will be our gathering 
together unto him. We shall be caught away to meet the Lord. 
Two in the field, bed and mill, "one taken and the other left." 
"and they said unto him, where Lord, (taken where,) and He said 
unto them wheresoever the body is thither will the eagles be 
gathered together." (Compare Matt. 24:28 and Luke 17:37.) 

Thus does Jesus seem to say to us positively, "If they say to you 
he is in the desert, go not forth, (or) behold in the secret 
chamber, believe not. " 

You will indeed desire to see, but "shall not see" until you are 
"taken," and as eagles you meet me. "Then we shall see Him as 
He is," for "we shall be like Him." Then He tells us how He will 
be in His day. Vs. 24. For as the lightning that lighteneth out of 
one part under heaven shineth unto the other part under heaven, 
so shall the Son of Man be in his day. Let us examine the 



language carefully. There are two things mentioned —the cause 
and effect: lightning itself; and its effect-the shining light. The 
lightning is the electric fluid which human eye cannot discern; 
the flash of light we can see. Now which of these are used to 
illustrate the Son of man in his day? We answer that it is the 
electric fluid. The lightning which cannot be seen that is used to 
illustrate the Son of man. Electricity was almost unknown as a 
science when Jesus uttered these words, but it was written for 
our edification and instruction, and the Lord knew that His 
simile would have a force and meaning now, which the disciples 
then could not fully realize. 

It is now known that electricity is one of the most powerful 
forces in nature; perhaps more powerful than any other, yet 
imperceptible to the eye. Scientists affirm that it can encircle 
this earth six times in one second of time. 

What a wonderful illustration of the powers of the "Son of man 
in His days." Everywhere present, all powerful. Its presence may 
be recognized by the flashes which it causes, and both its 
presence and power are shown when that which it strikes falls 
crumbled to dust. Just so now, and during all the days of the Son 
of man, for we understand that all the "day of wrath" or time of 
trouble, is included in the term "in His days." In these days there 
will be great flashes of light and knowledge in the church, 
enlightening all who have eyes to see, and are awake and 
watching. Has not this been to a great extent your experience, 
since you came to recognize as a fact that the bridegroom 



(Continued on Seventh page.) 

R114 : page 7 

(Continued from Second page.) 

came in 1 874, and that since then we are going in (into a 
condition of readiness,) to the marriage during these years of His 
presence, since you awoke to knowledge of the fact that the 
various great, grand, bright revelations of God's plan contained 
in "the word," have been seen by you? Yes, I think that this is 
the experience of all; we have not seen Him, but the 
enlightening influence resulting from His presence, we have 
seen. 

But the effect of lightning is different, in different places. It 
shines in the heavens, (the church,) but it is a very destructive 
agent on earth (to the world,) sometimes. So we understand 
during this, His day, the various high ones of earth will be 
smitten, crumbled and brought low, and "all the kingdoms of the 
whole world shall be thrown down. " 

Thus shall the Son of man be in his day. We recognize Him 
through the light upon the word, and the world shall recognize 



Him by the destruction and trouble. And they shall say, "hide us, 
(protect us,) for the great day of His wrath is come. " 



R114:page3 



When that Which is Perfect has Come. 

All the gifts that here are given, 
All the faith for which we've striven, 
We must loose, when heaven we gain, 
As is lost in the sea the rain. 

Light that on our path below, 

Seems like the summer sunbeam's glow, 

Then shall fade and pale away, 

E'en as the stars flee from the day. 

We have loved the Saviour here, 
Loved our fellow travellers dear. 
At our home, that love shall be, 
Lost, like time in eternity. 

Travelling home- ward through the gloom, 
Through the shadow of the tomb, 
Far too weak are these poor eyes 
To view unvailed the heavenly prize. 

What a waking! What a dawn! 
When the vail shall be withdrawn. 
Heart and mind and nature be 
Made fit to dwell eternally. 



L. A. A. 



R114:page3 

THE CLOSING WORK. 

The transition from the Jewish age to the Gospel age covered a 
period of a little more than seventy years, reaching from the 
birth of Christ to the destruction of Jerusalem. The prominent 
events of that period were the coming of Christ, and the 
disposition of the Jewish nation. That period was divided into 
several smaller ones, by marked events and stages of the gradual 
change. 

The birth of Christ was the beginning of the Gospel in 
fulfillment, and might be considered the beginning of the end of 
the Jewish age. Christ from that time had come from heaven, but 
as the law required that He should tarry thirty years (Num. 4) 
before entering on His public ministry and the real harvest work, 
He was not "made manifest to Israel" until the baptism of John. 



Jno. 1:31. This is an important point; He had been in the world 
for thirty years, and the world knew Him not (Jno. 1:10), not 
even Israel. The manifestation to Israel is also called a coming. 
John preached before His coming. Acts 13:24. "There cometh 
one after me." Mark 1:8. John pointed Him out and said: "This 
was He of whom I spake, He that cometh after me is preferred 
before me." Jno. 1:15. 

Let it be particularly observed that though there were several 
events called His coming, there was only one coming from 
heaven and that coming from heaven was at the beginning of the 
tarrying. The later comings were manifestations in new official 
positions. At His baptism John introduced Him as the 
Bridegroom to that typical Bride, speaking of his own joy as the 
"friend of the Bridegroom" as fulfilled. Jno. 3:29, Mark 2:19,20. 
During His ministry He was doing or superintending a finishing 
work, which he 

R115 : page 3 

calls reaping or harvest, (Jno. 4:34-38, Matt. 9:37-38) hence He 
was then manifested in the double character of Bridegroom and 
Reaper. At the end of His visible ministry He rode into 
Jerusalem as King, in fulfillment of "Behold thy King cometh" 
(Zech. 9:9), and He immediately exercised His authority in 
leaving their house desolate because of the manner in which 
they treated Him. 

These facts are interesting to the Bible student as matters of 
history concerning the Lord's dealings with the Jewish nation, 
but are intensely interesting when it is remembered that all those 
facts were arranged as a pattern of things connected with the 
closing history of the Gospel age. The equality and parallelism 
of the Jewish and Gospel ages we here take for granted, because 
they have been so often proved. 

The transition period of seventy years mentioned at the 
beginning of this article, has its parallel in the transition from 
the Gospel age to the millennium, or between A.D. 1844 and 
A.D. 1914. The beginning of this transition is marked by the 
application of the 2300 days or years of Daniel 8 and 9, and the 
end is marked by the end of the Times of the Gentiles. 

The prominent events of this period are the second coming of 
Christ, and the disposition of the Gospel church. This period 
also is divided into several smaller ones, by marked events and 
stages of the gradual change. In addition to the events already 
named let it be remembered that while the Lord was disposing 
of the Jewish nation, the Gospel church was coming on the stage 
of action, and so while He is disposing of the Gospel church, the 
Jewish nation comes up again by restoration. 

As the beginning of that change was marked by the coming of 
Christ from heaven, so the 2300 years above mentioned indicate 



that Christ was due to leave the most holy place— "heaven 
itself '-in 1844. Each of these points was marked by a 
movement of the expectant people in reference to the coming of 
Christ. As there was a tarrying of thirty years then before the 
manifestation of His presence, and the real closing work, so in 
this case His presence and the light on the harvest were not 
manifested until after thirty years of tarrying. 

We speak of His coming or manifestation as Bridegroom and 
Reaper between the Autumn of 1874 and the Spring of 1878, in 
the same sense as He was so spoken of during the three years 
and a half between His baptism and His entry into Jerusalem as 
King. His coming as Bridegroom was first expected and 
recognized by the watchers, and His work as Reaper afterward 
seen. In this case, as in the pattern, His manifestation to the 
watchers was not a coming from heaven, but a manifestation in 
his official relationship. In either case there was but one coming 
from heaven— the most holy— and that coming at the beginning 
of the tarrying. The tarrying in either case is the period of time 
after He had come, before entering upon His work. 

We call special attention to this feature of the parallelism, 
because some are claiming to hold on to the parallelism, and yet 
ignoring the presence of Christ entirely. The two must stand or 
fall together. We are not opposing them, but they are opposing 
us, and we are set for the defense of what we learned with those 
who are now opposing, and which we still believe to be truth. 
Those who are opposing the truth as to Christ's presence, make 
use of the parallelism to prove that Christ will come in 1881, 
seeming to ignore the fact that if Christ's coming is future there 
is no parallelism between the endings of the Two Dispensations. 

They tell us that the tarrying in either case is thirty-three years 
and a half; that in the first case it was the period during which 
He remained with His people, but in the second case the tarrying 
was the time from 1844 till 1878, ending three years and a half 
before He comes to His people at all. If their lamps were 
burning half as brightly as they claim, they might see this 
inconsistency. 

Will some one who is now opposing the presence of Christ, tell 
us what event took place at 1 844 to parallel the birth of Christ, 
and what happened between 1874 and 1878 to parallel the 
manifestation of Christ to Israel, if their new views are correct? 

Let no one claim to believe and build on the parallelism and yet 
virtually ignore it. If it can be proved that the presence of Christ 
is not true, the Two Dispensation arguments will be proved 
untrue so far as its time element is concerned. But we are 
satisfied that both will stand the test of time and future events. 

We believe that as in the pattern dispensation, Christ took upon 
Him the official dignity of King, and left Israel desolate, so at 
the parallel point in the Spring of 1878 He was manifested in the 



Kingly office, and Israel began to rise. When Israel rises 
Babylon must fall, for "the watchmen shall see eye to eye, when 
the Lord shall bring again Zion." Isa. 52:8. 

We trust that none who have seen these glorious truths, will 
forget that while there is such a beautiful parallelism between 
the Two Dispensations, the two comings, and the closing work, 
that there is also a clear contrast; that is, all connected with the 
second is on a higher plane than the first. We hope they will not 
forget God's order of first the natural and afterward that which is 
spiritual. If this be well remembered it will save them from the 
strong delusion of expecting Christ to come in the flesh, to the 
church, in 1881 or any other time. One difference between the 
two comings is that then He came to go away again, while this 
time He comes to stay; and instead of being overcome by the 
Powers of darkness, He will conquer all His foes. 

J. H. P. 



R115 : page 3 

THE CLOSING WORK.--N0.2. 

In the closing work of the Jewish and Gospel ages, there are 
three things mentioned as belonging to either, viz: Separation, 
gathering and burning. In the former dispensation they were 
represented under the figures of wheat and chaff, and in the 
nominal gospel church are called wheat and tares; but the 
disposition of the two are parallel. The two elements are 
separated— the wheat gathered into the barn, and the chaff and 
tares are burned. 

Not only the work of separation and the gathering of the wheat 
are under the supervision of Christ, but also the burning of the 
chaff and tares. This fact shows that all that is meant by the 
burning is included in the harvest, and, therefore, in the end of 
the age; for "the harvest is the end of the age, " whether it be the 
Jewish or the Gospel age. 

John's statement in reference to the closing work of Christ is 
clear on this point: "Whose fan is in his hand, and he will 
thoroughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into the garner; 
but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire. " -Matt. 
3:12. In the seventh verse the fire is called the "wrath to come." 
That this meant the fire (or judgment) which was to bring the 
Jewish people to desolation, is evident from the Savior's own 
prophecy: "For these be the days of vengeance, that all things 
that are written may be fulfilled;. ..for there shall be great distress 
in the land, and wrath upon this people. "-Luke 21 :22,23. Paul, 
in referring to the same people and the same facts, says: "Who 
both killed the Lord Jesus and their own prophets,... for the wrath 
is come upon them to the uttermost." -1 Thess. 2:15,16. 



These statements compared show clearly that the closing work 
included the day of wrath, and reached to the destruction of 
Jerusalem. Hence, we cannot escape the conclusion, that there is 
a sense in which the Jewish age, and, therefore, its harvest or 
closing work, reached to the destruction of Jerusalem. This 
being true, the Jewish harvest, for the complete disposition of 
the Jewish church, instead of being limited to three and a half or 
seven years, covered the forty years from the Spring after his 
baptism, to A.D. 70. 

This may show us that Christ has the supervision and power 
over the natural men and nations, as well as over spiritual things, 
for the overthrow of Jerusalem was of a very natural people in a 
very natural way; and yet it was in fulfillment 

R115 : page 4 

of the statement: "He will burn up the chaff with fire 
unquenchable." There is a parallel to this, and without a 
contrast, in the disposal of the tares of the nominal Gospel 
church —a very natural set of people. 

That the burning of the tares is included in the gospel harvest, is 
evident from Matt. 13:40: "As therefore the tares are gathered 
and burned in the fire, so shall it be in the end of this age. " So 
shall it be in the harvest, for "the harvest is the end of this age" 
(ver. 39). From these statements, the parallels, and other 
scriptures, we conclude that the day of wrath is included in the 
Gospel harvest, and, therefore, that the age and harvest extend to 
1914, covering a space of forty years from the Spring of 1875, 
instead of three years and a-half, or seven years. 

The prophecies of Isaiah call for such an extension as to include 
the "day of vengeance" in the closing ministry of Christ. Isa. 
61:2 and 

R116 : page 4 

63:4. It is evident from the latter reference, that the "day of 
vengeance" is also "the year of my redeemed. 

This carries us forward to Rev. 11:15-18 to find the same 
thought of the time of "reward" of all that fear God's name, 
being identical with the day of wrath. The seventh trumpet 
includes both and reaches to 1914. Whoever will read carefully 
the first few verses of Isaiah 63 and the description of the 
harvest as given in Revelation 14 can hardly fail to see that the 
scenes are identical. That harvest is under the supervision of the 
Son of man, with a golden crown upon His head. Then the idea 
we advance that Christ entered upon the official work of King in 
1878 is in harmony with the application of the harvest here 
given. 

But what becomes of the idea of those who now oppose us in 
these things, that Christ does not come into possession of His 



crown, until after this day of wrath? Will they not be compelled 
to admit for consistency's sake that the harvest and the treading 
of the winepress must be located away beyond 1914? It seems 
too much like desperation for them to take such ground, but they 
must do it or admit that a part of the harvest and the disposal of 
such as are represented by the clusters of the vine, and which are 
to be subjected to the wrath of God, take place after the Son of 
man is crowned. Will any one be so reckless as to take the 
ground that the "seven last plagues" of Revelation 15 contained 
in the "seven vials," in which are filled up the wrath of God, are 
to be fulfilled after the day of wrath is ended? Will any whose 
lamps are burning brightly with the light of the truth on the 
Times of the Gentiles, and the time of trouble or day of 
vengeance with which those times end, take the ground that the 
day of wrath extends beyond 1914? They must do all this, and 
thus ignore the parallelism between the two days of wrath, or 
admit that Christ receives His crown before the subjugation of 
the nations in this day of wrath. 

Who among the careful and impartial readers will read from the 
14th verse to the end of the 14th chapter of Revelation, and then 
believe that those who deny Christ's coming as King before the 
end of the harvest, have the clear and most advanced light, and 
that our lamps are gone out? We resent with a just indignation 
the assertion so often made that our lamps are not burning. We 
never have confessed it in thought, word or deed. The so called 
"new supply" of oil we never asked for because we never 
wanted it. In the parable of Matthew 25 the foolish were the first 
to know and confess their lack; but in the last year, and because 
we could not indorse all their recklessly new and contradictory 
statements, some have labored earnestly to convince us that our 
lamps are out, but not one of us believes it. Then that application 
of the parable is incorrect. The case is different however with a 
class who in the 1 844 movement saw light on the prophetic 
periods, then afterward gave it all up, and confessed that they 
had "no light on the harmonious ending of the prophetic 
periods." That was something like saying, "Our lamps have gone 
out." 

We are not disposed to boast of our light; be it little or much it 
comes from the Lord, and to Him we would be grateful. We 
would be dishonoring Him as well as our own consciousness 
should we confess that we are without light or if we did not deny 
the oft repeated statement, that we do not even claim to have any 
increase of light on these glorious subjects. Those who have not 
seen new and advanced thought in ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
during the year of its existence, only prove to us that they have 
not given it a careful and impartial reading. We believe it is our 
duty and privilege to bring from the treasure house things both 
new and old. Matt. 13:52. And the new truth must always be in 
harmony with the old truths. 



Now while we are teaching that there is a sense in which the 
Jewish age extended to the destruction of Jerusalem, and that in 
the same sense the Gospel age extends to 1914, we do not ignore 
the fact so well established years ago, that there is a sense in 
which the Jewish age ended at the death of Christ, and that in 
the same sense the Gospel age ended in the Spring of 1878. We 
believe the prophetic argument which fixes those two points is 
unanswerable; and the illustration of the equality of the Two 
Dispensations as ending at those points is as clear and beautiful 
as it ever was. 

God's dealings with the Jewish people, as a nation, ended at the 
Cross, but after that favor was extended to the remnant, until as 
we believe not a kernel of wheat was left to perish in the 
destruction of Jerusalem. It will not be difficult for those who 
understand what they are reading to see what would be a parallel 
to that in reference to the nominal Gospel church. 

We believe the recognition of these two endings of each age and 
therefore the two phases of each harvest will be necessary to the 
understanding of some things yet to be developed. In the law 
there were two gatherings-first the first fruits and then the 
general harvest. This was true of each season, and is true, we 
believe, of both the Jewish and Gospel ages. The first in either 
case included those who were able to receive the presence of 
Christ during the first phase of the harvest; and it is their 
privilege to extend the truth for the acceptance of others 
afterward. 

We have already shown that there was an extension of God's 
dealings with the remnant until the destruction of Jerusalem, and 
it can be shown that there was a work done and counted finished 
at the end as represented by the first cherub. The disciples under 
the personal supervision of Jesus gathered fruit for the Gospel 
barn or "unto life eternal" during the three years preceding the 
Cross. Compare Matt. 9:36-38 and Jno. 4:34-38. Jesus referring 
to that harvest work calls it, "to finish. " Later He says "I have 
finished the work which thou gavest me to do. " Seventy weeks 
were determined on Daniel's people for certain specified 
purposes but Isaiah foretold a cutting short of the work, and Paul 
applies it at the end of the Jews' age. "For He will finish the 
work and cut it short in righteousness: because a short work will 
the Lord make upon the earth." Rom. 9:28. This was what Jesus 
did when He left their house desolate. Mark! He both finished 
and cut it short. From which it is evident that the prophecy of 
the "seventy weeks" in Daniel 9 was fulfilled at the end of sixty- 
nine weeks and a half. The only point of the prophecy that does 
not seem to have been complete is the confirmation of the 
covenant, of the last verse, "for one week, " but let it be observed 
that this was not to be on Daniel's people, but with many. 
Daniel's people ceased to be recognized as a nation when Jesus 
left them desolate, and Jerusalem ceased to be the "holy city" 



when the vail of the temple was rent, and the Gospel church 
from that time became God's dwelling place. This the New 
Testament clearly teaches, and only the remnant of Israel who 
accepted Christ were recipients of the Gospel favor. 

Speaking of Christ leaving the house desolate, Paul quotes from 
Isaiah and applies it: "Except the Lord of Sabaoth had left us a 
seed [remnant] we had been as Sodoma and been made like unto 
Gomorrah." Rom. 9:29. That we are not mistaken as to the 
proper time for the application of that prophecy is made plain by 
the Apostle himself. In the eleventh chapter after speaking of the 
casting off of the nation, in order to show that a remnant were to 
be saved he referred to himself as one who had not received 
Christ during the first part of the harvest, and then to the case of 
Elijah, who at one time thought all were gone; "But what saith 
the answer of God to him? I have reserved to myself seven 
thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to Baal. Then Paul 
makes the application, "Even so then, at this present time also 
there is a remnant according to the election of grace. " Rom. 
11:1-5. The point is, the nation was given up to desolation, but 
the remnant were to be saved out of the fire. It may be true, in 
fulfillment of Dan. 9:27, that the Gospel was preached 
exclusively to the Jews for three years and a half after the cross, 
but it is evident that the remnant were not all saved during that 
half week. Paul made a specialty of his Jewish brethren at least 
seventeen years after he was converted, (Gal. 1:18 and 2:1) and 
there is reason to believe that the Jews who received Christ at 
any time before Jerusalem was destroyed were saved from that 
calamity as much as those who had accepted before. Thus He 
gathered the wheat and burned the chaff. 

Those who believe in the parallel of the Two Dispensations may 
readily make the application here. Some accepted the presence 
of Christ during the three years preceding the Spring of 1878. 
These have the privilege of extending the truth on this subject 
for the faith of others. And we would say this truth is none the 
less true because some, and even leading spirits, who once 
believed it, have, under peculiar trial, now ignored the presence 
of Christ. To us there is great force in the statement of 
Revelation 11:18, that even all that fear God's name small and 
great are to be rewarded during the sounding of the seventh 
trumpet. We will not now speak of the manner in which the 
work will be done, but it is evident that not one kernel of true 
wheat, or using another scriptural figure, one lamb of the flock 
will be left out of the kingdom. The extension or prolonging of 
the dispensation is an expression of the longsuffering of God 
toward us (not speaking of the world, but of the too worldly 
church), not being willing that any should perish. Though ninety 
and nine were safely in, He will seek and find and bring home 
the last one. 

J. H. P. 



R121 : page 4 

"Human laws derive all their binding force from their divine 
original, the good must demand that which is right, and 
condemn that which is wrong. "-Blackstone. 



Rl 17: page 5 

THE TABERNACLE-No. 2. 



THE LA VER-EXOD. 30: 1 7-21. 

Having in our last, advanced as far as the Altar of Burnt 
Offering, we will now consider the Brazen Laver. It stood 
between the altar and the door of the tabernacle. Its dimensions 
are not given. It was made of copper alone, from the polished 
copper mirrors (incorrectly -looking glasses. A. V.) of the 
Hebrew women. The laver was kept filled with water for the 
washing of the priests. When Moses, by command of God, 
would consecrate Aaron and his sons, he brought them first to 
the laver. Not only so, but the priests were bound under penalty 
of death, to always wash their hands and feet before entering the 
tabernacle or engaging in the work of sacrifice. They were not to 
wash simply if they thought it necessary, or when it was 
convenient, or in any way they imagined would pass for the 
ceremony and not incur God's displeasure. They might not wash 
one hand or one foot, or sprinkle a few drops on each. No ! the 
thought must be ever before them: "Be ye holy for I am holy." 
They must wash and be clean. 

Thus the laver clearly typifies baptism. We come by the brazen 
altar to the laver. It is not our offering, however, which entitles 
us to the benefits of the laver. Jesus is the altar, and by or 
through Jesus' offering, we approach to be washed. Without this 
washing, we have no part or lot in the matter. 

The consecration of the priests, as we have seen, began at the 
laver. The law said: Cast off your filthy garments, be washed, be 
clean, and be robed in the pure linen of the priesthood-Christ's 
righteousness. There was but one laver. At this and this only, the 
priests must wash —We find no other provision made. But, says 
some one: The high priest washed in the holy place on the day 
of atonement. True, but the laver and the altar were in the holy 
place. The difficulty arises from an obscure translation of Paul's 
description of the tabernacle in Hebrews. All within the snowy 
linen curtains of the court was holy. [See Ex. 28:43.] 

The laver was of one metal— copper. There was no wood in its 
construction. As we have seen in the brazen altar, and in the 



posts of the court, the corruptible wood symbolizes the fleshly, 
or human nature, and enduring copper, the divine. We find, then, 
in the laver, no provision for the flesh. Morality is of no 
account; natural goodness and self-righteousness have no place. 
That which we receive— the anointing, and the clothing upon 
with the pure linen robe of Christ's righteousness, fits us for our 
work as priests. And now fully consecrated, we may approach 
the altar and offer sacrifice. Being justified to life by being in 
Christ who is the end of the law to every one that believeth, we 
may even come and lay ourselves down with Christ on the altar, 
being called to be partakers of the sufferings of Christ-to die 
with him, that we may also live with him. Rom. 6:8, Phil. 3:10. 
As so beautifully brought out in the March No. by Bro. Russell, 
we can, in the type of baptism, symbolize this death. As Jesus, 
the great sacrifice, voluntarily laid down his flesh life, and after 
burial and through a resurrection, received from his Father 
spiritual life, so we, his followers, crucify our fleshly nature and 
rise to live a new— a spiritual life, and though not really dead as 
to the flesh, nor really alive as to the spirit, until the resurrection, 
yet God who "calleth those things, which be not as though they 
were, [when in process of accomplishment, as time is nothing to 
him,] allows us to reckon ourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, 
but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Being dead 
then, [in this sense,] we are buried with him by baptism; for as 
Paul says, "Know ye not that all we who were immersed into 
Jesus Christ, were immersed into his death?" [Amer. B. Un. 
version.] He says further: "For we have become united with the 
likeness of his death, we shall be also with that of his 
resurrection. Rom. 6:2-5. 

[Query. -When and how did Christ die? Let him that 
understands, mark.] 

Is baptism necessary to salvation? we are often asked. Do you 
believe God will send a christian to hell because he was not 
immersed; or do you suppose a few drops of water will keep any 
one out of heaven? We can at least answer it is always safe to do 
God's will, and it ought to be a pleasure. The popular notions of 
heaven and hell, baptism and salvation, are not of the Bible, and 
although the disobedient may sometimes seem to be greatly 
blessed, it proves nothing to the point, for even the wicked may 
flourish like a green-bay tree. We are sure of this: that those who 
know the Master's will, and did it not, will be beaten with many 
stripes and compelled to obey in the coming age, when alas, it 
will be too late to gain the high calling; for certainly in God's 
word we find no way revealed of entering the priesthood and the 
holies but by the laver. If any will climb up some other way, he 
must abide the consequences. See also, Ex. 30:20, Num. 16:1, 1 
Chron. 13:10. 

There was but one laver, not three. It was a laver too, not a 
hyssop branch. If sprinkling is baptism, how can it symbolize 



Christ's death and resurrection-or how indeed illustrate our faith 
and hope in dying with him that we too may rise to live a new 
and Spiritual life? While the laver is primarily a type of baptism, 
yet as a symbol and more particularly, because it is in a further 
sense a symbol of life, it would seem to point to several objects. 
Like nearly every type, it points to Christ-to Christ as the 
fountain of cleansing; to Christ as the resurrection and the life. It 
seems peculiarly to link together the spirit, the water, and the 
blood, as the agents by which we are washed from our natural 
filthiness, and through which we attain to life. 

Water in its purity, in its beauty, and in its all pervading power, 
is a fit symbol of Christ our Life, since it is the life of all organic 
nature. The tiny blade of grass and the giant oak are alike 
supported by water. In the glistening dew drop, in the refreshing 
rain and in the mighty torrent we see its power. The colors of the 
humble violet and of the grand heaven-spanning rainbow, alike 
reveal its beauty. The gentle murmur of the brook and the 
ceaseless roar of old ocean unite in proclaiming the praises of 
our Creator and Life-giver. Through the veins of the vegetable 
world circulates the (water) sap, causing the apparently dead 
plant to spring up into new life, and to send forth shoots covered 
with beautiful flowers and fruits. Through the arteries of the 
animal kingdom, darts the bright, red blood, carrying life and 
power to every member. Ascending still higher in the scale of 
creation, we find the blood-life superceded by the life spiritual 
with correspondingly higher powers. And so the vegetable 
kingdom, the animal kingdom, and the spiritual kingdom unite 
in one, witnessing for Christ, our life. 

Here at the laver the new life of the christian begins. Jesus said 
to Nicodemus: "Truly, truly, I say to thee, if any one be not born 
of water and spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God. " [Em. 
Diag., John 3:5.] Here the begetting by the spirit and the word 
takes place; it is reckoned as a full birth and symbolized by the 
rising from the watery grave— the grave of the old carnal nature. 
Of course the carnal nature does not really die here, but it is so 
reckoned, (the process having begun) because if faithful, we will 
ultimately kill it by crucifixion of the flesh. 

Water is a symbol of truth, both as a cleansing and as a life- 
giving power. Paul tells us that Christ gave himself for the 
church, "that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing 
of water by (or through) the word. " In praying for his own, 
Christ said: "Sanctify them through thy truth-thy word is truth." 
To his disciples he said: "Now ye are clean through the word 
that I have spoken unto you. " As water cleanses the natural, so 
truth cleanses the spiritual. As water is the life of the natural, so 
the truth of God develops the life-spiritual. Thus Jesus could 
say: "This is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only 
true God and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent." (John 17:4.) 



The laver in its washings, typified not baptism only, but the 
daily washing of the word. Not an instantaneous sanctification 
as taught by some, but a continual process or purification 
following a growth in the knowledge of the truth. No water-no 
washing, no truth, no sanctification. It is impossible for us to 
grow in the image of God only as we grow in the knowledge of 
God. We cannot copy that which we have not seen. 

In Gen. 1 :2, we find the spirit brooding over the face of the 
waters, impregnating them with the principle and power of life, 
till, under the guiding hand of God that which was powerless 
and dead, is quickened into life. In Rom. 8:1-1 1, we find man as 
powerless on account of sin, as were the waters in the beginning, 
quickened into new life by the same life-giving Spirit. Not 
resurrected from the dead by the power of the Father as some 
claim, (The passage has no allusion to the resurrection— See 
context) but quickened from a life in the flesh to a life in the 
spirit during this present Gospel age. Thus Jesus said to the 
woman of Samaria: "Whosoever drinketh of the water that I 
shall give him, shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give 
him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting 
life. " Again: "If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. 
(Jno. 4:14, 7:37-39.) In the millennial age, "the Spirit and the 

R118:page5 

Bride shall say, come and take the water of life freely. " Now we 
see but the brazen laver of the tabernacle -then Solomon's 
brazen sea; now a well of water in each believer's heart, 
overflowing many times, then the pure river of the water of life 
flowing wide and deep from out the city and over the world. 

The laver was a type of the Blood of Christ. 

There is a fountain filled with blood, 
Drawn from Immanuel's veins; 
And sinners plunged beneath that flood, 
Lose all their guilty stains. 

This is the fountain of fountains-the one and only cleansing 
laver. Is there a well of living water springing up in each 
christian heart? This is its secret spring. Is there a stream that 
makes glad the city of God? It rises here. Is there a river of life 
flowing out to the nations? Behold its source: 

Oh! the blood! the precious blood! 
That Jesus shed for me. 

How strange it seems that some who were once enlightened, 
have begun to despise this fountain. To them Christ's death is 
but a human offering-fleshly, not spiritual. They have grown 
too wise to have faith 

R118:page6 



in a "wooden cross." Surely, if he that swears by the altar, 
swears by all things thereon, he that despises the cross, despises 
him who died on it. We claim to belong to the priesthood, to 
have a right to minister in the tabernacle. How came we here? 
Whence this exalted privilege? Did not Satan triumph over 
Adam who was our head and lord of creation? Has not Satan 
become Prince of this world, and were not we his slaves? Yes, 
but we have been REDEEMED. How? Bought with a price. 
What price? Not with silver and gold, "but with the precious 
blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot. " 

The dimensions of the laver are not given, therefore, as a type, it 
must be considered unlimited. Under the Jewish dispensation, 
the people supposed that they had all the truth; that God's favor 
and love extended only to them; that all the promises, honor, and 
salvation were theirs; that the Lord really could not save but 
through them. The Gospel church affects to despise their 
narrow, ignorant prejudices, and claiming all the light and honor 
and promises and every prerogative for herself; she too, in blind 
ignorance, limits the blood and the truth and the powers of the 
Mighty One. In vain the church boasts herself against 
Atheistical Scientists, who limit nature's God by the laws he 
himself hath made, while she, claiming to magnify him, 
measures his thoughts and his Almighty arm by the puny grasp 
of her arm. Let us not forget that when Elijah our type began to 
tell the Lord how faithful he had been, and that he alone was 
worthy, God's answer was: "I have left seven thousand in Israel 
who have not bowed under Baal." 

Now we see God's grace or favor, perhaps we even catch a 
glimpse of the riches of his grace, but Paul tells us that it is only 
in the ages to come that he will show "the exceeding riches of 
his grace towards us in Christ Jesus," and "that in the 
dispensation of the fullness of times (the millennial age to which 
all prophetic times point) he will gather for himself into one, all 
things in the Christ. " Let us beware of limiting God's power and 
truth and love. Rather let us remember the oft-repeated 
declaration of the Psalmist: "His mercy endureth FOREVER. " 

There's a wideness in God's mercy, 
Like the wideness of the sea; 
There's a kindness in his justice, 
Which is more than liberty. 

W. I. M. 



R118:page6 

By putting on Christ you will put off the love of this world; you 
will live above the world while you live in it. If Christ be in the 
heart, the world will be in its proper place. If you are clothed 



with the sun, the moon (all sublunary things) will be under your 
feet. 



R118:page6 



NEW AND OLD. 

MATTHEW 13:52. 



The word of the Lord is indeed well compared to a rich treasure 
house, or a precious box of jewels. Out of this treasure it is the 
Christian's privilege to bring forth one precious thing after 
another, for admiration and encouragement; and it is the 
teacher's duty and privilege, as represented by the Scribe, to 
bring forth these precious things for the edification of the flock 
of God, over which he is Overseer. 

When we receive Christ as our own— not a set of ideas merely 
about Christ, but Himself as a living, personal and loving 
Savior- we receive the whole truth. "I am the Truth." The whole 
box of jewels is ours, though at first we may know but little of 
what it contains. It is the life work of the Christian to "grow in 
grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ." 2 Pet. 3:18. 

That a perfect knowledge constitutes one a member of the body 
of Christ is a sad and dangerous error. A babe in Christ is a 
member of the body, as really as the well developed Christian. 
The capacity differs but not the relationship. The youngest and 
weakest child is a son as really as the oldest and strongest. It is 
in Christ we are to grow up in knowledge and Christian stature, 
and not out of Him in order to become members. It is in the 
Vine, and not separate from it, that the young and tender branch 
becomes a strong branch bearing fruit in abundance. "Without 
me [i.e. separate from me] ye can do nothing." John 15:5. 

The lambs and the sheep make one flock, and there is but one 
Shepherd, who superintends and cares for all. "He shall feed His 
flock like a Shepherd: He shall gather the lambs with His arm, 
and carry them in His bosom." Isa. 40:1 1. There are under 
shepherds to whom a share or agency in this work is appointed. 
In addressing Peter, Jesus said, "Feed my lambs," and also, 
"Feed my sheep." John 21:15,16. Was not this saying: Neglect 
no part-Feed the flock? Peter so understood it, for he lays 
special stress upon it when he exhorts the elders as under- 
shepherds: "Feed the flock of God, which is among you. ...And 
when the Chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown 
of glory that fadeth not away." 1 Pet. 5:2-4. 

Paul, in his address to the elders of the church at Ephesus, 
makes the same thought prominent: "Take heed therefore unto 
yourselves, and to all the flock, over which the Holy Ghost hath 



made you overseer, to feed the church of God, which he hath 
purchased with His own blood." Acts 20:28. 

One remarkable feature of the word of the Lord is that, it is 
adapted to the varied necessities of all grades of Christians. 
There is milk for babes and strong meat [food] for them that are 
of full age. Heb. 5:12-14. In this variety and adaptation is seen 
the fullness of the Shepherd's care and love. 

Babes are not to remain babes always, as the above passage 
shows, but are to grow--which is a gradual change, and thus 
leave the first principles of the doctrine of Christ, and go on to 
perfection. Heb. 6:1. The babe cannot be expected to grow up to 
manhood instantly, and Peter exhorts such to "desire the sincere 
milk of the Word, that (they) may grow thereby. 1 Peter 2:2. 

From what we have seen above the teacher is to look after the 
young and the old. Is it not then dangerous to neglect, and 
presumptuous to willingly ignore this Divine command? Is "it 
rightly dividing" the word in every true sense to attend 
exclusively to the wants of those who can take strong food, and 
let the lambs of the flock die of starvation? 

It is true that the plan of the ages is the key to the right 
application of the scriptures, and to give a clear view of the 
progression of the word as one grand whole. But while the Lord 
speaks of and deals with all His people as one person, and the 
truth is thus a lamp that lights their way, and "shineth more and 
more unto the perfect day," is not the principle of progression 
"first the blade, then the ear, and then the full corn in the ear" as 
true of each individual Christian, as of the whole spoken of as 
one person? This is evidently so, and therefore while the general 
plan is treated of, the plan of God as to each person should not 
be neglected. This we ought to do, and not to leave the other 
undone. 

The principle of growth in knowledge seems to be the key to the 
idea of "things new and old." In an important sense, all truth is 
old, but what is old, in reality, is new to us, when it comes to our 
view. What is old to one is new to another, hence those who are 
far advanced should be interested in and have patience with 
those who are not so far advanced, but who are following on to 
know the Lord. What was once obscure to us has now become 
apparent, and what is now obscure may yet become clear to our 
minds. Let none be discouraged because others seem to see what 
he cannot see, and let none condemn the other because he 
cannot see as his brother. 

R119:page6 

Indeed it is a small matter for any of us to be judged of another 
man's judgment; to his own Master each one stands or falls. 

All truth is in harmony, whether old or new. What was true at 
any time in the past must be true yet. If the presence of Christ- 



which was and is the gist of the harvest message— was advanced 
truth between 1875 and 1878, it must be true yet; and if it is not 
true now, instead of being advanced light then it was terrible 
darkness. If the equality of the two dispensations, the other 
beautiful time arguments, and all the parallels were developed 
by the virgins, while they were all in the darkness of sleep, as is 
claimed by those who say they "all slumbered and slept" until 
the Spring of 1878, then those glorious truths were and are 
nothing but a glorious dream, and are therefore a very insecure 
and unworthy foundation to build upon after waking up. Why 
build upon the parallels, as the ground of expecting Christ at any 
time in the future, when if Christ's coming is wholly in the 
future, and we are not "in the days of the Son of Man," there are 
no parallels between the ending of the Jewish and Gospel ages? 
An essential feature of the parallelism, as is well known by all 
who understand the time arguments, lies in the fact that Christ's 
coming was due to begin in 1 844. That as He left heaven at His 
coming in the flesh, so he left the Most Holy- "heaven itself" in 
1844. 

We have sometimes been accused by unbelievers for teaching 
that the true way to advance was to displace the truth we learned 
yesterday by new truth learned to-day; but we utterly repudiate 
the absurd charge. To grow in knowledge is to retain the truth 
we have and add to our stock. 

We believe we are and should be as willing as ever to learn new 
truth, and unlearn error, whether old or new, but we are not 
willing to accept as advanced light what is not in harmony with 
the prophetic foundation on which we are building, until that 
foundation is proved false. We hope also for the sake of the 
flock of God that no one will claim to build on the same 
foundation and give what is called "advanced light," while 
virtually ignoring that foundation. All are not able- (Some are 
able)— to detect the sophistry, and therefore become confused. 
May the Lord enable those who do see, to help those who do not 
see, by a clear and earnest defense of the truth. 

J. H. P. 



Rl 19: page 6 



SET FOR DEFENSE. 



In the earnest defense of what we believe to be truth, and for the 
sake of those who have not as much time to devote to study, and 
who are therefore not as familiar with our prophetic position, 
when we state an error, by whomsoever taught, for the purpose 
of making the truth plainer by contrast, it may sometimes appear 
like a personal attack, and our earnestness may be taken for 



personal animosity. This is especially the case where but one 
person teaches the error to which we refer. 

R119:page7 

But we would say that we are not opposing men, but what we 
believe to be false ideas; and have nothing but the kindest 
feelings and the best of wishes for those whom we regard as in 
error. We do not intend to make any personal attack upon the 
motive or character of any one, from the Pope of Rome, who 
represents a great Hierarchy, to the person who represents 
himself. We honor, and sometimes greatly love, a fair 
antagonist, and never intend to disfellowship any brother in 
Christ because of a mere difference of opinion. 

Neither is it our purpose through this paper to defend ourselves 
against insinuations or garbled and false statements. We keenly 
feel such things, and they are hard to bear, but we will look to 
the Lord for help and patience. We do not even insinuate that 
false statements are always intentionally false. We will leave 
that, too, with Him who knows the hearts of all. If the Lord can 
afford to let His cause suffer in any way by the 
misrepresentation of any of His children, surely it should fortify 
us to bear patiently. We do not pretend to be indifferent to our 
reputation with good men, but, we care more to be "Popular 
with One Man"-the Lord Jesus, than for any earthly honor. 

We think we have good precedents in the New Testament for 
our earnest defense of truth, even by the opposition and contrast 
of error. We are instructed to contend earnestly for the faith, 
against the inroads and attacks of men, (Jude 3,4), and Paul 
condemns those who taught that the resurrection was past 
already and overthrew the faith of some. 2 Tim. 2:16-18. 

No Christian is blamed for specifying the acknowledged errors 
of Paganism, and no Protestant is blamed for pointing out the 
errors of the Papacy, but if we specify the false teachings of one 
person, we are blamed for being personal. This ought not so to 
be. It is as necessary to expose an error taught by one as by a 
thousand. We have never found fault with any one for 
specifying what in our teaching was supposed to be error, and 
for endeavoring earnestly to show wherein we were wrong. All 
we ask for is fairness and candor. What we ask for ourselves we 
desire to give to others. 

J. H. P. 



R119:page7 



EXTRACTS FROM 
"THE THREE WORLDS." 

P. 42.-"Angels, or spiritual beings have the power to appear in 
different forms.... Hence, fallen angels can appear in the form 
and character of any person they choose to represent, as easily 
as Christ could appear as a gardener, stranger, or with pierced 
hands and side. It is useless to deny their wonderful 
developments. And that they do now materialize themselves and 
appear in actual likeness of the person they choose to represent, 
is placed beyond all reasonable doubt by the testimony of 
numerous and creditable eye-witnesses. AND THAT THEY 
WILL YET DO STILL MORE WONDERFUL THINGS as 
claimed by their votaries we cannot doubt. That they may yet eat 
and drink, and thus actually consume food of man is not at all 
improbable. " 

P. 52. "Many seem to think that a spiritual body is not a literal 
body. In other words, that it is not a real body. Literal, says 
Webster, means real, not figurative or metaphorical. 'There is a 
natural (animal) body, and there is a spiritual body.' (1 Cor. 
15:44.) Does any one suppose the apostle here teaches that there 
is a real body, and there is a figurative, or metaphorical body, 
and as we have born the image of the real we shall bear the 
image of the metaphorical? One would suppose they so read, 
from their exceeding blindness in recognizing any but the 
natural, or animal body. They seem fearful lest, if the idea be 
entertained, that Christ comes the second time in any other than 
an animal body, it will lead to the rejection of a literal 
resurrection, &c. 

We do reject the idea of the saints being raised a natural, or 
animal body, and if that is rejecting a literal resurrection of the 
saint, we must plead guilty, and beg to be excused simply on the 
ground that the Almighty has said: 'It is raised a spiritual body.' 

Now will some one inform me why it is unscriptural, or 
fanatical to maintain that Christ has a spiritual; and, as the saints 
are to be like him, that they are raised spiritual bodies? Because 
some seem to think that a spiritual body is not real, but is only a 
metaphorical body; and that nothing is real except it is 'of the 
earth, earthy,' is no reason why those who can discern spiritual 
things, which the natural man cannot, (see 1 Cor. 2:14) should 
remain in darkness. The two cases on record, in which a spiritual 
body is described, (Dan. 10:6, and Rev. 1:12) represent a very 
nice kind of a body, and one which Daniel appeared to think was 
real. And we have the promise of being made like unto his 
glorious body; and that as we have born the image of the earthy, 
we shall also bear the image of the heavenly. The first man and 
his race are of the dust of the ground, and therefore, of the earth. 
Christ also took upon him our nature, to work out a plan by 
which we can take upon us his nature; and as he has born the 
image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the 



heavenly. 'Yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, 
henceforth know we him no more.' Many seem to think that 
because Christ appeared under a vail of flesh, after his 
resurrection, just as the Lord appeared to Abraham, that in some 
way they are to know him again, after the flesh. The world may 
see him thus, but we shall see him as he is; and not under a vail. 

To the natural man it is foolishness, neither can he understand 
the things of the Spirit. Hence, to teach that one who is born of 
the Spirit can come and go like the wind, is foolishness to them. 
If they cannot rise above the flesh, how can they believe when 
told of heavenly things? Hence, the only course left for them, is 
to explain away these texts. 

When it is said, 'This same Jesus which ye have now seen go 
into heaven, shall so come, in like manner as ye have seen him 
go,' the 'NATURAL MAN' at once fixes his mind on, not the 
Jesus who would suddenly appear in their midst, and then vanish 
out of their sight, and who was mysteriously invisible during 
most of that forty days of his presence in his spiritual body; but 

R120:page7 

on Jesus in the flesh, FORGETTING that we are to 'know him 
NO MORE AFTER THE FLESH.' The Jesus that went away, 
was the one born of the Spirit-a being who, according to his 
own words, is as INVISIBLE TO MORTALS without a miracle 
as is the wind. He would suddenly appear in their midst, 'the 
doors being shut' -and then-' vanish out of their sight.' Nor 
could they tell 'whence He came, or whither He went; so is 
every one that is born of the Spirit.' 

This is the Jesus who went away, and who comes again 'IN 
LIKE MANNER.' There are EXPERTS at explaining away 
scripture, who can dispose of these things and make them mean 
nothing, I admit, and so they can any and all scripture; 
nevertheless, the word of God standeth." 



NOTE:— As we may be accused of garbling the above we would 
refer our readers to the book and pages named that they may see 
for themselves. Italics are the Author's; small capitals are ours. 



R120:page7 

CALL NO MAN MASTER. 

Our Blessed Son took occasion to teach his disciples both by 
precept and example. Hence, when the disciples had been 
tempted to discuss the question as to who should be seated in the 
kingdom of Heaven, "He taught them that he who would be first 
must be last of all, and servant of all, and that the road to honor 
is humility. Then taking a little child and setting him in the 



midst of them He said: "Whosoever shall receive this child in 
my name, receiveth me; and whosoever receiveth me receiveth 
him that sent me: for he that is least among you all, the same 
shall be great. " Ah, my brother, this disposition for precedence 
is human and not divine. It manifested itself in forbidding those 
who walked not with them, but the Son rebuked them. Jesus had 
taught them not to follow the example of the Scribes and 
Pharisees, for says he, "One is your Master, even the Christ; and 
all ye are brethren. " 

These clear and positive utterances of our blessed Son are 
confirmed and enforced by the apostle Paul, when he argues, 
that the body is not one member but many, and that each has his 
own legitimate office to perform, and that upon the uncomely 
parts we bestow the more abundant comeliness. And this is the 
logical conclusion he deduced from that great argument he 
employs in the fourth chapter of Ephesians, where he says, "the 
Lord gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, 
evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers." He then proceeds 
to tell the reason why he gave these officials to the body, the 
church, namely, "for perfecting the saints, for the work of the 
ministry, for the building up the body of the Christ. " 

This service then belongs to the Saints, not to particular 
individuals of them; those special gifts ceased since they 
fulfilled their functions, and all we remain equally brethren, with 
no right to lord it over each other, and any effort to so do, only 
leads to carnality, namely, divisions, envyings, strifes. We are 
yet equally in the school of our risen Lord, to be disciplined and 
perfected by the instrumentalities He has provided; and when 
thus perfected and meet for the Master's garner, we have 
performed our mission here, because our building up agency, 
results from the reflex action of life and character on one 
another. And not till our Lord appears in His glory will we be 
called upon to act officially, and then not over our brethren, but 
the world. Let us then learn to walk as brethren towards each 
other. 

G. B. S. 



R120 : page 8 



WILL THE SPIRIT BE WITHDRAWN? 

At what point will the Spirit's work for Christians be complete? 
We answer, not until we are born of the Spirit. Our Head-the 
Lord Jesus Christ-was born of the Spirit more than 1 800 years 
ago, and we as members of His body must and will follow Him 
into the same life, and by the same power of the Holy Spirit. The 
birth of the Head secures the birth of the body in due time. 



If as some claim Christ the Head is to return to His church under 
the vail of the flesh to complete the education of His church, and 
that then because He returns, the Spirit is to be withdrawn, 
would it not prove the Spirit incompetent to do the work to 
which He was appointed by the Lord Himself, viz: to lead us 
into all truth and bring us to the birth. 

The Spirit is Christ representative in us, and Paul uses the terms 
"Spirit of God," "Spirit of Christ" and "Christ in you" 
interchangeably. Rom. 8:9-10. Now if an external, visible Christ 
is superior teacher to Christ in us, it would not have been 
expedient for us for Christ to go away and send the Comforter. 

It is Christ in us, or the indwelling of the spirit, that makes us 
Christians or sons of God. Rom. 8:8-17. This is the real and only 
difference between us and the world. He strives with the man of 
the world to lead him to God; but he dwells in the Christian. We 
can conceive the idea of the Spirit's (for some special reason) 
ceasing to strive with man, as when the Lord spoke to Noah: 
"My spirit shall not always strive with man; " but we cannot 
conceive the idea of the spirit being withdrawn from the 
Christian, without his ceasing to be a Christian. Take the spirit 
from the church, and they would be nothing but a company of 
mere natural men-men in the flesh. "So, then, they that are in 
the flesh cannot please God. But ye are not in the flesh, but in 
the spirit, if so be that the spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any 
man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of His." Rom. 8:8,9. 
The only way that the work of the spirit can cease is by being 
perfected. In this sense, Paul speaks of several things ceasing— 
prophecies, tongues and knowledge (1 Cor. 13:8); but he 
explains it: "For we know in part and we prophesy in part, but 
when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part 
shall be done away." Verses 9,10. So also, he says, a child 
ceases to be a child by becoming a man. Ver. 1 1 . "Now we see 
through a glass darkly, but then face to face. " We can only cease 
to be begotten children of God by being born. God's plan moves 
on to perfection. 

That it is possible that we might be born of the Spirit, and for a 
time remain in appearance as natural men, as did Christ, after He 
was raised from the dead, we do not deny. Such may be the 
case. But the Spirit cannot resign his work until it is complete. 

J. H. P. 



R120 : page 8 

THE EDITOR'S TRIP EAST. 

June 29, 1880, BERWICK, PA. 



Dear readers: -Many will be glad to learn that my trip, now 
about ended, has been a very pleasant one. The unpleasant 
features about it being the briefness of the visit at each place and 
the farewells as we parted. Many of the dear friends whom we 
had never met before, seemed, after the two or three days' visit, 
to be life- long acquaintances. We recognized in each other the 
spirit of adoption into the one family, and our membership of 
the one body of Christ; and we felt ourselves drawn to each 
other and cemented by "that which every joint supplieth"— love. 

The arrangements were carried out as noticed in our last, except 
at Montrose, Pa., where we were unable to make railway 
connections. 

The meetings averaged from four to six hours per day at each 
place, and we trust, have been profitable to the hearers; tending 
to strengthen, encourage, and establish them in the present truth. 
With the exception of the bodily fatigue attendant upon so much 
traveling and speaking, the month has been a round of pleasure 
to your Editor, who returns home feeling much encouraged and 
refreshed, by the contact with so many loving, sympathizing 
hearts, alive with the Spirit of Christ. 

We have seemed to realize more than ever, Jesus' words: "Ye 
shall have in this life a hundred fold- houses, lands, mothers, 
brothers and sisters." We have a hundred homes open to us if 
ever we go the same direction again. That the invitations to 
come again were sincere, was attested by the firm grasp of the 
hand, the moist eye, and "God bless you," at parting. 

On the whole, the effects of the visit were so satisfactory that I 
rather feel impressed that it may be Our Father's will that I go 
among the dear flock more. We shall wait for His leading, and 
go as the way seems to open, probably however in other 
directions. 

How dear brother Paul would have enjoyed such a trip as the 
one just ending. It would have required more than a year to 
accomplish the same results in his day. But evil also has new 
channels and 

R121 : page 8 

rapidly increases, and if we would be faithful we must take 
advantage of every circumstance. 

Another thought has been suggested to my mind by my 
becoming personally acquainted with the saints, viz: If it did me 
good to know them and of their affairs, would it not do all of the 
readers good, to know of the welfare of each other? I think it 
would, and propose to furnish a corner of the "WATCH 
TOWER'S" space each month for your correspondence. Let us 
all know every little while, say every three months, how the 
Lord prospers you; whether you keep up your meetings with 
those of like precious faith, etc. Make it brief and pithy; a few 



lines on a postal card will do. Thus our interest in each other 
will be enlarged and all will be blessed. Who will start it? 

Your brother in Christ, 

C. T. RUSSELL. 



R121 : page 8 



WHAT EFFECT. 



The writer once heard a preacher talking in defense of the idea 
that a "Clean Theology" is the "Wedding Garment," make a 
statement in substance like the following: "I wish my hearers 
would all stop trying to be good, and give your attention to 
gaining a knowledge of God's plan." We ask, would the 
tendency of such exhortation be to lead men to a higher and 
purer life? We think not. How different from the exhortations of 
the apostles. "Let us walk honestly as in the day; not in rioting 
and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in 
strife and envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and 
make not provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. " 
Rom. 13:13-14. 

For a list of the works of the flesh see Gal. 5:19-21. The apostle 
adds: "They which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom 
of God." "Let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season 
we shall reap, if we faint not. As we have therefore opportunity 
let us do good unto all men, especially unto them who are of the 
household of faith." Gal. 6:9-10. "Be ye therefore followers of 
God as dear children and walk in love." Eph 5:1-2. After 
speaking of the manner of the world, he says: "Let no man 
deceive you with vain words: for because of these things cometh 
the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Be not ye 
therefore partakers with them. For ye were sometimes darkness; 
but now are ye light in the Lord: walk as children of light: For 
the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness and righteousness and 
truth." Verses 6-10. 

"Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things 
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are 
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of 
good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, 
think on these things." Phil. 4:8. "Mortify therefore your 
members which are upon the earth; fornication, uncleanness, 
&c." Col. 3:5. "Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and 
beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, 
meekness, long suffering, &c. Verses 12-14. After speaking of 
"many foolish and hurtful lusts," the Apostle adds: "But thou, O 
man of God, flee these things; and follow after righteousness, 
godliness, faith, love, patience and meekness." 1 Tim. 6:11. "Let 
us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering.... And 



let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to good 
works." Heb. 10:23-24. 

"For consider Him that endured such contradiction of sinners 
against Himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your mind. Ye 
have not yet resisted unto blood striving against sin. ...Follow 
peace with all, and holiness, without which no man shall see the 
Lord." Heb. 12:3-14. 

These are but samples of the general exhortations to the church 
by the Apostles. They do not either ignore or belittle knowledge 
or faith, but they do exalt the importance of holiness of heart and 
life. Had the Apostles held to the theory that a "Clean Theology" 
is the "Wedding Garment," they would have exhorted as they 
did, but would have said, "You need not make any effort to be 
good, but study the plan. " We do not say it was the purpose of 
the preacher referred to, to encourage sin, but we think the 
tendency would be in that direction. And surely the theory must 
be defective that leads any man to make statements at such 
variance from the teachings of the Holy Spirit. 

J. H. P. 



R121 : page 8 



NOTICE. 



We have discovered that there is a defect in the binding of a 
few copies of the "Day Dawn." If any imperfect ones have been 
sent out, and the persons having received them will notify us, 
stating the defect, we will gladly make good by sending others. 

J. H. P. 



"DAY DAWN;" OR, 
"THE GOSPEL IN TYPE AND PROPHECY." 

Is a book of 332 pages, which should be in the hands of all bible 
students, as a book not only of information, but of reference. 
ADDRESS:- A. D. JONES, No. 29 Smithfield street, 
Pittsburgh, Pa. J. H. PATON, Almont, Mich. TERMS :- 

In paper covers, postage prepaid $ .50 

6 copies, paper covers, by express 2.00 

12 copies, paper covers, by express 4.00 

Cloth covers, postage prepaid 75 

6 copies, cloth covers, postage prepaid. 3.50 
12 copies, cloth covers, by express 7.00 

Those interested, and unable to pay, are welcome to a copy free, 
by asking for it. 



R121 : page 8 



MISTAKES. 



Some of our readers seem to get Bro. Jones, publisher of the 
"Day Dawn," confused in their minds with the publisher of 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER, and as a consequence, have when 
ordering a book of him, mentioned that he had not sent certain 
back numbers of the PAPER. Brother Jones is in no way 
responsible for the paper. If you do not receive it regularly, there 
is fault somewhere which we will attend to if notified; but all 
communications for the paper should be addressed carefully as 
directed in first column. 

For the book— which, as mentioned in our last we think should 
be carefully read by you all and kept for reference and for 
loaning— all orders should be addressed as elsewhere mentioned 
in our column. 

We would add that as quite a number are now renewing their 
subscriptions for the "WATCH TOWER," they may, if they 
choose to save letter writing and the inconvenience of sending 
fractional currency, send their orders for books (Day Dawn) to 
us, and we will hand over all such orders with money, etc., to 
brother Jones. 

EDITOR. 



R122 : page 1 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., AUGUST, 1880. 

NO. 2. 

page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 
L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R122 : page 1 



A REASON FOR THE HOPE. 

DIALOGUE. 

Questioner.— It is some time since we have had a talk together 
Brother W., and I have called now to make a few inquiries. I 
want you to give me in a few words, your reasons for believing 
that Jesus is now present. 

Watchman.— I am glad to talk with you upon so interesting a 
subject, and shall try to answer your queries. You are aware, I 
presume, that I and all the writers for the WATCH TOWER 
believe that Jesus has come the second time, and is now present 
in the world, and for this reason our paper is also called the 
"Herald of Christ's Presence. " If I understand your question, you 
want me to refresh your memory briefly on the reasons for so 
believing. 

Q. -Exactly. Of course all Christians believe that Jesus has been 
spiritually present with his church during all the Gospel Age, as 
He said: "Lo, I am with you always even unto the end of the 
world" [age]. In what sense is he now present, as He has not 
always been, and what are the proofs? 

W.— Let us for a moment then drop the idea of time and of His 
now being present, and see how He will be in His day, whether 
that day be now or a thousand years hence. First, come back 
2,000 years to the time when Jesus "being in the form of God, 
thought it not robbery to be equal with God" (when he was in 
glory.) See Him lay aside the glory which he had with the Father 
before the world was, and being rich for our sakes become poor. 
See Him take upon Him the form of a servant for the suffering 
of death. " Notice now the difference between bodily form of 
God and the form of servants; They are totally different and He 
must leave the one to take the other. 

Secondly, notice why He took the form of a servant. We read— 
for the suffering of death. God is a spirit, has a spiritual body, 
and could not die under any circumstances, for a spiritual body 
is an immortal, [undying] body, (1 Cor. 15). Man being a sinner, 
condemned to death and unable to release himself, Jesus became 
his ransom, giving His life a ransom for ours. We were 
redeemed from death, or justified to life, "by the precious blood 
[death] of Christ. " We see then that Jesus laid aside the form of 
God and took the form of man, so that He might pay our penalty 
for us— die for us. 

Thirdly, notice that when he had died "even the death of the 
cross" the purpose or object in taking our form was 
accomplished, and there is no reason why He should have the 
form of a servant since He died. And we claim that He is not 
now a man glorified, that He has not been a man since "the man 
Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom for all." I claim that these 
two natures-divine and human-are separate and distinct, that as 



He left the divine to take the human, so also He left the human 
when He resumed the divine. 

Jesus was put to death in the flesh but quickened [made alive] 
by the spirit. Let us look at this expression, "made alive by the 
spirit. " To what kind of life? Was it the life of the flesh that was 
quickened? No, it was spiritual life. Listen; Jesus tells 
Nicodemus "That which is born of the flesh is flesh, (Jesus as a 
man was born of a woman and was flesh, thus taking human 
nature,) and that which is born of the spirit is spirit. " Jesus at His 
resurrection was "born of the spirit," therefore was not flesh but 
spirit. He is called "the first-born from the dead," and was 
"quickened by the spirit." 

So it will be with us; we shall be satisfied when we awake in His 
likeness. Not in the likeness of men which He took for a 
purpose. We have that likeness now, but when "we see Him as 
He is we shall be like Him" and be satisfied-be like unto 
Christ's glorious body. 

Nor doth it yet appear, 
How great we shall be made, 
But when we see Him as He is, 
We shall be like our Head. " 

Q.--I see then that you understand the text, "Put to death in the 
flesh, quickened by the spirit" as being of the same import as the 
one which speaking of the death and resurrection of the Saints, 
says: "It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body;" 
and "as we now bear the image of the earthly, we shall then bear 
the image of the heavenly. " 

W.— Yes, very true, but let us not lose our subject. It is Jesus and 
His new condition after His resurrection, not what we shall be, 
although the inferential reasoning that our vile and earthly 
bodies must undergo so great a change, to be like His heavenly, 
or glorious body before we can see Him as he is, is the very best 
kind of proof that He is not and has not been, since His 
resurrection, like us, that is, in the form of a servant. 

Q.— If Jesus after his resurrection was a glorious spiritual body, 
how was it that the disciples never saw his glorious body? Why 
did he appear to them as he had done before his death? 

W. -If Jesus had appeared to them and shown his glory, they 
would probably have been so alarmed as to be unable to receive 
instructions; besides if they had gone forth saying the Lord arose 
and appeared to us in glory, they would have been accused of 
telling ghost stories. Remember that the object of Jesus 
appearing to them was to convince them that "He who was dead 
is alive forevermore;" that they might go forth as "witnesses." 
Being a spiritual body it was simply a question of expediency— 
which way could he best appear to them, i.e., in which way 
would his object in appearing be best accomplished? He could 



appear as a "flame of fire," as the angel of the Lord (also a 
spiritual body) had appeared to Moses "in the burning bush. " 
Thus Jesus might have appeared to, and talked with the 
disciples, or he might have appeared in glory as the angel did to 
Daniel, or as he afterward did to John and to Saul of Tarsus. 

If he had so appeared, they would doubtless also have had "great 
fear and quaking" and would have fallen to the ground before 
Him and "become as dead men; " or he could do, as angels had 
done and as he had done with Abraham (Gen. 1 8) when he 
appeared as a man. This last he saw to be the best way and he 
did appear as a man. But notice he did not appear to them as he 
had done before His death. First he appeared to Mary as the 
gardener and she "saw Jesus standing and knew not that it was 
Jesus." "After that he appeared in another form unto two of 
them" as they went to Emmaus (Luke 24:13). They knew not 
that it was Jesus, until he revealed Himself in breaking of bread. 
Then he vanished from their sight. 

Again, some had given up all hope of being any longer fishers of 
men and had gone again to their nets. They had toiled all night 
and caught nothing. In the morning Jesus is on the shore within 
speaking distance but they "knew not that it was Jesus." It was 
another form. He works a miracle giving them a boat full of fish 
in a moment; John, the loving disciple, remembers the feeding 
of the 3,000 and 5,000, the strange days in which they were 
living, and that Jesus had appeared to them already. He seems at 
once to discern who gave the draught of fishes; and said: "It is 
the Lord. " He recognized him not by the natural eye but by the 
eye of faith, and when they were come to shore "none of them 
dare ask him who art thou, knowing (feeling sure from the 
miracle for they saw not the print of the nails) that it was the 
Lord" (John 21). Thus did Jesus appear to his disciples at 
different times, to make of them witnesses of His resurrection, 
seemingly he was present but unseen during most of those forty 
days appearing in all, perhaps, not more than seven times. (John 
20:26,21:14.) 

Q.-What object could there be for His appearing in so many 
different forms? 

W.--I presume it was to guard against their idea that he was a 
fleshly body, by appearing in various forms and in miraculous 
ways, coming into their midst, the doors being shut, and 
vanishing from their sight. He not only showed that He had 
undergone a change since death, but He illustrated his own 
teaching to Nicodemus, that every one born of the spirit (that 
born of the spirit is spirit) can go and come like the wind. "Thou 
canst not tell whence it cometh and whither it goeth, so is 
everyone that is born of the spirit." So did Jesus go and come. 
"But some doubted"-some wanted to thrust their hand into his 
side and put their fingers into the print of the nails; and Jesus 
thus appears, whether it was the same body that had been 



crucified, or one like it, I know not nor does it make any 
difference, in any case it was not his body, for he had been 
"quickened of the spirit"-a spiritual body— "sown a natural 
body raised a spiritual body," and none of the various forms or 
bodies in which he appeared were His body. They were only 
veils of the flesh which hid or covered the glorious spiritual 
body, just as angels had often used the same human form to veil 
themselves when appearing to mortals. 

Q.— One point which seems to confuse some is, that Jesus ate 
and drank with the disciples and said, "Handle me, for a spirit 
hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have. " How do you 
explain this? 

R123 : page 1 

W.~ It does not need to be explained away. Jesus affirms just 
what we have claimed, viz: That the body they saw and handled 
and which ate with them was not his 

R123 : page 2 

spiritual body for the spirit hath not flesh and bones. Look back 
to the time when the Lord and two angels appeared to Abraham. 
(Gen. 18.) Jesus had not then left "the form of God" and taken 
the form of a servant. He was a spiritual body then, and it had 
not flesh and bones but he then used the human form as a veil. 
He ate and drank and talked and could have said to Abraham, 
"Handle me, this body which you see is 'flesh and bones.'" 

"THIS SAME JESUS SHALL SO COME 
IN LIKE MANNER." 

Q.— Now with regard to Jesus' second coming, does not this text 
(Acts 1:11) teach that when he comes he will be seen by his 
watching disciples? Will he not appear in the flesh to prove that 
he has come? 

W.-No, I think not. There is not a word about the disciple or 
any one else seeing him. It merely tells us that he will come as 
he went. How did he go? With trumpet blasts and shouts or 
wails of the people of earth? No, but quietly and unseen of the 
world. As he said before he died, "Yet a little while and the 
world seeth me no more. " And the world did not see him after 
his resurrection. During the forty days he was seldom seen, 
showing himself only to his disciples. Did he go mid pealing 
thunder, flashing lightnings and rending rocks? No, quietly, 
unknown of the world, he "ascended up where he was before." 
Whenever he comes he will come in the same quiet manner, 
unknown of the world. We know from other scriptures that his 
church will not be in darkness. 

Q.--I see that there is nothing in this text to teach that when he 
should come he would be seen, but does it not seem reasonable 
to suppose that he will so appear? 



W. -There is no question as to his ability to appear now as then; 
but before calling your attention to scriptures which seem to 
teach that he will be present unseen, let me remind you that 
while it was necessary that he should then appear to make his 
disciples eye-witnesses of his resurrection, no such necessity 
now exists. He comes now not to call out a people to believe on 
Him, but to glorify a people already separated by his call then 
issued; to glorify his virgin church and make her His bride; "to 
make up His jewels." 

Thomas, who doubted and must see the print of the nails before 
he could believe, lived not in the Gospel Age but in the Jewish, 
not among spiritual children of God, but in the fleshly house 
(until Pentecost). He was used to seeing things after the flesh, 
and had not his eye of faith yet opened. Yet in Jesus' words to 
Thomas it would seem that he had expected even more from 
him. Jesus said to him: "Because thou hast seen me thou hast 
believed; happy those who see not and believe." (John 21:29. 
Diaglott). 

Would we consider it expedient for an earthly teacher after 
training his class up, up, up to the higher branches of learning to 
complete their studies by giving them a three months course in 
the alphabet. But this would be no more unreasonable than to 
suppose that our education in the school of faith, and growth in 
grace and knowledge under our Master's instructions, should be 
finished by illustrations in the flesh; "Having begun in the Spirit 
are ye now made perfect by the flesh?" (Gal. 3:3.) "It is the spirit 
that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing. " 

Q.— It does not seem as though much benefit would result to us 
by merely gratifying our desire to see him, and I remember he 
said before going: "It is expedient for you that I go away." 
"Unless I go away the comforter cannot come." Would this 
involve the thought that when he comes again the comforter will 
be withdrawn? 

W.-No, the reason the comfort of the Holy Spirit could not 
come was, that all were sinners and God could not recognize 
and comfort sinners. They must first be justified by Jesus' death. 
Afterward being justified by his death, we have peace with God. 
We become His children, and to such, He sends the spirit of 
adoption whereby we cry "Abba, (our) Father." Before this spirit 
could be sent to any, Jesus must not only die, but He must also 
ascend to the Father's presence and present the evidence of our 
purchase as typified by the High Priest's going into the holy 
place and sprinkling the blood. The coming out of the holy place 
(heaven) by our high priest does not undo the work of 
justification. We are still justified, and shall be forever; still sons 
and shall always be such, and consequently always possess the 
spirit as a comforter. It is the spirit of Christ. "Let the Spirit of 
Christ dwell in you richly. " 



Q.-If I understand you aright your view is, that though it was 
expedient that Jesus go from the world and present the proof of 
our ransom before the Holy Spirit, could come to us, yet the 
continuance of the Spirit's comforting presence is not dependent 
on his absence, for once given, it will never be withdrawn from 
those who abide in Him. 

W.— Yes, but let us not leave our subject: We seem to agree then 
that so far as we can see, there would be nothing to be gained by 
Jesus' appearing in the flesh to us at his second coming. But 
another point, if he should so appear, what satisfaction would or 
could it give any of us. It would not be Him we would see, for 
He is not flesh and if Jesus should so appear to me I should pray 
as did Moses,-Lord that I might see thy Glory— that I might see 
thee really, not an appearance, but thyself, thy glorious body, as 
Saul and John saw thee, as thou art. Oh no, I never could be 
satisfied with seeing an appearance of Jesus; I want to see Him 
as he is. "I shall be satisfied when I awake in thy likeness," not 
by His appearing in our likeness. 

Remember too that he tells us about the time of his presence, 
before we "are made like Him." He says the world will not know 
of it but will go on eating, planting, building, marrying, etc., and 
"know not" of his (parousia) presence. Matt. 24:37-39. Luke 
17:26. 

Not only does Jesus intimate that his coming and presence will 
be unknown to the world, but that many of His servants will be 
so asleep, and overcharged with the things of this world, that the 
day of the Lord (His presence) will be upon them as a snare, and 
some will "begin to smite their fellow servants, saying: My Lord 
(the Bridegroom) delay eth His coming" while the ones smitten 
evidently are taking the opposite ground, viz: that the 
bridegroom does not delay, but is present. "Blessed is that 
servant whom his Lord when he (ako) has come shall find, 
giving meat in due season to the household of faith. (The meat 
due when the Lord has come, would unquestionably be, the 
evidences or proofs of His presence.) Evidently the presence is 
one not recognized by the natural eye, but by the eye of faith, 
else there could be no disagreement between the servants as to 
the fact of His presence. (Matt. 24:44-49.) 

Jesus tells us to beware, that false teachers will arise saying, 
"Lo, here or lo, there, believe them not, I will not come in any 
such seen manner, but as the "lightning" which cannot be seen 
(electricity, unseen, can go six to ten times around the earth in 
one second,) so shall the Son of Man be in His day. " (Luke 
17:24.) As the lightning when present frequently sends forth 
light which may be seen by those awake, so Jesus intimates that 
in His days of presence light will shine. 

Q.-That seems a beautiful thought taken in connection with the 
wonderful amount of spiritual light and truth which has shone 



on us and to us during the very years you claim as being the 
days of the presence of the Son of Man-since 1875. 

W.— Now we will glance hurriedly at some of the evidences that 
we are now in "the days of the Son of Man. " I will not attempt 
to prove the points of time. You can get them in full detail in 
Bro. Paton's new book, "Day Dawn," which you should by all 
means read. 

Q.--I have followed you so far, and can agree with your position 
fully, but when you come to prove that Jesus is now present and 
ask me to believe it without any sight evidence, I am afraid I 
have not strong enough faith to believe it. 

W.--I have not asked you to believe it, Bro. Q. I never ask any 
one to believe, I simply give the evidence; If it is as strong to 
them as to me they cannot help believing it. Now, you seem to 
think that if we had a little sight it would help matters. Let me 
remind you of a word from Peter. He was writing of things he 
had seen when on the mount of transfiguration; but when he has 
finished the narrative of the things seen, he adds: "But we have a 
more sure word of Prophecy whereunto ye do well that ye take 
heed." (2 Pet. 1:19.) And so I think now, the prophecies are 
more convincing to me than if Jesus were to appear as a man 
before me. Nay, more, I should say to such an one Begone, 
impostor; My Lord left word that if any so appear I was to 
"believe it not," and "go not after them nor follow them," "for as 
the lightning (not as a man— so shall the Son of Man be in His 
day." 

The "Jubilee Cycles" prove that the great jubilee or "times of 
restitution of all things" was due to begin in 1875. It is a clear, 
strong argument based upon both "the Law" and the Prophets; 
No one has ever yet been able to overthrow it. I believe that no 
one can overthrow it, nor even show a weak point in it, because 
it is of the Lord. Now, remembering this, turn to Acts 3:21, and 
hear Peter under inspiration, say: The heavens shall receive 
Jesus until the times of restitution of all things. Now, is it not 
clear that if the restitution times began in 1 875, the heavens do 
no longer retain Him. He is here present? 

Q.-That is strong, surely; but, are there any evidences that the 
restitution work began in 1875? 

R124 : page 2 

W.-Yes; we understand that before the human family are 
restored or even begin to be blessed the present kingdoms of 
earth which now bind and oppress mankind will all be 
overturned and that the kingdom of God will assume control and 
that the blessing and restitution come through the new kingdom. 
The work of demolishing human empire is beginning. The 
power that will overthrow them is now at work. The people are 
already organizing their forces under the name of Communists, 



Socialists, Nihilists, etc. True, there have always been 
Communists, but their work of organization and activity are 
within recent years, in 1875-6, scarcely any one knew the 
meaning of communist and nihilist. Now they are household 
words. 

Another prophetic proof is that of the 1335 days (yrs.) of Daniel 
to the time Jesus was due to be present— "the harvest," or end of 
this age- during which harvest time, Daniel was told that he 
should stand in his lot, or be resurrected with his class, the 
Prophets. The angel adds by way of comment: "Blessed is he 
that waiteth (remains alive) until (the 1335 days) 1874. Those 
days surely end there, but what blessing did any of us who live 
realize? We are blessed by the "Bright shining of the present 
one." (The literal rendering of last clause of 2 Thes. 2:8.) Jesus 
as the lightning is present, unseen, and is causing bright light of 
truth to shine into our minds. Wonderfully bright, and sweet, 
and precious, indeed, has been this light, on the presence of the 
Son of Man, separating between wheat and tares and preparing 
his chaste Virgin for glory. He is making up His jewels, 
finishing the work by selecting those who are alive and remain, 
that we may be caught up, together with those who sleep in him, 
to meet him in the air. 

As Jesus said to His disciples at the first advent, "Blessed are 
your eyes and your ears, etc., for I say unto you many prophets 
and righteous persons have desired to see these things and have 
not seen them"— So the angel said to Daniel-Blessed are they 
who will live to 1 874, for they shall see, (not with natural eye, 
but by faith) and hear (not with natural ear but through the sure 
word of Prophecy) and know (but not by worldly wisdom to 
which these things are hid, but by the Spirit of God freely given 
unto us "that we might know"-(l Cor. 2:11 and 12,) see, hear 
and know things which in times past God had not made known. 
Yes, truly blessed, we have found it— 

"To be living is sublime. " 

Again we have found the word to teach that the Jewish age was 
given as a pattern, or shadow, or illustration of the Gospel age, 
and we have found it so. The latter being on a higher plane than 
the former, but otherwise its exact counterpart. It was 1840-1/2 
years from the beginning of the age to their harvest when Jesus 
was present in the flesh to that fleshly house. And it was 1841- 
1/2 years from the commencement of our Gospel age at 
Pentecost (A.D. 33,) to the commencement of our "harvest" in 
the autumn of 1874, when our "sure word of prophecy" 
announces him as again present, but now on the higher plane, a 
spiritual body unseen, reaping, or harvesting the spiritual house. 
To the fleshly house the harvest work was on the fleshly plane 
and the chief reaper, Jesus and the other reapers, His disciples, 
were seen. Now there are under reapers, also, but they are "the 



angels," [Matt. 13] also spiritual bodies unseen, and so with the 
afterpart 



(Continued on Seventh Page.) 

R124 : page 7 

(Continued from Second Page.) 

of the harvest. As Jesus gave up the Nominal church at the close 
of his 3-1/2 years ministry because they "knew not the time of 
their visitation, so here too, at the parallel point of time, 1878, 
we believe the Nominal church to have been given up, and the 
"spewing out of His mouth" [Rev. 3] to have begun. As the 
Jewish house was shown some special favor for 3-1/2 years, the 
latter half of their covenant week so we expect some favor to 
continue with the Nominal Gospel church for 3-1/2 years, or 
until the autumn of 1881. As with the Jew, a period of 33 years 
of trouble followed these 7 years of favor, so we understand 
there will be upon Christendom, so called, a period of 33 years 
of trouble -making with the preceding 7 years the 40 years of 
trouble or "Day of wrath" ending with the times of the Gentiles 
in 1914, when the kingdom of God [soon to be set up or exalted 
to power] will have broken in pieces and consumed all earthly 
kingdoms. 

Q.— Wonderfully clear all this seems and how connected; my 
loss has been in not having a thorough knowledge of these time 
evidences of which you speak. I must study them up and make 
them my own that, as Paul says my faith may not stand in the 
wisdom of men but in the power of God-His word. (1 Cor. 2:5.) 

W.--I am glad to hear you say so. In no other way can you fully 
make them yours, or have in them such a basis for faith. 
Remember as Peter says the word is to be a "lamp to our feet," 
"a light shining in a dark place until the day dawn and the day- 
star arise in your hearts." It is evident then that no period of 
walking by sight comes to us here. We shall need the lamp all 
the way for "we walk by faith, not by sight." 

Q.-It speaks elsewhere of the "Sun of Righteousness arising 
with healing in his wings." When sunrise has come we do not 
need lamps. Does not this seem to indicate that we shall reach a 
condition whether by sight or not, where there will be no need of 
the light of "the lamp?" Does not this involve the thought of 
faith giving place to sight? 

W.--I think not. It is not we but the Jews who see the "Sun of 
Righteousness arise with healing in his wings;" and they are told 
in connection with it to "remember the Law of Moses." (Malachi 
4.) On the contrary, we, with Jesus our head will constitute that 
"Sun of Righteousness," as Jesus said (Matt. 13:43) speaking of 
the "harvest" or end of this age, when the wheat of the church 



should be completely separated from the tares of the same: 
"Then shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun in the kingdom 
of their Father. " 

It is the same thought that is expressed in Rev. 21 :24 of the New 
Jerusalem shining and the Nations walking in the light of it. Yes 
it is a grand thought, that the day so long expected is near at 
hand. Not only natural Israel but as Paul says: "The whole 
creation groaneth and travaileth together in pain until now, " and 
"waiteth for the manifestation of the Sons of God." (Rom. 8:19 
and 22.) All are now passing through a dark night of experience 
with sin, woe and death; all creation is sick; they groan in pain 
and soon they shall be delivered. Soon the "Great Physician" - 
"the Elijah"-"The Sun of righteousness (the Christ, head and 
body) shall arise with healing in his wings." 

Now the world is full of suffering, 
Sounds of woe fall on my ears, 
Sights of wretchedness and sorrow 
Fill my eyes with pitying tears. 

'Tis the earth's dark night of weeping, 
Wrong and evil triumph now, 
I can wait, for just before me 
Beams the morning's roseate glow. 

Yes, Bro. Q., "when He shall appear we shall appear with Him 
in glory." We will not be here when the "Sun" rises. True we are 
now in the dawn, but there is quite a while between first dawn of 
day and the Sun rise, and that is what Peter means. "We have a 
more sure word of prophecy— as a light in a dark place until the 
day dawn and the day star arise in your hearts." Jesus is the day 
star-"The bright and morning star." He must come first to us 
before we shine with Him as "the sun." And, dear Bro. Q., do 
you not see that this very thing is now being fulfilled? To all 
who recognize Jesus as present it is a fountain of joy to realize 
in Him the sure forerunner of our own glory with Him, and the 
great millennial day of restitution for the world. 

Q.-I must confess Bro. W., that your hope is the grandest to 
which mortals could aspire. 

W.-We could not aspire to such things. God has crowded these 
exceeding great and precious promises upon us; and while I urge 
that if interested in this great hope, you should make it yours, by 
personal investigation of the proofs, and recommend to you the 
"Day Dawn," yet let me suggest that the very object of our 
heavenly Father in giving us these exceeding great and precious 
promises, is "that by these ye might be partakers of the Divine 
nature. " (2 Peter 1 :4.) If we have put on Christ, let us walk in 
Him, and walk not after our own will, but according to the will 
of our head, Christ Jesus. 



R125 : page 3 



MY SACRIFICE. 



Laid on Thine altar, O my Lord divine, 
Accept this gift to-day, for Jesus' sake. 
I have no jewels to adorn Thy shrine, 
Nor any world-famed sacrifice to make. 

But here I bring, within my trembling hand, 
This will of mine-a thing that seemeth small; 
And Thou alone, O Lord, can'st understand 
How, when I yield Thee this, I yield mine all. 

Hidden therein Thy searching gaze can'st see 
Struggles of passions, visions of delight. 
All that I have, or am, or fain would be- 
Deep loves, fond hopes, and longings infinite; 

It hath been wet with tears, and dimmed with sighs, 
Clenched in my grasp till beauty hath it none. 
Now, from Thy footstool, where it vanquished lies, 
The prayer ascendeth-"May Thy will be done!" 

Take it, O Father, ere my courage fail; 
And merge it so in Thine own will, that e'en, 
If in some desperate hour my cries prevail, 
And Thou give back my gift, it may have been 

So changed, so purified, so fair have grown, 
So one with Thee, so filled with peace divine, 
I may not know or feel it as mine own; 
But, gaining back my will, may find it Thine. 

-New York Observer. 



R125 : page 3 

"IT HASTETH GREATLY." 

In the October number (1879) of the WATCH TOWER in the 
article headed "The Day of the Lord"— and in the November 
number in article headed "Babylon is Fallen," we gave 
expression to our view of the "time of trouble" and endeavored 
to prove scripturally that it began with the church and would 
first result in the complete overthrow of the nominal church, 
Protestant and Catholic, by infidelity and spiritualism, and 
afterward, it would reach and overthrow national governments. 
Many were inclined to make light of our statements, etc., and 
expressed themselves as believing that the trouble upon the 
nations was the only thing to be looked for by us. Our views 
then expressed are confirmed in us daily, and we are more than 
ever convinced of their truth; that around us in the nominal 



church, "a thousand shall fall at (our) side and ten thousand at 
(our) right hand;" that Infidelity's "arrows" and spiritualism's 
"pestilence," will for a short time sweep through the church- 
"and who shall be able to stand?"— "They who have made the 
most High their habitation and who have His truth for their 
shield and buckler." Psa. 91. 

We clip the following extracts to show our readers that the storm 
has already begun, and that others are noticing the fulfillment 
who never noticed the prophecies :— 

An anonymous writer in the North American Review affirms 
that the thinking minds of to-day are "drifting away from the 
religious belief and dogmatic theology of the past," and that "the 
wave of skepticism affects the orthodox church itself." He says: 
"The great body of orthodox religious doctrines known as 
systematic theology... is about to go to wreck with the 
mythology of Greece and the belief in witchcraft. " He also 
marks "the temporizing attitude of theology towards such 
modern doctrines as evolution. " 

Says Rev. Dr. Kittredge (Congregationalist) of Chicago: "It 
matters not in what direction you look, sin is on the increase, but 
the church is losing ground in her conflict with sin; she has 
almost ceased to be felt as a power. If a majority of our church 
organizations were to-day to become extinct, the world would 
hardly know it. -World's Crisis. 

Professor Von Oosterzee, the well-known evangelical teacher of 
Holland, said recently that a wave of infidelity is steadily 
advancing over Protestant Europe which the most favored 
country will not escape. "They have had it in Germany, and now 
we have it in Holland. They are beginning to get it in Scotland. 
In twenty years they will have it to the full, and all their 
theology will not save them. "-Messiah's Herald. 

The Christian Advocate (New York) writes: "The 
Congregationalist has received answers from twenty-nine 
ministers, to a circular sent out making inquiry as to the 
observance of Sabbath in New England. All testify to 
degeneracy and deplore results. Desecration has increased, and 
morality also decreases. Religion is losing its authority and the 
state of the community is becoming worse. " 

The N. Y. Herald quotes the veteran editor of the Observer as 
saying: "A great spiritual drought is prevailing, such as has not 
been known in the present century. We do not remember the 
time," says Dr. Prime, "when revivals of religion were so few 
and far between; when so few accessions to the churches were 
reported, and when the church seemed so much in danger of 
receding before the world." "A somber but true picture," says 
the Herald. 



Rev. Dr. Cuyler in the Evangelist, in a mournful article, asserts 
that Presbyterianism is on the decline; in 1875 there were 70,500 
members added to the churches; in 1877 there were 63,700 
added; but in 1878 there were only 53,000 additions, while in 
1879 only 49,000 were added-the real increase being only 
7,000 and perhaps not even that. What is true of the 
Presbyterian, is true, he says, of all the other evangelical 
bodies. -Montreal Witness. 

Rev. Dr. B. F. Campbell, of East Boston, in a lecture on "The 
Dangers of the Republic," said: "The world as a whole is 
undoubtedly growing more intelligent, but not moral. Moral 
power is on the decline in New England. The pendulum of 
religious belief has swung away from the rigid orthodoxy of 
Puritan times, has already passed the center, and is on its way to 
a heartless Nihilism."— East Boston Advocate. 

Rev. Henry Morgan says: "The cause of Boston's religious 
decline is Liberalism. It has broken down the Sabbath; paralyzed 
the arm of the law; opened Sunday theaters, concerts, 
excursions; emptied the churches; killed the public conscience; 
sown the seeds of distrust; sown to the wind, and we are now 
reaping the whirlwind. "-Boston Herald. 

The Church Union quotes a circular issued by most of the 
ministers of Baltimore, which urges all to prayer, and speaks of 
the forces of evil, general corruption, Sabbath-breaking, the 
thickening snares for the young, and adds: "The growing 
skepticism, as well as the intensely secular spirit of the age, are 
enough to awaken apprehension for our institutions and for the 
social fabric itself. "-Bible Banner. 

What is true of Christians in general is true of us who hold some 
advanced light on God's word and plan, viz: "Every man's work 
shall be tried of what sort it is." 

Should we expect to be exempted from the fire (trial) that is to 
try all? No, rather if we have the most advanced light we should 
expect to be the first and most severely tried. And we have been; 
and are now being, so tried. 

Your faith could not perhaps be tried by the same errors of 
infidelity, etc. Your knowledge of the plan of the ages and the 
work of restitution of all things renders powerless the arrows of 
infidelity, as also your knowledge of the condition of the dead 
protects you against the pestilence of "spiritualism." But for all 
this God is not without means of proving and sifting us. Our 
trial, which we hope is now almost over, has arisen mainly from 
the teachings scattered amongst us by some who walked with us 
and with whom we took sweet council together, who, denying 
the redemption and forgiveness of sins through Jesus Christ, 
have claimed it as possible for every man to pay his own penalty 
and climb his way up, and win for himself eternal life. Thus 
denying that the Lord bought them, thus seeming to fulfill to 



some extent, 2 Pet. 2:1, and thus have brought upon themselves 
by laying aside Christ's robe of righteousness-the wedding 
garment— and appearing in their own "filthy rags," the 
destruction of their light. 

"Light is sown for the righteous," but "there are none righteous, 
no not one, " except as covered by Christ's righteousness as with 
a garment. "Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, 
whose sins are covered." Blessed is the man to whom the Lord 
imputeth righteousness. These are the righteous for whom light 
was sown in God's word. Should we wonder if these brethren 
who have thus laid aside the imputed righteousness of Christ 
should be deprived of the light which was intended only for "the 
path of the just, "-those justified by faith in the ransom, and not 
by their own works. 

Such has been the result; these who once rejoiced in the light of 
"The sure word of Prophecy" which shows us the presence of 
our Lord as the "Bridegroom," "Reaper" and "King," that proves 
to us that the "times of restitution of all things began in 1874," 
and that consequently "the heavens" which were to receive Him 
until that time, now no longer receive him, but that He is 
present, and that soon when the separation of wheat and tares is 
complete, "we shall be changed to His glorious likeness and see 
Him as He is. All, all this light they have lost, and have now 
reached the condition of outer-darkness, the condition of 
darkness on the subject of the Lord's presence 

R126 : page 3 

that the world and a worldly church have always occupied. The 
parable says "there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth," 
meaning, we suppose, that such shall go through the time of 
trouble upon the world. 

With pain and sorrow we part company, but rejoice to know that 
many who followed them in a measure and were sorely tried are 
now able to discern between light and "outer darkness." "They 
went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of 
us they no doubt would have continued with us; but they went 
out from us that they might be made manifest, that they were not 
all of us." But "you have an anointing from the Holy one. You 
all know it." (1 John 2:19-20.) The Holy Spirit has revealed to 
us through the word the presence of the Bridegroom and we 
heard his voice and opened the door of faith and He came in to 
us and supped with us, and caused us to sit down to meat (truth), 
and himself has been our teacher and served us, (Rev. 3:20, 
Luke 12:37). And our faith does not stand in the wisdom of men 
but in the power and word of God. (1 Cor. 2:5.) And still 
beloved, there may be other trials for you. 



Oh, watch and fight and pray, 
The battle ne'er give o'er; 
Renew it boldly every day, 
And help Divine implore. 

Think not the victory won, 
Nor lay thine armor down, 
Thine arduous work will not be done 
Till thou hast gained thy crown. 



R215 : page 3 

THE CONCLUSIVE ARGUMENT. 

I have read that Benjamin Franklin tried to convince the farmers 
of his day that plaster enriched the soil. All his philosophical 
arguments failed to convince the farmers; so he took plaster and 
formed it into a sentence by the roadside. The wheat coming up 
through those letters was about twice as rank and green as the 
other wheat, and the farmers could read for months in letters of 
living green the sentence: This has been plastered. Arguments 
and culture, and fine sermons cannot convince sinners; they 
want to read in pulpit and pew, in our utter separation from the 
world, in our contentedness of mind and victorious joy, the 
clean-cut truth: This has been redeemed and sanctified by the 
Holy Ghost. Ah! brother, sister, the pierced hand of Jesus can 
pull out the throne of depravity from our heart, and open there a 
running stream of joy which will flow on through our pain, or 
poverty, or loneliness, or persecution, or trial, like a cooling 
river through a desert of sand. It is grand to live in a state where 
hallelujahs form the normal breathing of the soul. It is the joy of 
unwavering faith and repose in the blood of Jesus.— Advocate of 
Holiness. 



R124 : page 3 



Via. ELYRIA AND CLEVELAND, OHIO. 

I purpose visiting brother and sister Paton at Almont, Mich., 
and the other friends in that vicinity during August, and shall 
stop enroute at Elyria, on the 9th and 10th, and at Cleveland on 
the 22d, and be in Bro. Patorfs charge from 14th to 16th inst. 
Elyria meetings are in charge of Sister Avis Hamlin. Those at 
Cleveland are under Bro. Caleb Davies' control. May the Lord 
direct to His own praise and to our mutual profit. My dear wife 
accompanies me on this short trip. 

Your servant and editor of your paper. 



C. T. RUSSELL. 



R124 : page 3 

"It is man's relation to his God that must adjust and determine 
his relations to his fellow-creatures. The symmetrical position of 
the points in the circumference arises from their common 
relation to a common center. Set a man right with God, and he 
will certainly be set right with his neighbors." 



R126 : page 4 

"TO COMMUNICATE FORGET NOT." 

"But to do good and to communicate forget not, for with such 
sacrifices God is well pleased." Heb. 13:16. 

Our Heavenly Father is very rich, possessing all things, lacking 
nothing, yet if we may judge from his dealings with his earthly 
creatures, his pleasure has been not so much in the possessing of 
these great riches as in the using of them for the good and 
blessing of his creatures. 

His providence is kind and large, 
Both man and beast his bounty share; 
The whole creation is his charge, 
But saints are his peculiar care. 

So also as we become more and more like him— "partakers of the 
Divine nature" -benevolence, kindness and love will become 
more and more characteristic of us. Few perhaps of the "little 
flock" have been made stewards of this world's goods. It may be 
because there are few who could use and not abuse the trust, but 
such as have it should esteem it a privilege to be imitators of our 
benevolent Heavenly Father; not wasting it, neither hoarding it, 
but esteeming it merely as an agent for blessing and "doing good 
unto all men, especially to the household of faith. " And we 
should be anxious and careful to use whatever God has put into 
our hands, and to be faithful whether over a few things or many 
things, remembering that the man with but one dollar may be as 
really a miser or a philanthropist as he who has a million. 

What we should endeavor to possess is true benevolence and 
breadth of mind, charity, love. "Let the same mind be in you 
which was also in Christ Jesus our Lord," and it will lead you to 
regard and treat with tenderness and loving kindness, even those 
with whom you differ. Let us remember in this connection, too, 
that, "If any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of His." 

The spirit or mind of Christ is a meek and quiet and charitable 
spirit. It "vaunteth not itself, is not easily puffed up. " Its fruits 
are the opposite of the depraved fleshly nature, viz. : love, peace, 



long suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness, etc. "If we live 
in the spirit let us also walk in the spirit" and "not be desirous of 
vain glory, provoking one another, envying one another," but 
displaying the spirit of our Father in heaven, "and we shall be 
the children of the Highest, for He is kind unto the unthankful 
and to the evil." "Be ye therefore merciful as your Father also is 
merciful. " 

But if it is a joy and privilege to be God's stewards to a greater 
or less degree in earthly goods, how much more blessed is it to 
be permitted to dispense the spiritual blessings and thus to be 
"Stewards of the manifold grace of God. " Do we appreciate the 
fact that each disciple of Christ is a steward, some to a greater, 
some to a less extent; some with many talents, some with few, 
yet "To every man (in Christ) is given a measure of the spirit to 
profit withal"— to make use of. What use are you making of the 
talents given to you? Before saying to us, have you rule over 
two cities, five cities or many things, He will ask us to give an 
account of our stewardship. He will not expect me to give an 
account of your stewardship, nor you to give an account of 
mine. To the Master each servant will give an account and stand 
or fall. 

But while it is true that we each have been given special 
blessings of knowledge and truth and that certain responsibilities 
come with them, we had rather provoke you to love than fear. If 
we possess the spirit of Christ, love, we shall esteem it a great 
privilege to be permitted to carry to others that which has done 
so much good, which has removed the clouds from our minds 
and brought us into the clear sunshine of Gods love, revealing 
to us the grandeur of our Heavenly Father's character, the 
beauties and harmonies of his word, and the "exceeding riches 
of his grace in his loving kindness toward us in Christ Jesus." If 
it has set our hearts to ringing in melodious harmony with the 
heavenly music, "bringing glad tidings of great joy which shall 
be to all people," may it not produce the same effect upon 
others? Would that the story filled each of our hearts, that as a 
flame of fire it would consume all dross from our own hearts 
and set fire to all with whom we come in contact. Like the 
widow's cruse of oil, our treasure will fill to overflowing all the 
earthen vessels ready to receive it. Oh that every word of the 
beautiful song— "I love to tell the story"— could be the emphatic 
and truly heartfelt expression of all the readers of the WATCH 
TOWER: 

I love to tell the story, 
'Tis pleasant to repeat, 
What seems each time I tell it, 
More wonderfully sweet. 



I love to tell the story, 
It did so much for me, 
And that is just the reason 
I tell it now to thee. " 

Again, if we would "do good and communicate," how should we 
tell the story? Tell it simply, tell it plainly; be entirely 
swallowed up with the grandeur of your theme. Lose sight of 
yourself and what you have learned and let it be all "of Jesus 
and his glory, of Jesus and his love. " Too many take pleasure in 
telling the story only as they can make battle with it. They 
delight in using the truth as a knock-down argument. This is an 
element of the old nature which, not yet dead, asserts its right to 
fight what it terms the Lord's battles or the spiritual warfare. A 
sad mistake; be not deceived into developing an element of the 
carnal nature in direct opposition to the fruits of the spirit - 
meekness, gentleness, patience, love. 

Truly we are told that "the word of God is the sword of the 
spirit," but remember it is not our sword. The spirit does its own 
smiting and in its own way, but to us it says, "Put up thy sword. " 
The command to us is, Be light bearers. "Let your light so 
shine" by showing forth the fruits of the Spirit, that men may see 
your good fruits and glorify your Father in heaven. The word is 
a lamp, by its light put on Christ's righteousness, and truth as a 
garment, then lift it up to others that they may see your clean 
robes and be led to desire the same. Then let the Spirit use his 
sword upon others as he may see fit to humble them, strip them 
of pride, and bring them to the rock that is higher than they. 

We should not become discouraged if there are but few who 
love light rather than darkness. We should remember that the 
God of this world has succeeded in darkening the minds of 
many that they cannot appreciate the light of truth; that we are 
as it were, surrounded by men and women blinded totally or 
partially by sin and ignorance. Some, totally blind, can see and 
appreciate none of the good news; others can see a little but 
cannot see afar off. They can only see "the present evil world 
(age) and are losing much pleasure and joy because they cannot 
see afar off, how that, "In the ages to come, God will show forth 
the exceeding riches of his grace in his loving kindness toward 
us (who are) in Christ Jesus. (Eph. 2:7); and how it is his plan 
that both Jew and Gentile shall obtain mercy through your 
mercy. Rom. 11:31. Surely as it would afford great pleasure to 
strengthen and heal physical sight, much more should we rejoice 
to lead those who are blind spiritually to the Spirit's eye-salve- 
the word-that they may rejoice with us in singing: 

O, the prospect, it is so transporting, 
Savior hasten our gathering we pray. 

Of many it is as true to-day as when uttered: "Eyes have they 
but they see not, ears but they hear not. " God shows us through 



the lamp that this age ends the probation of none except those 
who do see and hear 

R127 : page 4 

clearly and plainly; that because of Jesus' ransom there is to be 
an age of Restitution. "Then the eyes of the blind shall be 
opened and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. " "Then all 
shall come to the knowledge of the truth" and "the knowledge of 
the Lord shall fill the whole earth" and none shall say to his 
neighbor, "know thou the Lord," for all shall know him, from 
the least to the greatest of them. 

In presenting the good news of the kingdom and the deep things 
of God, we should seek to follow Jesus' example, that is, while 
we at all times hold up Christ's righteousness to all men and 
thereby be to them "living epistles," we should seek to show 
"the deep things of God" to those who seem to have the spirit of 
God. (1 Cor. 2:9-16.) 

Knowing this, that spiritual or deep things cannot be discerned 
except by those having the spirit, "He that hath an ear let him 
hear," saith the Spirit. This must be our method, therefore, when 
we find any one without an ear to hear, leave off telling such an 
one. You cannot give him an ear; God will do that in his "due 
time. " Waste not valuable time and energy. Leave them in love 
and sympathy with God, and put no obstacle in their way. 

Whenever you meet what seems to be "an Israelite indeed, in 
whom there is no guile," expect in such a one to find "an ear to 
hear. " Commune with him first on Spiritual things familiar to 
you both, that he may come to recognize you as led of the same 
spirit-a fellow member of "the body of Christ," and an heir of 
the same glory. Then present to such the deeper things of God 
and your communion, instead of being a battle of words, will be 
profitable and blessed to both. To fully appreciate the meaning 
of our text, we should do good and communicate until we feel it. 
It is with such sacrifices God is well pleased. It does not amount 
to a sacrifice to merely give a dollar, or a moment, or an hour 
for which we have no other use. Give until you can feel it and 
then you may expect to feel in your heart that "with such 
sacrifices God is well pleased. " 



R127 : page 4 



THE FIG TREE. 



And seeing a single fig tree by the road he went to it but finding 
nothing on it except leaves, he said, "May no fruit grow on thee 
to the age," and the fig tree instantly withered. (E.D.) Matt. 
21:19. That Christ used the fig tree to represent the destruction 
of the Jewish nation seems evident. This event occurred about 



the time Christ rode into Jerusalem (verses 2,5) at which time he 
pronounced the curse (Luke 19:30,41). This is further evident 
when we notice the parable given in Luke 13:6,9. The three 
years he came seeking fruit, likely refers to the time of Christ's 
ministry during which time he confined himself almost entirely 
to the Jewish people (Matt. 10:5,6). Some may say however that 
Christ's ministry was 3-1/2 years and this would not apply, but 
while it was 3-1/2 years from the baptism of Christ until His 
crucifixion it seems there was no special work done until about 
the passover, which was about six months after his baptism, and 
so commencing in A.D. 30 would end in A.D. 33, time parable 
was given according to the year in the margin of your Bible. The 
dresser of the vineyard says let it alone this year, which of 
course would make it four and extend favor one year beyond the 
crucifixion, but I do not think it was allowed to remain another 
year, for the latter part of the chapter shows that Jerusalem was 
left desolate and as he came searching fruit and found none we 
know from the connection in Matt. 21:19, it was at that point it 
withered. Some however have thought it unreasonable to 
suppose that the fig tree represents the Jews, for Mark 11:13 
informs us, that the time of figs was not yet, which of course 
implies that the time for the Jews to bear fruit was not then, and 
if so why should Christ curse them? 

But I think the objection vanishes when we remember that they 
were only a typical people and that the time they will bear fruit 
is after the fullness of the Gentiles have come in. [Rom. 11:25- 

27]. 

It is also necessary to bear in mind that the curse did not seal 
their eternal doom, for blindness only happened to them for a 
time, says Paul, and the same thought is intimated by Christ 
when he left their house desolate, (Luke 13:35) for they are yet 
to say: "Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord." This 
being true we find how appropriate is the rendering given in the 
Emphatic Diaglott, viz. : "Cursed to the age. " And 'tis true that 
during the Gospel age, as a nation, they have borne no fruit, but 
when the bride is taken out from the Gentiles they will receive 
favor. [Acts 15:14,16.] We find that the cursed fig tree is to bud 
again according to Christ's own words in a parable given in 
connection with the signs of His coming in Matt. 24:32,33, and 
if the curse pronounced on it at the first advent shows us the 
blinding of the Jews, does not its putting forth leaves reveal to 
us the fact that they are in a fair way to bear fruit? So we 
understand it at least, and as there are unmistakable signs among 
the Jews to-day as a people, we recognize Christ's words and 
know "that summer is nigh. " And not only do we recognize that 
the restoration of the Jews is at hand but also that the kingdom 
of God is nigh. [Luke 21:29,31]. And as the kingdom of God is 
due at some time to be set up, we rejoice and lift up our heads 
because our redemption is nigh, [verse 28]. For the setting up of 
the kingdom implies nothing less than the resurrection of the 



dead in Christ and change of the living, and knowing that the 
restoration 

R127 : page 5 

of the Jews takes place in the midst of great trouble and during 
the pruning out of the seven last plagues according to the type, 
[Micah 7:14 to end], and having the promise that we are to be 
counted worthy to escape all these things, [Luke 21:34,36,] we 
patiently wait for our gathering together unto Christ. 

The redemption we understand to be the redemption of the body, 
[Rom. 8:23,] being caught away to meet Christ, and so to be 
forever with Him. This same idea seems to be brought out in 
Cant. 2:10,13, when Christ addresses the Church, saying: "Rise 
up my love, my fair one, and come away... the fig tree putteth 
forth the green figs;... Arise my love, my fair one, and come 
away. " 

We here find the fig tree maintained again and like Christ's 
words it is connected with our redemption. Surely we who 
recognize the signs of the times in connection with the prophetic 
measures, have great reason for rejoicing in hope of our speedy 
deliverance, and may we also give thanks to our Heavenly 
Father for the light shining on our path. May the truth have the 
designed effect, viz.: to sanctify us, separate us from the world, 
make us holy, for "without holiness no man shall see the Lord," 
[Heb. 12:14]. While in the presence of Christ we wait for our 
gathering together unto Him, and may the trial of our faith, 
being much more precious than of gold that perisheth, be found 
to the praise of His glory, whom having not seen we love, in 
whom, though now we see him not, yet believing, we 
rejoice... receiving the end of our faith, won the salvation of our 
souls, (1 Pet. 1:7,9). So here we find that we are not to see 
Christ until our salvation, when we shall be like Him and see 
Him as He is, (1 John 3:2), and then and not until then will faith 
end, and we will not longer need signs, not even that of the fig 
tree, but until then we expect to watch by faith. 

A. D. J. 



R127:page5 



DEAD WITH CHRIST. 



Growth in knowledge of truth is not only the privilege but also 
the duty of the Christian; so the education of the saints will not 
be complete until they have laid off the flesh, and been made 
like Christ. 

Then we ought to understand more fully the deep things of God 
now than at any other time in the past; and so we should 



comprehend more clearly what it is to suffer with Christ, as well 
as the glory which is to follow. 

Suffering with Christ involves more than a simple separation 
from the world. We must be dead to the world, then we shall not 
love the world or worldly things. 

Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the 
world, why, as though living in the world, are ye subject to 
ordinances; after the commandments and ordinances of men? 
Touch not, taste not, handle not the unclean thing. Col. 2:20,22. 

The conscience must be purged from dead works to serve the 
living God, (Heb. 9:14). For I through the law am dead to the 
law, that I might live unto God (Gal. 2:19). It is a faithful 
saying: "For if we be dead with Him we shall also reign with 
Him," (2 Tim. 2:11). Yea, doubtless and I count all things but 
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my 
Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do 
count them as vile refuse that I may win Christ and be found in 
him; not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, 
but that which is through the faith of Christ that I may know him 
and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his 
sufferings, being made conformable unto His death; if by any 
means I may attain unto the resurrection of the dead, (Phil. 
3:8,1 1). Always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord 
Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our 
body. For we which live are always delivered 

R128:page5 

unto death for Jesus sake, that the life also of Jesus might be 
made manifest in our mortal flesh. (2 Cor. 4:10,1 1.) 

These passages seem to teach more than a crucifixion of the 
flesh simply; i.e., an actual giving of ourselves, as did our head, 
for the purpose of completing the sacrifice for the world; to fill 
up that which is behind of the sufferings of Christ. He gave His 
flesh for the life of the world (John 6:5 1). Hereby perceive we 
love, because he laid down His life for us, and we ought to lay 
down our lives for the brethren, [1 John 3:16]. 

If we are still under the death penalty entailed upon us by Adam, 
how we can be counted as dead, crucified with Christ, I can not 
conceive; but if He redeemed us from that penalty, by His death, 
I can see how we can give ourselves a voluntary sacrifice for the 
world in Him. He could give Himself because of His own 
righteousness; His body can do it only by having His 
righteousness imputed to them. There were two sacrifices for 
atonement under the law Lev. 16; one for the priesthood or high 
priest's house, and the other for the people. Jesus, our high 
priest, gave himself a propitiation for our sins (1 John 2:2) or his 
house, whose are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the 
rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end, Heb. 3:6. 



Then again Christ, our Passover is sacrificed for us [the church 
of the first-born.] 1 Cor. 5:7. Whom God has set forth to be a 
mercy seat, by his own blood, through the faith; for an 
exhibition of His righteousness in passing by the sins formerly 
committed, during the forbearance of God; and for an exhibition 
of His righteousness at the present time, in order that he may be 
righteous while justifying him who is the faith of Jesus [Rom. 
3:25,26]. [Diaglott.] So faith in Christ, or the law of the Spirit of 
Life in Christ Jesus hath made us free from the law of sin and 
death [Rom. 8:2]. 

If the death of Christ releases us from the Adamic penalty, then 
why do we die? To complete the sacrifice. Presenting our bodies 
a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is our 
reasonable service, [Rom. 12]. 

Dead with him. Not only dead to the world, to the law, to sin, to 
the flesh, but really dead with Him. Baptized into his death; for 
if we have been planted together in the likeness of His death, we 
shall also be in the likeness of his resurrection. Knowing this, 
that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might 
be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin; for he that 
is dead is freed from sin. Now if we be dead with Him, we 
believe that we shall also live with Him [Rom. 6]. The 
completion of the individual sufferings of the head was his 
laying off the flesh; so with the body. 

The atonement was for the purpose of cleansing. That Jesus 
gave himself for the church-the church of the first-born-that 
they might be partakers with Him in making atonement for the 
world, seems to be clearly taught in Numbers 8. "Take the 
Levites from among the children of Israel and cleanse them. " 

"And Aaron shall offer the Levites before the Lord for an 
offering of the children of Israel, that they may execute the 
service of the Lord. And the Levites shall lay their hands upon 
the heads of the bullocks; and thou shalt offer the one for a sin 
offering and the other for a burnt offering unto the Lord, to 
make an atonement for the Levites. 

"Thus shalt thou separate the Levites from among the children 
of Israel; and the Levites shall be mine. For they are wholly 
given unto me from among the children of Israel; Instead of the 
first-born of all the children of Israel have I taken them unto me. 
For all the first-born of the children of Israel are mine. And I 
have given the Levites as a gift to Aaron and to his sons among 
the children of Israel to do the service of the children of Israel in 
the tabernacle of the congregation, and to make atonement for 
the children of Israel. " 

Do not the first-born represent the church? And has not God 
chosen them out from among the nations and given them to 
Christ for a purpose? By virtue of Jesus having given Himself a 
propitiation for our sins; and as our passover having been slain 



for us, our sins go beforehand to judgment. We are first on trial, 
and do not come into Judgment [trial] with the world. We 
escape the things that are coming upon the world, and having 
suffered with Him, crucified the flesh with the affections and 
lusts; completed the sacrifice, we shall be exalted with Him to 
the throne, as kings and priests, to reign over, judge and bless 
the nations. When the sacrifice for the world shall have been 
completed, the ransom fully paid, and the perfected Christ 
exercises authority, not another individual will die on account of 
Adam's transgression; nor indeed for mere sins of the flesh, but 
for sins against the knowledge of the truth. 

B. W. K. 

[No other scripture or type shows so fully perhaps, the intimate 
relationship between Jesus, the head, and "the little flock" as 
members of His body as this. [Lev. 16.] The head was a sacrifice 
and the body follows in His footsteps. The Head died for all the 
household of faith; the body fills up the measure of the 
sufferings of Christ, and dies for all "the people" not of the 
household. We may learn better to appreciate the apostle's 
expression concerning the prophets when he says that "they 
spake before of the sufferings of Christ [head and body] and of 
the glory that should follow. Have patience, brethren, until the 
sufferings are full then we shall have the glory. "For if we suffer 
with Him we shall also be glorified together. " "If we suffer we 
shall also reign with Him. " And as when the suffering of death 
was accomplished for "His house" by the head they were 
recognized by the Father no longer as enemies and aliens, but as 
sons were given the spirit of adoption, [at Pentecost] so when all 
the sufferings are completed and filled up the Father will 
recognize all the world as free from Adam's transgression and 
justified to life, and the great work of the millennial age, 
"Restitution," will begin when the sufferings are complete for 
the world God will send the spirit upon them as he did upon the 
church when its redemption was finished as it is written: "It 
shall come to pass in the last days saith the Lord, I will pour out 
my spirit upon all flesh. " The first installment or "early rain" 
came upon us at Pentecost, the promise will be completed when 
we are glorified. 

But, another point shown by this atonement type is, that all 
believers constitute a part of the household, they are represented 
by the Levites and are a part of "the church of the first-born." 
Though apparently none except the willing living sacrifices- 
"The Lord's Goat," those who suffer and shall reign, are counted 
overcomers -His bride— the members of his body. Typified by 
the priests all other members of the household will be 
wonderfully blest but will lose much. It rejoices us however to 
think that many who through fear of death (afraid of the scoffs 
of the world, afraid though longing to crucify themselves,) and 
therefore subject to bondage. That these dear loved ones will not 



be suffered to have part with the world, but during the time of 
trouble "the rod and staff" of our shepherd will lead them 
through great tribulation to our Father's house and family. Thus 
they may become palm bearers even though they are not part of 
the "little flock" of crown wearers. It is the Lord's plan, and 
marvelous in our eyes. How wonderfully good our Father is and 
how His plan shows it. "Let me love Thee more and more."]— 
EDITOR. 



R128:page5 



'PERILOUS TIMES." 



In ordinary times it is the privilege and duty of the children of 
God to shine as "the light of the world. " As in nature, the 
energies of every thing that is germinated are directed to the 
building up and perfecting its own organizations, and thereby 
fulfilling its own mission in the realms of animated creations; so 
in the spiritual sphere of existence, the great business of "the 
begotten again" is to grow, develop and mature, and in the 
accomplishment of these processes to shine as "the lights of the 
world. " That which shines commands the observation and 
reflects its own light upon all its surroundings, and is as a 
consequence as "a city set upon a hill," it cannot be hid. This is 
the duty the Christian owes to the world, the filling of the 
perfect development of his character as a son of God. It is not 
teaching, instruction. His knowledge is imperfect and only 
gained by the slow process of his spiritual discipline as it 
displaces his natural ideas and makes revealed truth 
comprehensible to him. "The natural man receiveth not the 
things of the spirit of God; for they are foolishness to him: 
neither can he know them because they are spiritually 
discerned," and discipline alone makes them comprehensible to 
the "begotten again. " All that Christians can do for the world, is 
to shine before it, that is illumine and illustrate by their 
luminous conduct, the principles their profession recognizes. 

When the Father sends teachers into the world they speak to it 
by inspiration, as in the case of the Prophets, the Son of God and 
His Apostles. But the revelation being 

R128 : page 6 completed for the preliminary age of the Gospel, 
the Father is pleased to complete the education of His sons 
before He sends them forth as teachers of His truth, for every 
one whom He sends forth gives utterance to no uncertain sound. 
Hence at present we are left under the guidance of the Holy 
Ghost to be led into all truth. We are not at liberty to rely upon 
human wisdom, learning or capacity to discover the meaning of 
the revelation which was given to us by the power of the Holy 
Ghost. Nor is there any promise that the 



R129 : page 6 

Holy Ghost will "endow any of us with power from on high" to 
speak by inspiration before the blessed Lord our living head is 
manifested in His glory. These being the normal conditions of 
Christian life. It may become our duty when abnormal 
conditions supervene, as we think they do at present, to lift up 
our voice of warning when those who would be recognized as 
the faithful teachers of the household seek to impress the 
household with the idea that they have been the recipients of a 
divine preparation to be its leader and teacher in these last days. 
When you read such utterances as this- "I felt and knew that it 
was a baptism for the work," stop and ask yourselves whether 
you recollect any utterances of the revealed word that leads to 
the expectation that the Holy Ghost's functions are to be 
supplemented by human agency? No, my Brethren, the agency 
that follows the invisible agency of the Holy Ghost is that of the 
manifested Lord and His Bride. It is true that prior to His 
manifestation He may, and undoubtedly is, personally directing 
the angels in their gathering work, but it is manifest that His 
presence and action now are kept in this, the limits of the Holy 
Ghost's sphere of invisibility. 

As long as we are in the flesh we are liable to be led astray, and 
we think our brother errs egregious ly in his extraordinary efforts 
to be recognized as a special missionary of the Lord in these last 
days. It seems possible "the elect" may deceive themselves as 
well as others. 

I wish the brethren would take their Concordance and find under 
the head of Holy Ghost what is judicated of Him, and having 
studied each passage where His offices and services are spoken 
of, ask themselves if there be left any possible avenue through 
which the man agency can supplement His work? 

I could say more on this subject. "A word to the wise is 
sufficient. " 

G. B. STACY. 

[Remarks by the Editor: We presume that Bro. S. -would not 
wish us to understand him as ignoring the fact that God always 
has, and perhaps always will use, special agents for special 
work, as for instance Abraham, Moses, Samson and Paul, the 
"chosen vessel." These were used as long as they kept humble— 
"kept their body under," but if even a Moses, allowed pride to 
overcome him, he would cease to be the leader of the Lord's 
hosts. 

If we rightly understand Bro. S., he wishes to guard us against 
the danger of receiving men's teachings or expositions of "the 
word" because they have had a vision or dream. 

We heartily endorse this sentiment. "To the Law and to the 
testimony if they speak not according to these it is because there 



is no light in them," no matter if they had a thousand visions. 
We should not take an angel's word unless it could be sustained 
as in harmony with the Bible. If any man be used of the Spirit as 
a special vessel he need not tell anyone of it. It will manifest 
itself through his exposition of "the word. "] 



R129 : page 6 

THE LIKENESS AND THE DIFFERENCE. 

[The following is an extract from an editorial in Zion's Herald 
(Boston) the leading organ of the M.E. church of New England.] 

That faculty of our moral nature by which we judge of the 
quality of our own acts and the acts of others, and which we call 
conscience, was given to us of God. Its judgment is immediate 
and decisive when occasion occurs. We cannot avoid it. The 
character, the law, and the acts of our Creator are passed upon 
before this personal tribunal in our heart. We cannot avoid doing 
this. God knows we must form these judgments, for he has given 
to us this moral nature. We cannot call that right, because it is a 
divine act, which really shocks our conscience. The fact of its 
being found in the Bible, if it is abhorrent to our moral sense, 
cannot give it any different ethical coloring to us. It is wrong 
there and everywhere— to us. God has given us this faculty, in 
order that we should make these judgments. We cannot help 
them. We are not responsible for them. They flash out their 
decisions involuntarily to us. 

In accordance with this common law of our natures, men freely 
express their judgments in reference to the divine government 
over us, and especially in regard to the sanctions revealed in the 
Bible as following a persistent breach of the law of God. They 
judge of the divine conduct towards themselves, as they would 
of their own towards their children. They would not justify 
themselves in an exacting, persistent, absolutely strict demand 
of entire obedience at the hand of the latter, but would be 
lenient, forgiving, patient, forbearing, hopeful and helpful until 
the last. This is what their moral nature exacts of them towards 
their children. Have they not a right to demand the same at the 
hand of the Great Heavenly Father? No human mind could 
endure the thought of the absolute and eternal ruin— the 
protracted, conscious, exquisite, and hopeless suffering of 
thousands upon thousands of intelligent immortals; the moral 
sense of no saved person could enjoy, it is affirmed, the bliss of 
heaven, to know that related and heretofore greatly beloved 
friends were enduring the unmitigated woes of an unlimited 
wretchedness. Our ethical natures must be of the same character 
as that of our Creator, for God has given us ours. He would not 
bestow upon us a moral sense which would apprehend that to be 
right which is in itself wrong, and conversely. He knows that all 



His acts and threatenings must pass in review before our own 
inward apprehensions of justice and righteousness. Can He 
expect that we will believe in reference to Himself that, that 
which shocks beyond expression our moral apprehension, is 
right simply because He has ordained it? 

We present the question quite boldly and without qualification 
in order that any suggestion that is made may cover, if possible, 
the strongest aspect of the case. We hear, in these days, in our 
religious discussions, expressions that would have been thought 
blasphemous a few years since. The divine Lawgiver and 
Creator is unceremoniously summoned before the tribunal of 
our lower human courts, and His character and acts are 
submitted to a summary judgment. If He treats His creatures as 
many believers in the Bible think He does, He is affirmed to be 
worse than a devil. If He permits them to enter upon such a life 
as ours, the character and circumstances of their birth largely 
deciding their moral conditions in spite of themselves, and then 
condemns them, after a life of frightful temptation, with small or 
no fair opportunities for moral recovery, to a fearful and 
hopeless retribution in a life to come, He is, as these modern 
religious philosophers say, simply a monster. Our own moral 
natures rise up involuntarily within us, it is urged, and repel such 
an idea of the infinite Creator and Father of the universe. 

Now, while a reverent and Christian believer would hesitate to 
use such language as this, every one may safely affirm that some 
time and somewhere every act of God, to every intelligent soul, 
will be made to appear, as it relates to the individual or universe, 
absolutely righteous. We may not be able to adjust all the 
questions involved, here and now, but some time God will 
justify himself before the moral sense He has Himself created 
within us. It is just as safe and proper, also, to say that at some 
point in the history of every soul, God's economy over him and 
all other souls will be made to appear as the reign of infinite and 
unqualified love. God expects this judgment at the hand of every 
person, for He has given to all this wonderful faculty of sitting 
upon His own acts, and He has revealed Himself both as holy 
and as a God of love; not simply merciful and forgiving, but 
essential love itself. 

We cannot look back upon the history of the race, or even read 
the Bible, or gather up the results of our own observation, and 
feel that, judged by our standard, the government of the world 
has seemed exactly just to individuals and nations. We cannot 
reconcile divine impartiality, with the special favor shown to 
some peoples and some individuals.... 

Amid all these conflicting moral elements, we readily hold our 
faith in both the divine wisdom and love. The Judge of all flesh 
will do right. And God is love. It becomes us, therefore, to be 
both modest and reverent in our expressions of opinion in 
reference to divine acts to occur on the other side of the vail. We 



only see now in part. God will be true to Himself and to our 
purified moral sense. Let us not dare summarily to express, in 
our ignorance and moral infirmity, a judgment upon His 
possible government hereafter, beyond the sure word of 
prophecy. 

REMARKS BY THE EDITOR: 

The above is evidently the expression of a noble, honest heart, 
yearning and longing for the bright light of truth to prove to him 
what the scriptures claim, that "God is love," and "His mercy 
endureth forever. " We are glad to think that this brother is one 
of many who are beginning to awake to the fact that there must 
be something in God's plan which they have not yet seen, which 
will harmonize His word and show its claim, that God is just and 
merciful and loving, to be borne out and proved by his dealings 
with his creatures. This Brother, while not alone in his unrest 
and disquiet, is comparatively alone in his utterances. Others 
think, but seldom speak, and the above utterances seem to 
indicate either a bolder or a larger heart than the majority of his 
colleagues possess. 

When we read such heart throbs how we wish we could give 
some of 

R130 : page 6 

the consolations of the "sure word of prophecy. " How we wish 
for opportunity to sing to them "The Song of Moses and the 
Lamb," and to show to them that only the few— that have "come 
to the knowledge of truth" and have "been made partakers of the 
Holy Ghost" (the church), only these have yet had their trial, or 
judgment, and that it is a blessed truth, and eventually will be 
"glad tidings of great joy to all people, that God hath appointed 
a day (age) in the which He will judge (Put on trial by giving 
them the clear knowledge of the truth) the world in 
righteousness by that man whom He hath afore ordained— Jesus 
Christ," the new man-the "anointed Savior" -head and body. 
("Know ye not that the saints shall judge the world?" If they 
could but see what is meant by Peter in Acts 3:21. ("The 
heavens must retain (Jesus) until the times of restitution of all 
things.") and that the very object of His coming is to glorify His 
Bride and "the Virgins, her companions that follow her," and 
then through them to "bless all the families of earth" and 
"restore all things "-restore poor fallen humanity to its original 
human perfectness which God declared "very good," freeing 
them from all the evils of Adam's transgression and placing 
them again where it is possible for them to keep a perfect law. 
Oh, would that they could see that this "time [these years] of 
restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of 
all the holy Prophets since the world began," is the magic key 
which unlocks God's goodness, love, mercy, and justice and 
discloses to our enraptured vision not only "the exceeding riches 



of His grace and loving kindness toward us in Christ Jesus," but 
that it also gives us a glimpse of "the depth of the riches, both of 
the knowledge and wisdom of God," that we might 
"comprehend with all saints the height and depth, length and 
breadth, and know the LOVE of God which passeth 
knowledge. " 

But why is it that souls expressing such longings for truth as the 
above, are unwilling [generally] to hear or investigate our sweet 
story? Alas, they are bound! Creeds made by fallible men in the 
Fifteenth to Seventeenth centuries, who, though honest, had 
much of the error, tradition and darkness of old Papacy clinging 
to them. These are the shackles and chains which bind men's 
consciences and prevent the reception of truth, or so dilute and 
mix it with error as to destroy much of its power and almost all 
of its beauty. Oh, that Christians could realize the liberty 
whereunto they are called, and that they would not be held in 
bondage to any man nor to any written creed, nor to any 
preconceived opinions of their own (an unwritten creed.) Let us 
put down no stakes, saying, thus far will I believe and no farther, 
but realize that the Lord is our shepherd and that he will lead His 
sheep day by day and arrange ways by which things both new 
and old shall be brought 

R130:page7 

out of the great treasure-house of His word as meat in due 
season for the household of faith. Let us remember that it is as 
much our work to follow as it is the Spirit's work to lead us into 
all truth. "Then shall we know if we follow on to know the 
Lord," [Hos. 6:3]. "Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty 
wherewith Christ hath made you free, and be not again 
entangled with the YOKE OF BONDAGE. " 



R130:page7 

"HAVING THE HARPS OF GOD." 

And I saw as it were a sea of glass, mingled with fire: And them 
that had gotten the victory over the beast, and over his image, 
[Omit: "and over his mark"] and over the number of his name, 
stand on the sea of glass having the harps of God. 

And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the 
song of the Lamb, saying— Great and marvellous are thy works 
Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways thou King of 
Nations [margin] who shall not fear thee O Lord and glorify thy 
name, for thou alone art holy? For all nations shall come and 
worship before thee; for thy judgments [righteous acts] are made 
manifest. Rev. 15:2-4. 



The question has often been asked: who sing this song and 
when? The most commonly received answer perhaps has been: 
This is the second or great company who come up through the 
great tribulation and they sing this song during the time of 
trouble. We think this incorrect and wish to express a different 
view. 

First. It cannot be the second company because these have 
gotten the Victory over the Beast and Image, etc. (As to what 
these symbolize, see first article in WATCH TOWER January 
1880.) The trouble with the mass of Christians is that they are in 
bondage to this beast and image. 

The second company never get the Victory over them and 
apparently do not recognize their true character until they are 
overthrown by the judgments of the "day of wrath," when the 
"Beast and false prophet are cast into the lake of fire," they still 
worship them and it is not until their power is gone that they 
recognize their overthrow as of God and say: "True and 
righteous are his judgments: for he hath judged the great harlot." 
(Rev. 19:2.) Not these are the Victors, but they who now stand 
out free while The Beast and Image are ruling and enslaving all 
who profess the name of Christ with their man-made creeds, and 
are Lording it over God's heritage. 

Secondly. This scene occurs before the pouring out of the vials 
of wrath for the angels are seen with the "seven vials full" (vs. 
7). 

As we proceed to analyze the song, I think you will recognize it 
as the very song of Restitution which we sing. Then too you will 
see how none who bow to the decrees of orthodoxy, so called, 
can sing it being hindered and chained by their creeds, until they 
get the Victory over them. 

"I saw a sea as it were of glass"— Sea symbolizes people of the 
world, as it were of glass, shows that their condition is easily 
recognized by those who stand on or above them. The Victors, 
we and all who can sing this song, we believe to be the Victors. 
We see the sea (people) mingled with fire, [judgments]. We 
believe that this fire [trouble] has been mingling or coming 
among the people since 1873, and that it is to continue until 
1914. Though pitying them we cannot stop to weep for our 
hearts are filled with joy by the unfolding before us of the Word 
and plan of God, and our mouths are filled with the song of 
Restitution saying: "Great and marvelous are thy works Lord 
God Almighty; just and true are thy ways thou King of Nations." 
Who but those seeing, that there is to be a "restitution of all 
things" can say or think God's ways with the Nations "just and 
true?" Look back to the slaughter of great nations-The 
Amorites, Amelekites, Hitites, Jebuzites, etc., without ever 
giving them a chance to know Him, whom to know is life 
eternal. Consider these dealings of God and none can do more 



than try in a feeble way to excuse God's action by saying that 
those were wicked people, forgetting that wickedness can only 
exist where there is law and a knowledge of good. 

Who could do more than attempt an excuse for the destruction 
of Sodom, when Jesus says that if His mighty works done 
among the Jews had been done in Sodom "it would have 
remained until this day." [Matt. 11:23.] It could not be excused - 
-God doesn't want us to excuse Him. 

God is His own interpreter, 
And he will make it plain" 

— if we will only let Him, and not bind ourselves with creeds so 
that we dare not believe what His word tells us, when we read 
that these same Sodomites are to be restored— brought back to 
"their former estate" and under the new covenant given to Israel 
"as daughters" for instruction in the next age. [Ezek. 16:48-63.] 
Only we, who see these beauties of God's plan, can truly say - 
"Just and true are thy ways, thou King of Nations." 

Again, as we sing our song we say "Who shall not fear Thee, O, 
Lord, and glorify thy name, for thou only art holy?" and our 
Christian brethren hold up their hands in horror saying, "That's 
almost universalism!" "According to orthodox belief nine out of 
every ten shall not, either in this life, or hereafter glorify God's 
name. " But we reply: "There is one Mediator between God and 
man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all 
men, to be testified in due time. " When in the millennial age, 
God's due time for testifying it to the world— to every man— shall 
have come, we believe that almost all will fear and glorify Him 
and love Him, too. What they lack is knowledge: 

If all the world my Savior knew, 
Then all the world would love Him too. 

Who but ourselves, believes the next clause? "All nations shall 
come and worship before Thee. " Not, those who think that all 
but a very few are gone to hell torment forever. Not those, 
either, who believe that all are annihilated except the saints. Nor 
yet, those who believe in a partial restitution, and that the living 
nations only are to come and worship God in the next age. No, 
none of these can or do sing this song. Only we, can sing it in 
full- a "Restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the 
mouth of all the holy prophets." Even the Sodomites of whom 
no remnant was left when "fire came down from heaven and 
destroyed them all." "All nations shall come and worship before 
Thee." "Thy judgments [righteous acts] are made manifest." We 
can see in the unfolding of the great plan that God's dealings are 
all 

R131 : page 7 



righteous, and just, and we can make it manifest to all who are 
not so blinded by traditions of men that the word of God is made 
to them of none effect. 

Judge not the Lord by feeble sense, 
But trust Him for His grace; 
Behind a frowning providence 
He hides a smiling face. 

Yes, dear brethren and sisters, we have to some extent at least 
gotten the victory over the Beast and his image, etc. The song is 
ours and we are singing it. But you say where are our "Harps of 
God"-We haven't got the harps yet? Yes, we have; it is called 
"The word of God" and Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, David, Job, 
Moses and all the Prophecies are but strings to our harp; they 
only require keying up and they will produce the sweetest 
harmony to this "Song of Moses and the Lamb," for as Peter 
says God hath spoken of the restitution by the mouth of all these 
holy Prophets. (Acts 3:21.) 

Then tune up your harps, dearly beloved, and sing aloud our 
glad song of "Jubilee. " Sing to your dear friends who love God, 
despite what seems to them his injustice. But if they will not 
hear sing to the world. It will be a "Bow of promise" to them 
when they go further down into the time of trouble. And if you 
cannot do this sing it loudly in your own heart. It will joy and 
comfort bring you, to think of our Father's love and realize that 
"His mercy endureth forever." (Ps. 136.) It will open and warm 
your heart and enrich it with love, both for your Father and for 
those who are the objects of His care and love. 



R131 : page 8 

RESTITUTION--FOR WHOM? 

Restitution signifies the restoring of a thing which was lost. 
You might give a person anything, whether he had once 
possessed it or not; but it would be quite improper to call it 
restoring unless he had once possessed and then lost it. The 
human family once possessed a perfect mental, moral and 
physical nature as represented in the person of Adam their head. 
Beautiful and majestic in form, God-like in the mental and 
moral qualities of his being (in God's image) and commissioned 
to be the King or God over all earthly creatures ("In our likeness 
let him have dominion over the beasts, foul, fish," etc.) he stands 
before us the picture of human perfection. He passes the 
inspection of the great Jehovah and is pronounced a "very good" 
man. He was not a God— no it had not been God's purpose to 
make another God, but a man: "Let us make man in our image. " 
We should not suppose that to be mentally and morally in God's 
image means that we will have the same mental and moral 



capacity; but, our justice, mercy, love, truth, and powers of 
reasoning, deciding, etc., while limited in capacity are the same 
in kind, as the justice, love, etc., of God, so that he can say to us: 
"Come let us reason together. " 

But before Adam had ever learned to use his powers fully, sin 
entered, and death followed, degrading and destroying by its 
various agencies of sickness and vice the once noble form, and 
the perfection of his intellectual and moral faculties. 

We have seen that God foresaw the necessity of this victory of 
evil over man, that he might learn forever the lesson, that sin 
and death go hand in hand and both are his enemies; while 
obedience to God and life and happiness are indissolubly 
connected, and that God is his true and best friend. We see God, 
the loving Father permitting evil for man's good and taking 
advantage of its presence to prove to man His unalterable 
character, "the exceeding sinfulness of sin," the Justice of His 
Laws, The boundlessness of His mercy, "The exceeding riches 
of His grace," and "the great Love wherewith He loved us," by 
redeeming us from all sin through Jesus Christ. We have seen 
too, how that as through one man's disobedience the many were 
made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall the many be 
made righteous, (just). (Rom. 5:19) and that in His due time God 
intends to bring all men back to the condition of perfect 
manhood where they will again be "very good. " This is 
restitution, the restoring to mankind of the power, qualities, and 
things lost through the first Adam. 

We next inquire who will be restored, and answer all of Adam's 
family except "The Bride" of Christ, "The Virgins her 
companions follow her," and the few who commit the 
unpardonable sin, sinning willfully, after that they have received 
the knowledge of the truth, and who count the blood of the 
covenant wherewith they were sanctified an unholy thing. [Heb. 
10:26-29.] These three classes have made a covenant with God 
by which they renounced their rights to the benefits of 
restitution and the perfect fleshly condition. They declare that 
they will take up their cross and follow Jesus. Instead of living 
with the world they will become dead to the world. Instead of 
expecting a restitution of the flesh they agree to crucify the 
flesh. Why do they make this covenant? Because of the joy set 
before them in God's part of the covenant, which is, that if they 
thus die with Jesus to all earthly interests they shall be joint- 
heirs with him to a heavenly inheritance. If with Him we give up 
and crucify the human nature, we shall be made partakers with 
Him of the divine nature. Those who do not enter this covenant 
to crucify the human nature retain it; and will be raised and 
restored to human perfection. Another thought is that now is the 
time to suffer and die with Him It cannot be done in the next 
age. For there is no death there, neither sorrow nor suffering - 
for the former things are passed away. This is the age of sin and 



evil and crucifying; the next will be for Glory and Restitution. 
[Rev. 21:4.] True, the restored family may come to the fountain 
and drink of the river of water of life freely, have an abundant 
supply of their life, yet it will be different from having 
immortality as a fountain of life, "springing up in YOU" so that 
you will never thirst, neither need come to that river to refresh 
yourself or to continue your life. 

So it is written, "If we suffer [death] with Him, we shall also 
reign with Him. " "If we be dead with Him we shall live with 
Him. " "If we suffer with Him, we shall be glorified together. " 
When?-answer -"Being made conformable unto His death; If 
by any means I might attain unto the [chief or first] resurrection 
from among the dead." Diag. Phil. 3:10. From the moment we 
enter into this covenant of death and life-suffering and glory 
with God, we begin the work of crucifying the human nature 
and God begins also at the same time to develop in us the divine 
nature by imparting to us the Holy Spirit. Once entered into, the 
covenant or agreement is unalterable, the matter is fixed and 
sealed. "Who hath also sealed us, and given the earnest of the 
Spirit in our hearts." [2 Cor. 1 :22.] We can never have part with 
the world in the restitution because by our covenant we have 
abandoned the human nature; the question with us now is, shall 
we continue to develop our new nature [which now is but an 
embryo condition] until at our birth [resurrection or translation] 
we come forth "spiritual bodies" like unto Christ's glorious 
body." 

Who will develop, this higher nature-many or few of those who 
enter the covenant? We answer: All of them, except those who 
openly ignore the value of the "blood of the covenant wherewith 
they were sanctified," i.e., set aside and ignore the value of 
Christ's death-as their ransom or purchase and we believe this 
will be a small number. 

So to speak, Jesus enters the covenant for us. He agrees to 
guarantee that our part of the contract shall be fulfilled. All such 
sealed ones are set apart, from the world and dealt with 
differently; even as our's is a different hope and calling from the 
world's. We have been begotten of God, are now in our embryo 
condition; and all will ultimately come to birth in His likeness 
who abide under the blood of the covenant, but if any of these 
members of "the household of faith" go forth from their house 
upon which is the blood of the Paschal Lamb, these will be 
destroyed. (Ex. 12:22,23.) 

We see then, that the only ones who do not reach the birth 
[resurrection] among all who are begotten and sealed by the 
Spirit are those who renounce the "blood of the covenant" and 
withdraw themselves from its protection, they sin against light, 
knowledge, and against the Spirit's direction and leading 
therefore it is called "The sin against the Holy Ghost which hath 
never forgiveness." 



Aside from these, the entire household of faith being begotten of 
the Spirit are all, children of God; and are all ultimately to reach 
his likeness. "He who begun the good work in us will complete 
it. " But there will be a difference in our positions according to 
the way in which we "run the race set before us." All who run 
will ultimately reach the end of the race, but the prize, of our 
high calling in Christ Jesus will be obtained only by those who 
"so run that they may obtain." This prize is to be the Bride of 
Christ, to be made one with Him, and therefore, to "Sit with 
Him in His throne" and to "inherit all things." 

In what way, do we become overcomers and gain the victory, 
and win the prize of being part of the Bride? By presenting our 
bodies a living sacrifice, by crucifying our fleshly will and 
nature, becoming dead, so that our own will, will neither be 
known nor done by us, but in everything we must seek to know 
and do the will of Christ. When dead, you will seek to eat, drink, 
talk and be clothed, not as the world might dictate, nor your own 
tastes desire, but according to the best information you can 
obtain of the will of God concerning you. This is a 

R132 : page 8 

hard work and it involves much pain to the old nature to be thus 
crucified and ignored. It is so difficult a task that we never could 
accomplish it unaided. But we hear the voice of Him that saith: 
"My grace is sufficient for thee." "Seek and ye shall find." "This 
is the victory that overcometh the world, even your faith. " 
According to our faith in God we draw supplies of strength. We 
desire to overcome, we seek his grace, we find it and as we 
become daily more filled with the new divine nature the victory 
over the old nature becomes more easy. This is the first 
company, the bride-the body. Like their head, Jesus they have 
been willing sacrifices. 

The second or great company are of the household also. They 
have made the covenant to die, but poor frail humanity shrinks 
from becoming a "speckled bird," a target for this world's sneers 
and ridicule. They love the favor of God and the favor of man 
also. They restrain themselves from presumptuous sins, and 
console themselves that they are far better than many others. 
They have not the power of faith to lay hold of God's promised 
assistance. "How can ye believe who receive honor one of 
another and seek not, the honor that cometh from God only. " 
(Matt. 5:44.) Thus "through fear of death they are all their 
lifetime subject to bondage;" these will be freed from their 
bondage soon; they are to go into the time of trouble, be 
"delivered over to Satan (the adversary) for the destruction of 
the flesh (which they would not willingly crucify) that the spirit 
may be saved. " They love the present world, to some extent, 
therefore do not overcome it. But Jesus, who became the surety 
for all believers, will not suffer the Divine nature begun in them 
to become extinct. 



Oh, how great and loving is the plan of God. How grand the 
prospect of restitution for the world, to the likeness of Perfect 
Earthly man. But how much grander our hope of being elevated 
from this to the "new creation." Who would not lay aside every 
weight, and run with patience for the prize of our high calling in 
Christ Jesus. 



R132 : page 8 

Correspondents' Questions. 

Bro. R.-In what sense do you consider Christ our substitute? 
Since you believe that when the Saints are made immortal they 
give up their flesh life as Christ gave up his, they needed no 
substitute. And since the sinner will die the second death it 
cannot be that he has a substitute. 

Ans.— I seldom use the word substitute now because it does not 
occur in our English translation of the Bible, I prefer to use the 
Bible words purchase and ransom which mean exactly the same 
thing. All men were sinners through Adam's disobedience. The 
seeds of sin and its result death had been sown in our race and 
we daily became more weak and sinful. All must die, and the 
process- "dying thou shalt die" is in progress. There is no way 
by which we can keep ourselves alive, much less make 
ourselves alive when we become entirely dead. We can never 
justify ourselves to life, consequently can never live again. 

At this juncture Jesus steps in- Does he set aside the Father's 
law which had condemned all the sinful race to death? No, but 
recognizing death as the righteous penalty of sin; he paid that 
penalty for us. Being, "without sin," "holy," "undefiled," he was 
not liable to the penalty of sin-death He had a perfect right to 
continue his earthly life forever; but instead he gave it for, i.e., 
instead of ours that had been forfeited. So that now God can 
give back perfect natural life to the whole race, and he declares 
that he will do so in His "due time." Thus did Jesus make 
himself "a propitiation -[satisfaction] for our sins, and not for 
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world, so that, as 
death passed upon all the human race through Adam, life is to be 
restored to all in "the times of restitution of all things," because 
Jesus Christ "gave himself a ransom for all men. " 

Jesus informs His church of the purchase and tells them that 
soon all will be restored, but offers to admit them to the Spiritual 
plane of life if they will now freely give up the natural life- 
make a sacrifice of it. They could not offer a sacrifice of their 
natural life until it was purchased for them, because they were 
already dead. Jesus purchased our lives, then hands them to us 
saying: Do what you wish with them— here is the great prize, if 
you crucify yourselves. And we do so gladly for the prize set 



before us in the Gospel— For ye were bought with a price, even 
the precious blood of Christ. 

What about the sinner who will die the second death? We 
answer, the fact that he dies the second death on account of his 
own sins is clear proof that he must have been ransomed from 
the first death which was the result of Adam's sin. 



R132 : page 1 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., SEPTEMBER, 1880. 

NO. 3. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 
L. A. ALLEN, .... HONEOYE, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R132 : page 1 



IMPORTANCE OF BAPTISM. 

Before considering what constitutes Scriptural baptism, let us 
inquire whether it is essential. We have no hesitation in saying 
that it is indispensable, and that no one will have a part in the 
"little flock" or be of "The bride, the Lamb's wife" who has not 
been baptized. Further, we have scriptural proof that all who are 
baptized shall be saved, that all such shall be in the "first 
resurrection." Let us hear Jesus' words- "He that believeth and is 
baptized shall be saved." But Paul is yet more explicit and says: 
[Rom. 6:3-8.] "For if we have been planted together in the 
likeness of his death we shall also be in the likeness of his 
resurrection." Notice that the subject is baptism; and that there is 
not an if, nor a but, nor any other contingency mentioned than 
baptism. How important then that we know what it is and 
understand how it should be performed. 

The meaning of the Greek word Baptizo is to bury, immerse, 
cover up, submerge. Now apply this significance to the word 
baptized; then associate it with yourself and you find that you 
are to be buried or submerged. But into what are we to be 
immersed— into water? No, we answer: Paul tells us that those 
who are really baptized "were baptized into Jesus Christ." The 
true baptism then is to be submerged, covered up, or immersed 
into Christ. If immersed into Christ we lose ourselves; we will 
no longer do our own will or way, for that will is buried. We 
have a new will or mind; it is the mind of Christ. "Let the same 
mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus." If we have been 
baptized into Christ it is that we may be members of His body, 
the church. And since "He is the head of the body, the church," 
[Col. 1 : 1 8] it follows that the only controlling authority for those 
who are members of that body is the will of Christ Jesus the 
head. This is complete immersion into Christ, and who will 
doubt that if thus dead to self and the world and alive only as a 
member of his body, obeying no will but that of "the head," we 
say who can doubt, that if thus immersed we shall be in his 
likeness in the resurrection; that if we thus know him, we shall 
also know the power of his resurrection. [Phil. 3:1 1.] 

But, by what means can one become thus immersed into Christ? 
Shall we be baptized into Christ by being immersed in water? 
Not at all; thousands are so immersed who will not be in his 
likeness in the resurrection. Let us ask Paul into what we must 
be immersed. He answers (Rom. 6:3) "Know ye not that so 
many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into 
his death?" 

Ah yes; It is a difficult matter to attain to the prize of our high 
calling. While many, "a great company" (Rev. 7:15) shall stand 
before the throne in glory, only "the body" of overcomers are to 
sit with him "in the throne." Rev. 3:21. It is only him that 
overcometh that "shall inherit all things" and be "joint-heir with 
Jesus." Not to the "great company" of "the household of faith" is 



the promise of the kingdom given, but to the "first-born" of the 
heavenly family-Jesus the head, the "church of the first-born" 
the body. To this first-born is the promise made: "Fear not little 
flock it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom. " 

This is the prize and all Christians are in the race course. All 
Christians in the race shall be saved and shall ultimately reach 
the goal, if they continue in this pathway. They will all 
ultimately reach the completeness of the "Divine nature," but it 
requires the putting forth of every effort in the race if we would 
win the prize and be found in Him as members of the body of 
the first-born and "heirs of all things." Therefore Paul exhorts 
[not the world, but Christians] to "so run that we may obtain" 
[the prize of our high calling]. "Let us lay aside every weight 
and the sin that doth so easily beset and run with patience the 
race set before us." They that so run shall 

R133 : page 1 

win the prize— be the Bride-the body. They that run but do not 
so run as to win, "suffer loss," the loss of the prize which they 
would have obtained had they been willing to "lay aside every 
weight. " They shall suffer loss but themselves shall be saved so 
as by fire. [Coming through "the great tribulation."] Their lives 
shall be saved but their works shall suffer loss. [Phil. 3:15]. 

Yes, beloved, it is a prize such as never before and never again 
will be offered and what wonder if it is very difficult of 
attainment- if it be "Through much tribulation shall ye enter the 
kingdom." By being baptized into his death, we are to be 
members of his body, "therefore we are buried with him by 
baptism into death. " But what is it to thus die his death. Is it 
simply to put "away the filth of the flesh," that is to deny 
ourselves only such things as are sinful? No, that would not be 
"being made conformable to his death." "In Him [Jesus] was no 
sin; " consequently he could not put to death a sinful nature. But 
while his nature was pure and his every desire was to do things 
right and proper for him as a perfect man, yet he yielded his 
rights and will as a natural man for us. For instance as a holy 
undefiled one he had a right to seek his own ease and pleasure 
but instead of so doing he was moved with compassion toward 
the people and went about spending his life for the sinner's 
benefit, taking our infirmities and bearing our sicknesses, and on 
more than one occasion he might have said: "Virtue [power, 
vitality] is gone out of me. " 

Yes he went about doing good spending his perfect life powers 
for the good of sinners because he was full to overflowing of the 
perfect love. Finally after having thus shared our sorrows and 
our griefs, He bought us and paid the price of sin [death] for us, 
that we sinners might be accounted righteous, and therefore 
have again the right to live. This was the great, grand, 
culminating expression he gave of his love: When he gave the 



life upon which sin and death had no claim in order that, in due 
time the race should go free, from sin and from death by a 
resurrection to perfect life. Surely he might have kept this life 
which he gave. It was not like ours, forfeited; as he himself 
testified: "No man taketh it from me; I lay it down of myself"- 
Even now I could ask the Father and he would give me more 
than twelve legions of angels, but these things to which he had a 
perfect right he gave up freely. 

Now it is his death, that we are to be conformed to. True it will 
include the giving up of the sins or "filth of the flesh," and the 
"denying of ungodly lusts," etc., but, thus far it is simply duty. 
You only give up things you never had a right to, there is no 
sacrifice in it. If we would be made conformable unto his death, 
it must be by the giving up of things not sinful and to which you 
have a right, as men. Jesus did not his own will, but the will of 
him that sent him, and we should "Let the same mind be in us 
which was also in Christ Jesus our Lord. " The Father's will as 
done in Christ Jesus was the giving up of natural things, and 
comforts, and life, on account of sin in the world. Sin and 
sufferings are still in the world and the disciples of Jesus most 
willing to "spend and be spent," to "labor and suffer reproach," 
making "himself of no reputation," such a disciple most closely 
follows Him "who has set us an example that we should walk in 
His footsteps." 

When asked of the two disciples whether they might sit on the 
right and left hand in the kingdom he answered: "Ye know not 
what ye ask; are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, 
and to be baptized with the baptism that I am [to be] baptized 
with?" Jesus shows what cup he meant when in the garden he 
exclaimed, "Father, if possible, let this cup pass from me. " He 
shows the baptism referred to also, that it was not the baptism of 
John in Jordan, but of death when he says, "I have a baptism to 
be baptized with and how am I straightened 'til it is 
accomplished. " 

Such, baptized into Christ's death will not make earthly ease and 
comfort their aim, but will seek to "do good unto all men as they 
have opportunity especially to the household of faith. " Their 
self-denial and God-likeness will seek to benefit and lift up the 
physical man, and how much more will it lead to self-sacrifice 
in order that others may be helped on to the divine life. Thus it 
was that the apostles spent themselves that they might declare 
"the unsearchable riches of Christ. " It was for this cause that 
Paul says: "I now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for 
his body's sake, which is the church. " Jesus left a measure of 
suffering, etc., for his church as his body to complete, or fill up, 
and Paul was zealous to bear as much of it as possible. Glorious 
ambition to spend his life in bearing the glad tidings of the 
"High calling" to those who would receive it. This is the 



ambition which Jesus both exemplified and commended, saying, 
"He that would be greatest among you let him become servant 
of all." 

If we thus live a divine life and crucify and ignore the natural 
life, we shall be considered "a peculiar people zealous of good 
works," and we will thus be so very different from the ideas of 
the natural man; that we must needs remember Jesus' words— 
"Marvel not if the world hate you, ye know that it hated me 
before it hated you." "The disciple is not above his Lord." "If 
any 

R133 : page 2 

man will be my disciple let him deny himself and take up his 
cross and follow me. " Self-denial means much, and will never 
be experienced except as we crucify the human nature with its 
affections and desires. 

We see what it is to be baptized into Jesus' death. Let us inquire 
whether it is an instantaneous act performed when we first come 
to Christ and seek admission into "the body" or, a life work? We 
answer it is both. 

When we first come to God through Jesus we covenant with 
Him that we will take up our cross and follow him through evil 
and good report, whether it brings the favor or frown of our 
fellows. Jesus tells us it means the loss of the friendship of the 
world, the gain of the friendship of God, the loss of worldly 
honor, the gain of heavenly honor, the loss of earthly life and 
earthly nature, the gain of the divine nature and the divine image 
-a spiritual body like unto Christ's glorious body. He illustrated 
his teaching on the night he was betrayed. He took bread and 
brake, saying, this is my body broken for you, eat ye all of it. 
The bread symbolized Jesus as the truth. "I am the truth"-"the 
heavenly manna. " After supper he took the cup of wine saying, 
This is my blood of the new covenant shed for many for the 
remission of sins; drink ye all of it. The wine symbolizes the 
blood and after we have tasted of the truth (bread) and seen that 
the Lord is gracious he says, Here is the cup of my sufferings 
and death, drink ye all of it— you must share this cup of 
sufferings if you would share my glory. "Yes," says Paul, "If we 
suffer with him we shall also be glorified together. " 

This covenant of death we make with God when we first come 
to him and He says He will, from the moment of covenant 
forward, reckon us dead indeed to the world and sin, although 
the entire life is to be a time of crucifying, or putting to death up 
to the time we die actually. God's part of the covenant is, that 
these who thus die shall have part of the divine nature, and from 
the moment we make this covenant, He seals it by giving us the 
Holy Spirit as a guide and comforter; which is an earnest of our 
inheritance, which full inheritance we shall receive when all the 
"little flock" have crucified themselves. Notice then that we first 



covenant to die, etc., and then receive of the Spirit's begetting 
power giving us spiritual life, whereby we can carry out our part 
of the covenant. 

But as crucifying is a lingering death, so our dying is well 
expressed thus, It is hard to die in any sense, but it is especially 
hard to be dead to the world, its opinions, pleasures and wishes, 
while still in it. In the world but not of it. Separate from sinners. 
Often will we need to "look unto Jesus the author (and soon to 
be) the finisher of our faith. " We will often need, as Paul said, to 
"consider Him who endured such contradiction (opposition) of 
sinners against himself lest (we) be weary and faint in (our) 
mind." "Be not weary of well-doing, for in due time we shall 
reap if we faint not. " 

No words that we can use can express so forcibly as do Paul's, 
the necessity of this immersion into Christ's death. "What things 
were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ. [Paul was fitted 
for a high social and political position, both by birth and 
education.] Yea, doubtless I count all things but loss for the 
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom 
I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but 
dung that I may win [a position in the body of] Christ, and be 
found in him, " covered with the righteousness of faith. "That I 
may know him and the power of his resurrection -(experience 
the same resurrection as Jesus to a spiritual body and immortal 
life— the first resurrection) and the fellowship of his sufferings, 
being made conformable unto his death, if by any means I might 
attain unto THE (first) resurrection." (Phil. 3:8-11.) "For if we 
have been planted together in the likeness of his death we shall 
be also in the likeness of His resurrection." (Rom. 6:5.) 

But while the above mentioned is beyond question the essential 
baptism, was there not a baptism into water enjoined also and as 
a type? Assuredly there is. When the new hearers had heard of 
Jesus' death for them, and of their high calling to share it with 
him and afterward to share his glory, they made the covenant 
with God and gave outward expression to it by the beautifully 
expressive type of being buried in water, and said by the act we 
die to the world and earthly conditions and rise to "walk not 
after the flesh but after the spirit. " 

R134 : page 2 

I rise to walk in heavens own light, 
Above the world and sin, 
With heart made pure and garment white 
And Christ enthroned within. 

The ordinance of water baptism is so beautifully expressive of 
our hope and covenant, that if there was no divine injunction as 
to its performance, as there is, we should still feel it a privilege 
to show forth and illustrate our planting (burying) together in the 



likeness of his death and our expectation of being in his likeness 
in the resurrection. 

When Cornelius had received the Holy Spirit Peter inquired, 
Can any man forbid water that these should be immersed? And 
so we ask, who can say aught against water being thus used as a 
type of our death? And we might put the question in another 
form for some: Can any man refuse to thus show forth his death 
if he has indeed died to the world? We think not. That which 
hinders many in the public illustration of the death they profess 
is we fear, generally pride, fear of mental or uttered reproach of 
fellow disciples and of the world. But dear fellow disciple 
reflect that these objections to water baptism indicate that the 
true essential baptism has never fully taken place. You may be 
partly dead, and have given up part of your own will, but when 
fully crucified you will say with Him, "I delight to do thy will, 
O Lord." I count all things but loss and dross that I may win 
Christ-the great prize. 

Let us, dearly beloved, live up to our covenant, and not only 
bury ourselves and our wills in Christ's, but also keep our bodies 
under-dying daily until fully delivered into the blessed 
kingdom— which deliverance we believe to be so very nigh at 
hand. 



R141 : page 2 

In most situations of life the consciousness of innocence is 
truly our best shield, and our firmest security. 



R134 : page 2 

"THE CHRIST OF GOD." 

The word Christ or Kristos is a Greek word introduced into our 
English language but not translated into it. Its translation or 
meaning is ANOINTED. 

Unto us a child was born, etc., and "They shall call his name 
Jesus." The name Jesus means Deliverer or Savior, and the child 
was called in view of a work he was to do; for we are told, "He 
shall save His people from their sins." Jesus was always His 
name, but from the time of His baptism, when the Holy Ghost 
descended upon Him and anointed Him as the High Priest 
preparatory to His making "The sin-offering" on the cross and 
thus accomplishing what is indicated in His name Jesus (viz. : 
saving his people from their sins). From the time (baptism) that 
God thus "anointed him with the oil of gladness above his 
fellows," his title has been "The anointed"-Jesus "the Christ 
(anointed) of God." Luke 9:20. 



Jesus was frequently called by this title instead of by his name; 
as English people oftenest speak of their sovereign as "the 
Queen" instead of calling her by her name- Victoria. 

But, as Jesus was in God's plan as the anointed one before the 
foundation of the world, so too the church of Christ was 
recognized in the same plan, that is, God purposed to take out of 
the world a "little flock" whom he purposed raising up above the 
condition of the perfect human nature, to make them "partakers 
of the Divine nature. " The relationship of Jesus towards these is 
that of "Head over all, God blessed forever. " For he hath given 
him to be head over the church (of the first-born), which is His 
body. As Jesus was foreordained to be the anointed one, so we 
also were chosen to the same anointing of the Spirit as members 
in his body and under him as our head. And so we read: (Eph. 
1:3) "God hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ 
according as He hath chosen us in Him before the foundation of 
the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him 
in love; having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by 
Jesus Christ, to himself... where he hath made us accepted in the 
beloved." (See also vs. 20-23.) Again (Rom. 8:29), "Whom He 
did foreknow he also did predestinate to be conformed to the 
image of His Son, that He (head and body) might be the first- 
born (heir) among many brethren. " 

God's plan of saving the world by a "restitution of all things" 
waits until first this bride of Jesus-these members of the spirit- 
anointed body shall be gathered out from the world according to 
His purpose. God's intention being to display to the world his 
wonderful and mighty "love wherewith he loved us" as we read 
(Eph. 2:7.) "He hath raised us up together... in Christ Jesus, that 
in the ages to come He might show the exceeding riches of His 
grace (favor) in His kindness toward us in Christ Jesus," for we 
are "elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father 
through sanctification (setting apart) of the Spirit unto obedience 
and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ." (1 Pet. 1:2.) This 
shows us that the election is not an arbitrary one. God elected 
first that Jesus should taste death for us, thus releasing us from 
death. Second, that the knowledge of this redemption should be 
declared. Third, that those who believed the proclamation 
should be invited or called to become "partakers of the Divine 
nature," "heirs of God, joint heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord, if 
so be that they suffer (death) with him that they might be also 
glorified together." (Rom. 8:17.) His purpose being that when 
this "promised seed" is developed in, through, or by it "all the 
families of the earth shall be blessed." [Gal. 3:29.] The seed is to 
crush the serpent's head. [Rom. 16:20] thus destroying evil and 
bringing about "the restitution of all things." 

To be thus a part of "The Seed," "The Christ," we must see to it 
that we comply with the conditions [suffer death with Him if we 
would be found in Him] thus making our calling and election 



sure. We make sure of our being part of the elect company by 
obedience to the call: for "They that are with Him are called, 
and chosen and faithful." [Rev. 17:14.] Being faithful to the call 
insures our position among the chosen. They that "follow the 
Lamb whithersoever He goeth" in the future, are the same that 
bend every power and lay aside every weight to "walk in His 
footsteps" here. 

A beautiful illustration of our oneness with Jesus, as members of 
the anointing of Aaron as high-priest: All of the anointing oil 
[type of the Holy spirit,] was poured upon the head; the under 
priests stood by, their heads covered with 

R135 : page 2 

bonnets (Lev. 8:13) indicating thereby, that they were not the 
head. Aaron who stood with uncovered head, was the head of 
their priesthood. They took part in the ceremony and were 
anointed symbolically in him as members of His body, for the 
oil poured on the head ran down over the members of His body, 
as we read, (Psa. 133:2): "It ran down the beard even Aaron's 
beard: that went down to the skirts of the garments. " So we who 
claim not to be the head but members in Christ's body receive 
full anointing by the same spirit. "For as the body is one, and 
hath many members, and all the members of that one body, 
being many, are one body, so also is Christ for by one spirit are 
we all baptized into one body. 1 Cor. 12:12. "As many of you as 
were baptized into Christ were baptized into his death." Rom. 6. 

Our oneness with Jesus as members of the Christ-anointed body 
—may be clearly illustrated by the figure of the pyramid: 



The topstone is a perfect pyramid of itself. Other stones may be 
builded under it and if built in exact harmony with all the 
characteristic lines of the topstone the whole mass will be a 
perfect pyramid. How beautifully this illustrates our position as 
members of "The Seed, " "The Christ. " Joined to, and perfectly 



[Continued on seventh page.] 

R136 : page 7 

[Continued from second page.] 

in harmony with our head we are perfect; separated from him we 
are nothing. 

Jesus the perfect one has been highly exalted, and now we 
present ourselves to him that we may be formed and shaped 
according to his example that we may be built up as a building 
of God. In an ordinary building there is no "chief corner-stone, " 
but in our building there is one chief corner-stone the "topstone" 
as it is written, "Behold I lay in Zion a chief corner-stone, elect 



precious"— "to whom coming as unto a living stone.. .ye also as 
lively (living) stones are built up a spiritual house an holy 
priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by 
Jesus Christ." 1 Pet. 2:4-6. And very soon we trust the union 
between Jesus and the body will be complete; as expressed by 
the prophet: "He shall bring forth the head-stone, therefore, with 
shoutings of grace unto it. 

And dearly beloved, many blows and much polishing must we 
have, much transforming we must undergo, and much 
conforming unto his example under the direction of the great 
Master builder; and in order to have the ability and ideality of 
the builder displayed in us we will need to see that we have no 
cross grained will of ours to oppose or thwart his will being 
done in us; We must be very childlike and humble- "Be clothed 
with humility, for God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to 
the humble. Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand 
of God that he may exalt you in due time." 1 Pet. 5:6. 



R134 : page 3 



THE WAITING VIRGIN. 

From Zion's watch tower gazing, 
Christ's Bride perceives the morn, 
Her eyes to heaven raising, 
She heeds not Satan's scorn. 

The smell of precious ointment 
Floats on the balmy breeze, 
The signs of Christ's appointment 
In all around she sees. 

Anon with earnest longing, 
She looks across the plain, 
Where rosy light is dawning, 
And tunes her plaintive strain. 

"I know not now the moment 
When Thou, dear Lord, shalt call, 
But, with the wedding garment, 
I wait for my sweet Home. 

Not through the grave's dark portal 
May I be called, dear Lord; 
But clothe e'en here this mortal 
By Thine immortal word. " 

Still of her Bridegroom sueing, 
In soft low tones she speaks; 
He listens to her wooing, 
And answers while she seeks. 



"Cease now, my spouse, from weeping; 
Thy loved one like a hart, 
O'er hills and mountains leaping, 
Shall cause Thy foes to start. 

The morn of Thy salvation 
E'en now bright gilds the sky, 
Through every tribe and nation 
My heralds swiftly fly. 

The bridal song is swelling, 
The guests are gathering fast; 
Angelic hosts are telling 
That life's battle's won at last. 

~"M. J." Princeton, N.J. 



R174 : page 3 

LOOKING UNTO JESUS. 

HEBREWS 12:2. 

It is one purpose, at least, of the Holy Ghost in this epistle, to 
show that in all things Jesus has the preeminence. First, He 
brings forward the angels, but only to set them aside in the 
presence of Jesus; for unto which of the angels said God at any 
time, "Sit on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy 
footstool?" (1:13.) Second, He brings forward Moses, but only 
to set him aside in the presence of Jesus; for "Moses verily was 
faithful in all his house, as a servant,... but Christ as a son over 
his own house." (3:5,6.) Third, He brings forward Aaron, but 
only to set him aside in the presence of Jesus; for the former was 
made after the law of a carnal commandment, without an oath, 
not suffered to continue by reason of death, and offered up 
sacrifice, first for his own sins; while the latter was made after 
the power of an endless life, with an oath, who ever liveth to 
make intercession for us, and is holy, harmless, undefiled, 
separate from sinners. (7.) 

Fourth, He brings forward Melchisedek, "first being by 
interpretation king of righteousness, and after that also king of 
Salem, which is king of peace," but only to set him aside in the 
presence of Jesus; for it is his highest glory to be a passing 
shadow, a momentary type, of the man of Calvary who is the 
very center of God's counsels. Fifth, He brings forward the old 
and broken covenant of works, but only to set it aside in the 
presence of Jesus, in whom is confirmed the new covenant, the 
better covenant, established upon better promises, securing 
beyond the possibility of failure the eternal salvation of all His 
people. (8.) Sixth, He brings forward the imposing ritual of the 
tabernacle service, but only to set it aside in the presence of 



Jesus; for it could "never with those sacrifices which they 
offered year by year continually make the comers thereunto 
perfect," while of Jesus it is said, "By one offering he hath 
perfected forever them that are sanctified." (9:10.) Seventh, He 
brings us at last into God's gallery of portraits, illustrating the 
power of faith, but only to set them aside in the presence of 
Jesus, the Princely Leader and Completer of faith; who stands so 
far above angels, above Moses, above Aaron, above 
Melchisedek, above the covenant at Sinai, above the tabernacle 
of the wilderness, above the saints of four thousand years, that 
we are told to look off and away from all others and from self 
unto Jesus, and unto Jesus alone, "looking unto Jesus."— The 
Truth. 



R173 : page 3 

THE LORD'S JEWELS. 

BY H. GRATTAN GUINNESS. 

The Christian church as a witness for God in the world has 
failed, like the Jewish nation, and become apostate. There is a 
little flock, there is a true church, but its members are scattered 
abroad and almost invisible in the great Babylon; they are the 
seven thousand who have not bowed the knee to Baal, they are 
the called and chosen and faithful who follow the Lamb, they 
are those who have turned to God from idols, to serve the living 
and true God, and to wait for his Son from heaven; they are 
those who have not the form only, but the power of godliness, 
those who keep themselves unspotted from the world, and 
overcome through faith. They are found in every section of the 
professing church, and the Lord knoweth those that are his- 
"They shall be mine, saith the Lord of Hosts, in the day when I 
make up my jewels." 

But for the rest-for the vast professing body which bears the 
name of Christ, it has not continued in the goodness of God, it 
has turned his grace into licentiousness, its sentence is gone 
forth, it must be "cut off. " The long-suffering of God has been 
abundantly manifested; it is right that his holy severity should be 
again revealed. The professing church has long been unworthy 
of the sacred name it bears, and of the high and holy 
responsibility of being God's witness on earth, which belongs to 
it; it is time it should cease to hold the position it has so fearfully 
forfeited. Instead of being the instrument of spreading the truth 
of the Gospel among men, it is the worst hindrance to their 
attaining that knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ whom he 
has sent, in which life eternal lies. Like the Pharisees of old it 
stands as the great obstruction, neither entering itself into the 
kingdom, nor suffering those who would, to enter in. The name 
of God is blasphemed among the nations, by reason of the 



corruption of the professing church; the light that should have 
been in it, is become darkness, and great is that darkness! The 
church is confounded with the world, and the true saints are 
strangers in its society. It is no longer the pillar and ground of 
the truth, it is the hotbed of heresy, false doctrine, and 
corruption of every kind. What contrast can be more complete, 
than that between the church as Christ intended it to be, and the 
church as it now exists in the world! An end must come to all 
this ! Not only does the Word of God predict it, not only does 
our own sense of righteousness demand it, but the solemn 
analogies of history distinctly intimate it. Let the undeniable fact 
that past apostasies brought down the judgment they deserved, 
forewarn men what must be the end of the existing apostasy of 
the professing people of God. Babylon must fall! Great Babylon 
must come in remembrance before God, who will give unto her 
the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath, for her sins 
have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered her 
iniquities. 



R135 : page 3 

THE REPULSIONS OF CHRISTIANITY. 

We dwell much upon the attractions of Christianity, but rarely 
stop to think that it may also have repulsions which are vitally 
necessary to its purity and permanence. If the church of Christ 
draws to herself that which she cannot assimilate to herself, her 
life is at once imperiled; for the body of believers must be at one 
with itself, though it be at war with the world. Its purity and its 
power depend first of all upon its unity. So that if perchance the 
church shall attract men without at the same time transforming 
them; if she shall attach them to her membership without 
assimilating them to her life, she has only weakened herself by 
her increase, and diminished herself by her additions. It is a hard 
and ungracious saying, then, to declare that the church of God in 
the world must be able to repel as well as to attract. 

NATURE IS AN AUSTERE TEACHER 

on this point. She has given to the rose its exquisite fragrance, 
but she has also armed it with thorns, so that while the delicious 
odors attract, these little sentinels stand guard with their drawn 
bayonets to defend the flower, which is endangered by its very 
beauty and sweetness. And the church of Christ has too much of 
loveliness and excellence to be trusted on earth without 
defences. Hypocrites will hide under her beautiful garments; 
covetous men will make gain of her godliness; pleasure-seekers 
will turn the grace of God, which she offers, into lasciviousness, 
and the avaricious will make merchandise out of her pearl of 
great price, unless her outward attractiveness is guarded by 



some counter defences. "The Bride of Christ," has the church 
with wonderful honor been named. And think you that the 
Heavenly Bridegroom would leave her in this world without 
endowing her with that stern chastity of holiness, and that native 
aversion to impurity which should be her defence against such 
as would betray her? "The king's daughter is all glorious within; 
her clothing is of wrought gold. So shall she be brought unto the 
king in raiment of needle- work. " But "as the lily among thorns 
so is my beloved among the daughters." The beauty of Christ's 
church is guarded by the asperity of her discipline. Her graces 
are hedged about with self-denial; her gifts are compassed with 
crosses and her triumphs are crowned with thorns. This is her 
only safety from such as might otherwise be won to her only to 
waste and dishonor her. 

SANCTITY OF LIFE AND CHARACTER 

which Christ requires in his church is her most powerful 
defense. It is her native chastity and constitutes her truest 
safeguard. Nothing is so severe as purity; nothing so effectually 
repels the familiarities of the wicked. We think to fence the fold 
of God with guards and restrictions so that the unsanctified and 
the unclean may not come in. This is a confession of weakness 
and frailty. The holy virgin of the Lord has been endowed with a 
native purity which is her true shield and defense. What means 
the Scripture when it commands us to stand, "having on the 
breastplate of righteousness?" Is it not an intimation of that 
which all experience verifies, that righteousness is the strongest 
repellant of wickedness and corruption which the soul can wear? 
You say that purity shrinks from contact with impurity; but 
remember that this aversion is mutual. Uncleanness recoils from 
purity; it sinks abashed from its presence as the wild beast 
cowers and quails before the imperial eye of a fearless man. I 
am not theorizing on this point. Ungodly men have confessed to 
a discomfort amounting almost to torture which the enforced 
association with the good and holy has produced. It is said that if 
we live in the same luxury, and dress with the same 
extravagance, and drift in the same tides of fashion; if we seek 
wealth with the same greed, and pursue pleasure with the same 
fondness, and love society with the same devotion; and if with 
all this we are popular preachers and eminent Christians, and 
zealous churchmen, we shall win multitudes to our faith. We 
shall have made men think well of themselves, by these cordial 
affiliations, which is the surest step to making them think well 
of us and of our church. And so we have won them. 

But alas ! what have we done? We have gained them by being 
ourselves "conformed to this world," instead of by their being 
"transformed by the renewing of their minds." We have brought 
them into the church by lowering its fellowship to them, instead 
of by raising them to its fellowship. 



The church that is holy is armed with a perpetual decree of 
excision against the hypocritical and profane and unclean. It 
says to the worldly and ungodly and impure: "Stand by thyself; 
come not near to me, for I am holier than thou"-words which 
are most improper for any man to speak with his lips; but most 
honorable for the church to express by her silent, unconscious 
example. Do I speak coldly and harshly of the relations of 
Christians to the world-as though it were their principal care to 
keep aloof from it, or if touching it by enforced association, to 
gather up their garments, lest they be defiled by its contact? God 
forbid that I should so think. "This man receiveth sinners and 
eateth with them, " is the blessed tribute which was paid to Jesus 
Christ, by his enemies. If we at all bear his character and do his 
work we shall be like him in this respect. 

Or take another exhortation of Scripture. "Let us put on the 
armor of light." Here light is made the Christian's shield— light 
whose beams search into every nook and corner of earth's 
impurity and yet contract no defilement; absorbing from 
everything the clear crystal water, but rejecting every particle of 
uncleanness— attracting always, but always rebuking. These, O 
church of God, are thy weapons of defence and conquest. 

Then again, we find in the doctrines and invitations of the 
gospel just that mingling of tenderness and sternness which is 
calculated to draw men from their sins instead of drawing them 
in their sins. "Come 

R135 : page 4 

unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give 
you rest," and, "If any man will come after me, let him deny 
himself and take up his cross and follow me. " What worldling is 
likely to run hastily after Christ in obedience to such a 
summons? What disciple is likely to be captured with such an 
invitation before his heart is really won? There is the check of 
rigid exaction in Christ's calls, as well as the allurements of 
gracious love; so that while men are drawn, they may not be 
hurried into an impulsive, premature profession. 

Have you thought to analyze the attraction of Christ's cross, to 
see how strongly this principle holds there?" "And I, if I be 
lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me," says Jesus. 
But what is it that is thus set forth as the central attraction of 
Christianity? The most repulsive object on which the natural 
man can look— 

R136:page4 

CHRIST CRUCIFIED: 

unto the Jews a stumbling-block, and unto the Greeks 
foolishness." Draw men it will, as long as there is a sinner 
sighing for pardon, or a penitent seeking peace; draw men it 



will, when they have guilt to be cleansed, and burdens to be 
lifted, and stains to be washed. But it will draw no one through 
his aesthetic tastes, or his sense of the beautiful, or his poetic 
sentiment. There is a cross which can do so: that jeweled and 
exquisitely carved adornment which hangs upon the neck of 
beauty -that cross wrought with diamonds and robbed of its 
"offence," "Which Jews might kiss and infidels adore"- that can 
attract men without converting them. And who knows what evil 
it has done to men's souls on this account— this cross in which 
beauty culminates and ignominy utterly disappears. How it has 
filled eyes with its charms which have thereby been cut off from 
beholding "the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the 
world;" how it has helped to substitute sentiment for faith, and 
poetic feeling for godly sorrow, and the crucifix for the 
Crucified. You see what the true cross of Christ did when Peter 
held it up on the day of Pentecost. It wrought intense conviction 
as it showed men what their sin had done. Its nails seemed to be 
plucked out and driven into the breasts of the multitude, till 
being "pricked in their hearts" they cried out: "Men and 
brethren, what shall we do?" And then it brought peace as 
quickly as it had brought contrition, when it was made known 
that this Crucified One had "borne their sins in his own body on 
the tree. " This is the attraction of that cross which is ordained to 
be the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth. 
It is an attraction which pierces while it draws, and wounds 
while it wins, and thus proves a worthy instrument of God's 
electing love. And we have seen in the history of the church 
what the spurious cross could do; as for example, when the 
monks went forth among our ancestors in Britain to win them to 
Christianity. The crucifix was lifted high; it was supplemented 
by all the pomps and splendors of an imposing ritual; chants 
were poured forth, censers were waved, bodies were prostrated, 
and thousands in a day gave in their allegiance to the new 
religion. But it was the senses that were won, not the hearts; and 
baptized pagans were brought into the church only to paganize 
Christianity. This is an illustration of the evil that always comes 
of magnifying the attractions of the cross while diminishing its 
wholesome repulsions. 

And the same law holds in regard to all the institutions of 
Christianity. Its baptism is described as a "burial with Christ," a 
"baptism into death; " so that he who submits to it must in spirit 
become like his Lord, "obedient unto death, even the death of 
the cross." Its sacrament of fellowship is "a communion of the 
blood of Christ," and "a communion of the body of Christ"- 
expressions from which the natural man has always revolted. Its 
worship is required to be "in spirit and in truth;" its music the 
"sacrifices of praise;" its gospel the "foolishness of preaching," 
its example before the world "in simplicity and godly sincerity. " 
Enough here surely to temper the inducements of Christianity! 
But this is evidently according to the divine plan-that the gospel 



should act upon men by an elective affinity, winning their faith 
but offending their pride; constraining the sincere by their love 
of Christ, but testing the superficial with the searching question 
of Christ, "Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, 
and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?" 

My brethren, we are living in a time when men are 



BENT ON MAKING A LUXURY OF RELIGION. 

They demand that our doctrine shall be pleasant, our worship 
refined and artistic, our ordinances beautiful and alluring. No 
"bitter herbs" must be upon our tables as we keep our passover; 
no heavy crosses must be laid upon our shoulders as we follow 
Christ. 

Shall we "preach Christ crucified in a crucified style"— putting 
the nail through those refinements of reason that so often cover 
up the blood of expiation, and pressing the thorns into that 
intellectual pride which would soften propitiation to a moral 
influence? Shall we be content with that plainness in worship, 
and strive for that holiness of life, which can commend Christ 
while humbling us, and gain men's hearts though offending their 
tastes? Oh, ungracious calling, that we must displease the world 
when we might perchance delight it, and turn its impatient gaze 
upon its sins, when we might rivet its admiration on ourselves! 
But so long as good and evil are in the world, grace and severity 
must be in our lives and our doctrines. Wonderful is that high 
commendation of the Son of God— "Thou hast loved 
righteousness and hated iniquity, therefore God, even thy God, 
hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows."— 
(Extracts from a sermon by Rev. A. J. Gordon, D.D., in 
Messiah's Herald.) 



R136:page4 



NUMBER SEVEN. 

(CONTINUED.) 



There are seven petitions in what is commonly called the 
"Lord's prayer"— more properly the prayer He taught His 
disciples. Matt. 6:9-13. This prayer, so brief and so expressive 
of human wants, is based on the sacred number which we have 
found underlying so many things in God's plan. Does not this 
fact show that the mind which invented this prayer, so to speak, 
knew that principle? It is to us an additional evidence of the 
inspiration of the Bible. Our Lord Jesus spoke from His own 
Divine fullness, "I am the Truth"— and hence in harmony with 
human wants. 



The central petition in this remarkable prayer is, "Give us this 
day our daily bread. " This doubtless includes both natural and 
spiritual bread. It is as certain that we need spiritual bread-the 
truth- constantly, in order that our spiritual life be sustained, as 
that we need natural bread daily to sustain our physical life. In 
this as in almost everything else in the Bible the natural 
represents the spiritual. Hence Jesus could say both, "I am the 
Truth" and "I am the true Bread which came down from 
heaven. " Truth is to the spiritual life as bread is to the natural 
life, hence: "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every 
word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. " Matt. 4:4. (If, as 
some would have us believe, Jesus while here in the flesh, was 
nothing but a man, having left His Divine nature and life, will 
some one tell us how He could truly say I came down from 
heaven?) (If His flesh came down from heaven, then we all 
came down from heaven.) 

In a preceding chapter we saw that Joseph was a type of Christ 
as the bread-giver, and also that there were seven years of plenty 
followed by seven years of famine, or what would have been 
famine had it not been for the abundance in the storehouse. 
Since that was written it occurs to us that those two periods of 
seven express typically the relation between the Jewish and 
Gospel dispensations. This new thought— new to us— looks very 
clear and beautiful and tends to confirm our faith in the equality 
and parallelism of the Two Dispensations. 

Where do we get our spiritual food during the Gospel 
dispensation, but from the full storehouse of the Old Testament? 
The Jewish age was emphatically a period of direct 
communication from God. All the Old Testament was written 
during that age. The gospel in all its glorious fullness, is 
contained in the types and prophecies of the Old Testament. The 
New Testament is but the development and fulfillment of the 
Old. Christ and the Apostles quoted from and applied the 
teachings of the Old Testament. The New was in the Old as the 
kernel in the shell, or as the light is in the oil before it is burned. 
The burning is the process of bringing out the light. The work of 
the Holy Spirit as Christ's representative has been to bring out 
from the rich storehouse the treasures of wisdom and 
knowledge. Not all at once, nor all to one person, has the truth 
been unfolded, but to the church in its varied capacities, and as 
meat in due season. 

The want of these direct communications, and of visible angelic 
ministrations has made the Gospel age emphatically one of faith, 
and it would have been, like the second seven, a period of 
famine, had it not been for the full stores laid up for us by our 
Joseph-Christ the Bread Giver. How very wise His provisions, 
and how precious the constant, daily, supply! 

As human wants are expressed in seven petitions, so Christian 
character is comprehended in seven graces added to faith. 2 Pet. 



1:5-7. This language is addressed to Christians, as shown by the 
exhortation to add to faith. Faith is fundamental, and these 
graces are as the house of Wisdom built upon it. "Wisdom hath 
builded her house, she hath hewn out her seven pillars." Prov. 
9:1. Pillars are not only for beauty but for strength. "If ye do 
these things ye shall never fall." "Without faith it is impossible 
to please Him: for he that cometh to God must believe that He 
is, and that He is the rewarder of them that diligently seek Him. " 
Heb. 11:6. Peter says to those who have faith, "Besides this, 
giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue; and to virtue, 
knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, 
patience; and to patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly 
kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity." By comparing 
Paul's and Peter's statements above, it will be seen that diligently 
to seek 

R137 : page 4 

and come to God is to build this house of Wisdom, and so form 
a character like God, or grow up into Christ our Head in all 
things; and it will be seen also, by reading the context that the 
reward, of the abundant entrance is to him who thus builds. 

We have been surprised at times by a statement of a Christian 
brother, something like the following: "If you expect to gain the 
high calling on account of character you will be greatly 
disappointed. " This statement, we believe, has a worse meaning 
and influence than he who wrote it supposed. Had it been said, 
"If you expect to form such a character out of Christ you will be 
greatly deceived, " we would have said a hearty AMEN. But 
from Peter's statement and the general teaching of the New 
Testament, it is evident that the object of union with Christ is 
that we bring forth fruit unto holiness; and we may safely say 
that whoever expects to have a part in the high calling of God 
without character will be greatly disappointed. And we firmly 
believe that the writer above referred to would agree to this. 

Men are sometimes led to make statements in the heat of an 
argument, the legitimate effects of which they would reject. 
Their hearts in such cases are better than their statements. But 
when the doctrine of holiness is obscured by such statements, 
then the Lord gives a fullness of expression to this subject by 
His Spirit, enabling us to defend the truth and ourselves against 
the wiles of the Devil. And we are justified, for the sake of the 
flock of God who are in danger, in contending earnestly for the 
truth. 

See how emphatic Peter is upon this point. "If these things be in 
you and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren 
nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. " Verse 
8. As much as to say though we have the knowledge, yet lacking 
these we will be both barren and unfruitful. "He that lacketh 



these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten 
that he was purged from his old sins." Verse 9. 

The doctrine of the forgiveness of sin is made very prominent in 
the Bible, and is a strong motive to a holy life. He that is 
conscious of being forgiven much loveth much; hence the 
danger of forgetting it, and of falling into the idea that every one 
must suffer the full penalty for his own sins. The Psalmist says 
"Bless the Lord, O my soul! and forget not all His benefits. Who 
forgiveth all thine iniquities" &c. Psa. 103:2-3. The very first 
great benefit is 

R137:page5 

forgiveness of all our sins. According to Peter the effect of 
forgetting this is the neglect of the Christian graces. Hence he 
would put them in remembrance and says: "Wherefore the 
rather, brethren, give diligence [by adding these graces] to make 
your calling and election sure: for if ye do [add] these things ye 
shall never fall; for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you 
abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in 
remembrance of these things, though ye know them, and be 
established in the present truth. " Peter did not consider it enough 
that his brethren should be established in the present truth, but in 
addition to that he would continually remind them of these 
things— the seven graces. We have here a good reason for our 
importunity on this theme, though unfortunately it may be 
distasteful to some. May the Spirit of truth help us to appreciate 
and to add these seven cardinal graces. 

J. H. P. 



R174:page5 

God the Director of Forces. 

JOSEPH COOK. 

The Scotch philosopher Beattie once went into his garden and 
drew in the soft earth the letters C. W. B. He sowed these 
furrows with garden cresses, smoothed the earth and went away. 
These were the initials of his little boy, who had never been 
taught anything concerning God, although he had learned to 
read. "Ten days later," says Beattie, "the child came running to 
me in amazement, and said, 'My name has grown in the 
garden.'" "Well, what if it has?" said the philosopher. "That is 
nothing," and turned away. But the child took his father by the 
hand, led him to the garden plat, and said, "What made those 
letters?" "I see very well," the father replied, "that the initials of 
your name have grown up here in the garden. That is an 
accident;" and he turned away again. The child followed him, 



took him by the hand, brought him back to the spot, and said 
very earnestly, "Someone must have planted the seeds to make 
the letters." "Do you really believe those letters cannot have 
been produced by chance?" said the father. "I believe somebody 
planted them, " said the son, who probably did not know what 
chance meant. "Very well," said the father; "look at your hands 
and your feet; consider your eyes and all your members. Are 
they not skillfully arranged? How did your hand get its shape?" 
The boy replied: "Somebody must have made my hands for me." 
"Who is that some one?" said the father. "I do not know," said 
the child. "Do you feel certain that somebody planted those 
seeds, and sure that some one made your hands?" "Yes," said the 
boy, with great earnestness. And then the father communicated 
to the child the name of the great Being by whom all things are 
made, and the boy never forgot the lesson, nor the circumstances 
which led to it. 

Now I bring the materialist, or any one who doubts the validity 
of the argument from design to prove the existence of a God 
possessing intelligence, to this garden plat. I say, "Will you 
explain for me the letters C. W. B?" The materialist replies: "I 
will do so, and can do so very easily, for the letters are explained 
by the powers in the seeds." "Let us hear your explanation in 
detail," I reply. "Very well," the materialist goes on to say: 
"there is a garden cress making the head of the letter C. Is not 
that garden cress accounted for by the seed from which it 
grows?" "Yes," I say. And so he goes on through the fifty 
garden cresses that make up the letter. He accounts for each one 
of the cresses, and then infers that he has accounted for the 
letter. I stop him and say, that to account for each one of those 
garden cresses, is not at all to account for the arrangement of the 
cresses into the shape of the C. Why did they not arrange 
themselves as a W, or a B, or in any form, or in no form at all? 
Here is the distinction between the existence of the forces of 
matter and the direction of those forces. 



R137:page5 



THE SIN AGAINST THE HOLY SPIRIT. 

What do you understand to be the sin against the Holy Spirit? 
is a question frequently asked by Christians and others, of those 
who are teaching that, that is the only unpardonable sin. 

It is a question which has puzzled many Christians, and they 
have had fears lest they would commit it, or were already guilty. 

Jesus says: All manner of sins and blasphemy shall be forgiven 
unto men; but the blasphemy against the Holy Spirit shall not be 
forgiven unto men. 



And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall 
be forgiven him; but whosoever speaketh against the Holy 
Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world (age), 
neither in the world (age), to come. Matt. 12:31,32. 

Those who oppose the idea of a future age of probation; say the 
world to come was mentioned for the sake of emphasis. 

Why speak of it in connection with this one sin, if no sins shall 
be forgiven in a future age? 

The language would certainly be meaningless, were there not 
two ages, during which the spirit does a work for the human 
family, making it possible for some to commit the sin which 
shall never be forgiven, in each. The Spirit is choosing a bride 
for Christ, during the Gospel age; at the end the marriage is 
consummated; and during the millennial age, the Spirit and the 
bride say come. Rev. 22:17. 

The church as a chaste virgin espoused to Christ-2 Cor. 1 1 :2; is 
chosen through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth. 
2Thess. 2:13. 

Jesus says: "If ye love me, keep my commandments, and I will 
pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he 
may abide with you forever; even the Spirit of truth; whom the 
world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth 
him; but ye know him, for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in 
you." 

"But the Comforter, which is the Holy Spirit, whom the Father 
will send in my name he shall teach you all things and bring all 
things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. 
John 14:15,16,17,26. But when the Comforter is come, whom I 
will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, 
which proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me. " John 
15-26. 

Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the 
heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that 
love him; but God hath revealed them unto us by his spirit; for 
the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.. ..So 
the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God. 1 Cor. 
2:9-11. 

Again, Jesus says: Nevertheless, I tell you the truth: it is 
expedient for you that I go away, for if I go not away the 
Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send 
him unto you. Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth is come, he 
will guide you into all truth. John 16:7-13. These passages seem 
to teach, conclusively, that the Spirit began its work at 
Pentecost, where the Comforter came, after Jesus went away; 
consequently does its work in the two ages referred to; also that 
only those who have been made partakers of; and led, to some 
extent, at least, into truth, can commit the sin under 



consideration. Certainly it would seem that no one would claim 
that the Spirit has done so much for the great mass of the human 
race, during the gospel age, to say nothing of previous ages. 

But a question involving a forever, we should expect to find 
very plainly stated and so we read: "Leaving the principles of 
the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection; not laying 
again the foundation of repentance from dead works; and of 
faith toward God; of the doctrine of baptisms; and of 
resurrection of the dead; and eternal judgment. " (A broader 
foundation, surely, than most Christians build upon.) "And this 
will we do if God permit; for it is impossible for those who were 
once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were 
partakers of the Holy Ghost, and tasted the good word of God, 
and the powers of the world to come; if they shall fall away, to 
renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to 
themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open 
shame." Heb. 6:1-6. 

It is positively certain, that whatever of spiritual truth is received 
by anybody, it is by the help of the Spirit. "The natural man 
receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are 
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they 
are spiritually discerned." 1 Cor. 2:14. 

Paul says further: "Wherefore I give you to understand, that no 
man speaking by the Spirit of God calleth Jesus accursed; and 
that no man can say that Jesus is Lord, but by the Holy Ghost." 1 
Cor. 12:3. 

Of course he means that no man can say so understandingly, 
from a scriptural standpoint. As has already been shown, the 
purpose for which the Spirit was given, was to lead into truth; 
the object of truth is to sanctify-set apart for a holy purpose. 
And this is the class who could sin against the Holy Ghost. 

This conclusion is confirmed by another scripture, viz.: "If we 
sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the 
truth; there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins; but a certain 
fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery indignation; which 
shall devour the adversaries. He that despised— violated— Moses' 
law died without mercy under two or three witnesses; of how 
much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, 
who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted 
the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an 
unholy thing, and hath done despite -unto-insulted-the Spirit 
of Grace. Heb. 10:26-29. Peter says: For if after they have 
escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of 
the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled 

R138:page5 

therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the 
beginning; for it had been better for them not to have known the 



way of righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from 
the holy commandment delivered unto them. But it is happened 
unto them according to the true proverb: "The dog is turned to 
his own vomit again;" and, "The sow that was washed to her 
wallowing in the mire." 2 Pet. 2:20-22. 

Or as Paul says: "A fearful looking for of judgment and fiery 
indignation, which shall devour the adversaries." 

These passages give us a part of the sorer (worse) punishment; 
but not all. If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall 
remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the 
Father; and this is the promise that he hath promised us, even 
eternal life. 1 John 2:24,25. 

But if any "fall away," or count the blood of the covenant, 
wherewith they were sanctified, an unholy thing, they will not 
receive the eternal life promised; but the opposite, eternal death: 
the second death. 

There is a sin which is unto death; I do not say that ye shall pray 
for it. 1 John 5:16. It has been shown that the "Gospel by 
Moses" shadows forth so many good things; which were to 
come; will it seem surprising if we shall find the unpardonable 
sin typified also? It may be found that the "jots and tittles of 
Israelitish history, as well as of the law and prophets, have a 
meaning, and point to something. " 

The tribe of Levi, chosen to do the work of the tabernacle of the 
wilderness, represents the gospel church, chosen for the service 
of the "true tabernacle. " The other tribes then must represent the 
nations to be blessed by the church, in a future age. 

We find in Num. 16, an account of Korah and others of the tribe 
of Levi; and a company of men of renown, of the children of 
Israel, murmuring against God's commands, given through His 
servant Moses, and a new thing happened to them, different 
from the common lot of men: "And the earth opened her mouth, 
and swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the men that 
appertained unto Korah, and all their goods." Is it far-fetched, to 
claim that this was typical? Is not the "second death," which is 
the end of those who commit the "sin which is unto death," a 
different thing from that which happens to others? whether in 
this age, or in the age to come. They are twice dead, plucked by 
the root. Jude 12. 

B. W. K. 



R141 : page 5 

"TRUTH is always consistent with itself, and needs nothing to 
help it out. It is always near at hand, sits upon our lips, and is 
ready to drop out before we are aware. A lie is troublesome, and 
sets a man's invention on the rack, and one trick needs a great 



many more to make it good. It is building upon a false 
foundation, which is continually in need of props to shore it up. " 



R138 : page 6 



ASCEND, BELOVED. 

Ascend, beloved, to the joy, 

The festal day has come; 

Tonight the Lamb doth feast his own, 

Tonight he with his bride sits down, 

Tonight puts on the spousal crown, 

In the great upper room. 

Ascend, beloved, to the love, 
This is the day of days; 
Tonight the bridal song is sung, 
Tonight ten thousand harps are strung, 
In sympathy with heart and tongue, 
Unto the Lamb's high praise. 

The festal lamps are lighting now, 

In the great marriage hall; 

By angel hands the board is spread, 

By angel hands the sacred bread 

Is on the golden table laid; 

The King his own doth call. 

Long, long deferred, now come at last, 
The Lamb's glad wedding day; 
The guests are gathering at the feasts, 
The seats in heavenly order placed, 
The royal throne above the rest- 
How bright the new array. 

Sorrow and sighing are no more; 
The weeping hours are past, 
Tonight the waiting will be done, 
Tonight the wedding robe is on; 
The glory and the joy begin, 
The crown has come at last. 

Without, within, is light, is light; 
Around, above, is love, is love; 
We enter to go out no more; 
We raise the song unsung before, 
We doff the sackcloth that we wore, 
For all is joy and love. 

Ascend, beloved, to the life, 
Our days of death are o'er; 
Mortality has done its worst, 
The fetters of the tomb are burst, 



The last has now become the first, 
Forever, evermore. 

Ascend, beloved, to the feasts, 

Make haste, the day has come; 

Thrice blest are they the Lamb doth call 

To share the heavenly festivals 

In the new Salem's palace hall, 

Our everlasting home. 

[Selected for "Watch Tower"] 



R138 : page 6 



"OUR HIGH CALLING." 



We are called to be saints (holy ones) for without holiness no 
man shall see the Lord. Also, we must crucify the old man, that 
thus we might destroy the body of sin, and henceforth not serve 
sin. We that are baptized into Christ, are baptized into His 
death... and he that is dead is freed from sin. Even before we 
have succeeded in putting to death the flesh, if we do that we 
would not it is not us but sin that dwelleth in the flesh; for we 
delight in the law of God after the inner man; hence, when we 
have succeeded in crucifying the flesh and its lusts, we are freed 
from sin. The law of the mind wars with the law in our members 
until the former has completely overcome the latter. So long as 
we are carnally minded we are not subject to the law of God, 
and while we are in the flesh cannot please Him. If we live after 
the flesh, we shall die, but if we through the spirit, do mortify 
the deeds of the body, we shall live. By crucifying the flesh, we 
become dead with Christ. During the crucifying we suffer with 
Him, that we may be also glorified together; and if we do not 
share in the suffering, we have no right to expect to share in the 
glory. I know of nothing else that could be filling up the 
sufferings of Christ which are behind, except the crucifixion of 
the flesh, and many will find that to cut off desire, is more 
painful than to cut off a right hand, but though it be as dear, we 
should do so if we would follow in the footsteps of Christ, and 
overcome as He overcame, and thus have a place on the Throne 
and reign with Him. We are to present our bodies a living 
sacrifice, holy acceptable unto God, which is our reasonable 
service. By the death of Christ we were justified to life natural. 
Now we have the chance of giving this life as a sacrifice and 
thus gaining spiritual life, and as the latter is so much higher 
than the former, it is only reasonable service for us to accept the 
conditions. 

It seems to be in God's plan that there are to be two lives, perfect 
natural and spiritual. The first we get by the death of Christ, the 
latter, by sacrificing or crucifying what he gave us; we cannot 



have both. We prize the former because the stepping stone to the 
latter, that is we value very highly that which Christ purchased 
for us by His death, because were it not that His death justifies 
us to the natural life, we would not have anything to give in 
order to gain the spiritual, but like Christ we are willing to give 
the natural to gain the other, for then we partake fully of the 
divine nature. This explains to us how many may be called and 
few chosen; also, narrow the way and few find it, and many 
shall strive to enter and not be able, because many do not crucify 
the flesh. We used to think that it was the degree of light that 
decided whether we belonged to the little flock or not, but now I 
am convinced that any who put to death the flesh, and presents 
their bodies living sacrifices and Holy, will receive the spiritual 
body and share the glory of their Lord, when the time comes and 
which we think is not far distant. 

Paul says: "That I may know Him and the power of His 
resurrection and the fellowship of His sufferings, being made 
conformable unto His death." He further says: "I am crucified 
with Christ, nevertheless I live: yet not I, but Christ liveth in me, 
and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of 
the son of God." Yes, friends, if we are truly Christ's, we have 
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, therefore, set 
your affections on things above... for ye are dead (to this world), 
and our life is hid with Christ in God. Forasmuch then as Christ 
hath suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves likewise with 
the same mind; for he that hath suffered in the flesh, hath ceased 
from sin. But rejoice inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's 
sufferings, that when His 

R139 : page 6 

glory shall be revealed ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. 
It is well worthy of notice that the glory is always associated 
with the sufferings. No cross, no crown, is true, for 'tis a faithful 
saying, that if we be dead with Him, we shall also live with 
Him; if we suffer, we shall also reign with Him. There are many 
apparently who do not see that we must die with Christ, if we 
would be one of the Bride Company. This fact we think is 
clearly brought out in Lev. 16, as has been shown by Bro. 
Russell, Aaron was to offer a bullock for a sin offering, this 
bullock was for himself (or instead of himself) and for his house 
and represents the offering made by Jesus when He gave himself 
for the church and became the Savior of His body. (Eph. 5:23- 
25.) The world does not seem to have been the object primarily 
in the death of Jesus, but the church. This we think is shown by 
the caution of Adam and Eve— Eve was taken from Adam and so 
the church is taken from Christ. The world of mankind came 
into existence from the uniting of those two, and when united 
God called their name Adam. It was in the two all died, and we 
can show that it will be in the Second Adam and Eve, all will be 
made alive. Paul in 1 Cor. 15 is speaking of death which came 



by man. But as Eve was the instrument direct in their death, she 
must be included in the statement, "as in Adam all die," and if 
she is, the next, "so in Christ shall all be made alive," must 
include the church. The first two God called Adam, and they 
brought death and misery on the human family. The second pair 
God calls "The Christ or seed" (Gal. 3:16-29) and they bring life 
and bless all nations of the earth. That the church is included in 
the sin offering which justifies the world to life is shown by the 
type. 

Aaron was to take two goats from out the congregation for a sin 
offering. He was to cast lots upon them, and the one on which 
the Lord's lot fell, he was to offer for a sin offering. With this 
goat he was to do just as he had done with the Bullock (verses 
15-27). This goat was the sin offering for the people. Now we 
will turn to Heb., and see by the connections, if we cannot prove 
beyond a doubt that the goat is just as sure a type of the church 
as the Bullock was of Jesus. In the 9th chapter, where Paul is 
speaking of the patterns and that the patterns of things in the 
heavens should be purified with these (that is by the blood of 
bulls and goats) but the heavenly things themselves with better 
sacrifices than these, it must here be noticed that the blood of the 
two animals is contrasted with the sacrifices, (plural) not 
sacrifice which seems to include Christ and church. 

But to be more sure let us look at Heb. 13:11. For the bodies of 
those beasts (plural) whose blood is brought into the sanctuary 
by the High Priest for sin, are burned without the camp. Let us 
go forth therefore, unto Him without the camp... then there 
would be two without the camp, (He and us) just as there were 
two beasts taken without. Certainly then those two beasts 
represent Christ and the church. Hence the age of sacrifice and 
suffering continues all through the Gospel Age. And not until 
the last member has ceased to suffer will the sufferings of Christ 
be completed. And so when the Prophets searched to know what 
manner of time the spirit of Christ which was in them did 
signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and 
the glory that should follow, they referred to both Head and 
Body-Christ and the Church, which is His body. Surely, 
friends, ours is a "high calling," and while we bear about in the 
body the dying of the Lord Jesus, it is that the life also of Jesus 
might be made manifest in our mortal flesh, for we which live 
are always delivered unto death for Jesus' sake, and though the 
outward man perish, the inward man is rewarded day by day, 
and our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for 
us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Therefore, 
dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain 
from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul (life) and humble 
yourselves under the mighty hand of God, that He may exalt you 
in due time. And while here may we like the Captain of our 
salvation be made perfect through suffering and thus be able to 
sympathize with others and then when glorified together with 



Jesus we shall reign with Him as Kings and Priests to rule and 
bless the world. Yes a King shall reign in righteousness and 
Princes rule in judgment and Saviors shall come up on Mt. Zion, 
when the kingdom is the Lord's. 



A. D. J. 



R139 : page 6 

"IT IS WRITTEN AGAIN." 

These words of our Savior addressed to the tempter, suggest 
incidentally a very important lesson for all Christians. 

The devil in his assault upon Jesus had just quoted from the 
Scripture, saying, "It is written" thus and so. Very well replies 
Jesus, suppose it is written as you say— "It is written again;" i.e., 
the Scripture contains something else besides what you have 
quoted. From these words of our Lord, "It is written again," we 
gather a principle which ought to govern us in our doctrinal use 
of the Scripture. We cannot safely found either doctrine or 
practice on an isolated passage of Scripture. One passage cannot 
be interpreted independently of other Scripture. Here lies our 
only safety from the most monstrous errors. We must go, not to 
a solitary passage, but to the whole Scripture to learn what is the 
will of God. There is a unity in the Scripture like the unity of the 
human body. One part balances another. One part requires 
another part to complete it. One portion of Scripture needs to be 
explained by other portions. When a man or a sect quotes an 
isolated passage as the basis of some absurd doctrine or practice, 
our reply must be, "It is written again. " There are other 
Scriptures besides that which you have quoted and your 
Scripture must be interpreted in harmony with the remainder of 
the Scripture. You take a single passage of Scripture out of its 
connection, and give it a distorted use and claim that you have 
God's truth. But that is the way the devil uses Scripture. He 
would gladly acknowledge the authority of the Scripture if he 
could be permitted unrebuked to use it as he chose, and handle it 
deceitfully. Most of those errors which the church of Christ 
brands as heresies are simply one sided, exaggerated truths. 
They are torn out of their connection with counter truths. 



R173 : page 7 

Mr. Oliphant's Scheme for 
Colonizing Palestine. 

The London Times says: The Rev. George Nugee gave a 
lecture yesterday, May 13, at St. George's hall, on a proposal for 
colonizing Palestine by Jews, and referred incidentally to the 



existing establishment of a Jewish agricultural colony of fifty- 
five inhabitants near Jaffa. After some statistics relating to the 
modern Jews, who, he said, had shown themselves so alive to 
the advantages of education that they numbered half the 
university students, half the barristers, and more than half the 
merchants of Vienna, the lecturer proceeded to develop a plan 
which he said had met with the approval of many Jews and had 
been communicated by Mr. Lawrence Oliphant to the sultan, 
who received it favorably, for establishing a Jewish colony on 
the east bank of the Jordan. 

The plan was to purchase 1,500,000 acres, to introduce a 
European element into the government, and to settle colonies 
there, either of Jewish peasant farmers or of Jewish farmers 
employing the labor of the 

R173 : page 7 

indigenous fellah. The incursions of the Arabs were a danger, 
but might be bought off. He had sent a circular to Mr. Goschen, 
the new special envoy to Constantinople, who had expressed a 
deep interest in the scheme. The lecturer described the country 
which was to be settled as exceedingly fertile, and identified it 
with the land allotted to Reuben, Dan, and the half tribe of 
Manasseh. 



R173 : page 7 

An international convention of Hebrews from all portions of 
the world will be held at Paris, September 10, under the auspices 
of the Alliance Israelite Universelle. Matters affecting the 
interests of the whole Hebrew race will be discussed. Delegates 
have been appointed from ten countries, the Rev. Myer S. Israel, 
the Rev. H. S. Jacob, Myer Stern, William Seligman, and Simon 
Wolf being the delegates from the United States. Among the 
subjects to be discussed are the amelioration of the Hebrews in 
Palestine and the promotion of emigration to that country, the 
promotion of Hebrew literature and education, and the 
persecution of Hebrews in Roumania and elsewhere. 



R173 : page 7 

JERUSALEM seems to be growing in favor as a place of 
residence for foreigners who find their native countries 
uncomfortable. The foreign Jewish population has, according to 
Consul Moore, increased considerably of late years. That 
community is now estimated at 15,000, including native Jews, 
against 10,000 in 1873. The desire to avoid compulsory military 
service now enforced in most European countries, and the right 
of holding real property in Turkey, probably account for the 
increased immigration. The German colony at Jerusalem now 



numbers nearly 400 persons, that at Jaffa about 300. There is a 
third German settlement at Califfa of about equal number with 
the last mentioned. The settlers are mechanics, artificers, 
carriers, and agriculturists, and are fairly prosperous. 



R139:page7 



THE LOVE OF CHRIST. 



If ye keep my commandments ye shall abide in my love. (John 
15:10.) 

It is true that God loves the world because He is Love, rather 
than because there is aught in them to call forth His love. It is 
also true that Christians are loved by both Father and Son in a 
special way. "He that loveth me, shall be loved of my Father, 
and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him. " (John 
14:21.) 

God's love for the world is all-embracing and powerful. There is 
no being so obscure and sin43linded that he is not included in 
God's providence, even as he receives the free blessings of air 
and sunlight. That care will follow him until he is unshackled 
from sin and made to appreciate what has long been true: That 
none who will accept the responsibilities of life, are made in 
vain. The possession of life is pledge and proof that all are 
needed in God's economy. 

The Lord illustrates in His dealings with men, the Savior's 
commands to us. "Love your enemies, bless them that curse you; 
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that 
despitefully use you and persecute you, that ye may be the 
children of your Father which is in heaven. " (Matt. 5 :44.) Even 
some Christians overlook the fact that the Lord acts upon the 
principle that the best way to conquer an enemy is to convert 
him into a friend by kindness. They try to drive men to Christ to 
escape punishment. This is not the best motive, though it may 
sometimes succeed. The severest of all punishments was 
experienced by the Son of God to redeem men from the effects 
of sin. What heart can withstand the power of this truth when 
once realized? 

A person's idea concerning God is a fair index of his relation 
toward God. "To the pure He will show himself pure, and to the 
froward He will show himself froward. " (Ps. 18:26.) 

Seen from afar, the Lord is clothed with terror and awfulness. A 
near approach changes the terror into worship. Those who see 
the Lord (He is manifest to those who love him, John 14:21,23), 
yield to Him homage, and glory, and praise, because they cannot 
help it. Their hearts bow down before Him, as must the hearts of 



all who are once made to appreciate goodness, truth and 
perfectness. In turn He gives to them Fatherly love and pity. 

The love of Christ is as the love of a bride-groom. It is typified 
in the story of Isaac and Rebecca, and of Jacob, and Rachael, 
and prophetically told in the Songs of Solomon. 

The love of Christ is what unites Christians, for the marriage is 
the complete expression of union between not only Head and 
body but all the members of the body. 

His love rewards our faithfulness. We have His fellowship 
according 

R140:page7 

to the degree of progress we have made in the path of life. That 
pathway is indeed holy, for His footsteps have pressed it. When 
He putteth forth His own sheep He goeth before them. However 
varied the experience of Christians may be, the Lord knows all 
about it, for He has felt the same, "yet without sin." Herein is 
that saying of His true: "I know my sheep and am known of 
mine. " He knows us fully, we know Him in part, known as we 
progress, but when the journey is finished then shall we know 
even as also we are known. Let this truth encourage us to 
renewed effort, for each step in our progress will bring its own 
reward. 

"If ye love me, keep my commandments." This precept is for the 
beginner in the journey; and no Christian will ever get beyond it. 

L. A. A. 



R174 : page 7 



LET THEM GO DOWN. 



Coaxing the devil to support the Gospel is a modern devise. 
The primitive church knew nothing of it. When Paul was 
collecting funds to aid poor saints at Jerusalem, he used no fairs, 
festivals, "mum sociables," kissing games, or other sacrilegious 
snares, to accomplish his object. The Christians paid their own 
bills, and did not expect Satan to pay for the weapons which 
they used in warfare against him. When the devil does support a 
church, he does so in his own interest. He carries on his 
operations with a full knowledge of the fact that "a kingdom 
divided against itself cannot stand. " For every dollar paid out of 
his coffers to the church, he receives full value. Church 
partnership with the evil one never benefits the former, but 
always the latter. Hands off! 

Untold harm comes to the church by the use of even 
questionable measures to raise money for the support of God's 
work. It creates the impression on the minds of the world that 



the church is a kind of pauper, dependent for its existence on the 
community, that it is a sort of genteel beggar, which it is proper 
and fashionable to support; that it is an object of charity, or even 
pity and contempt, which is grateful for the tolerance of the 
people that let it live. The ungodly regard such churches as 
engaged in seeking money rather than souls, and exalting 
wealthy members more than poor saints. To stand before the 
world in this light is humiliating and degrading beyond 
expression. Such churches ought to be cleansed or closed, cured 
or killed. 

Churches that are doing the Lord's work, and are worth 
supporting can be supported without the use of questionable 
means. Others deserve no support. Let them go down.- Banner 
of Holiness. 



R140:page7 

ANSWERS TO 
CORRESPONDENTS' QUESTIONS. 

Ques.— Bro. Russell please give your opinion of Jesus' words: 
"Every branch in me that beareth not fruit He taketh away. " 
John 15. Can it be that a truly regenerated soul will be lost? 

Ans.-As expressed in article- "Restitution-for whom?"-in the 
August number, I believe that the Divine nature once imparted 
never ceases, except in those who commit the unpardonable sin 
counting "the blood of the covenant wherewith they were 
sanctified an unholy thing." Heb. 10:29. We answer your 
question then by saying: A truly degenerated soul who abides 
under the blood never will be lost. "His seed remaineth in him. " 
Jesus is the great Shepherd and says of his sheep: "I will give 
unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall 
any pluck them out of my hand." John 10:28. Vs. 26, shows that 
all who believe are his sheep. 

What shall we say then of the text "Every branch in me that 
beareth not fruit He taketh away." Simply this: Jesus is the vine 
[the head] we are the branches [the body]. The only "calling 
held out before us now, as we come to God is, to join the vine, 
become members of the "body of Christ"— to become members 
of His "bride"-the "little flock." There is no calling to be a part 
of the second-or "great company. " No, "ye are called in one 
hope of your calling" and all coming to God are reckoned at 
first, "Babes in Christ"- "Branches" in the vine. And it is God's 
will that they shall continue in Him and thus make their "calling 
and election sure. " But how many do not, "go on unto 
perfection. " How many would like to be branches in this vine, 
and yet, would not like to "crucify the flesh" and be made 
"conformable unto His death. " Jesus used the red juice of the 



grape [the fruit of the vine] to symbolize his death— his shed life 
["this is my blood"] and the fruit expected of every branch of the 
vine is the same, viz: a giving of your life for the world "being 
crucified with Christ"- "filling up the measure of the sufferings 
of Christ which are behind. " Those who do not bring forth this 
fruit, are cut off from membership with the body— the vine; and 
as touching our high calling in Christ Jesus [to be his bride] they 
become castaways. 

This was what Paul guarded against saying, "I keep my body 
under [crucified] lest after having "preached to others I myself, 
should become a castaway." 1 Cor. 9:27. He is talking about 
running the race for the great prize— an incorruptible crown. [See 
vs. 23-25.] He does not fear losing the Divine nature and eternal 
life, for again he says, "I am confident that he is able to keep 
that which I have committed unto him." [Life.] 2 Tim. 1:12. 

The cut off branch referred to is not one which has withered, of 
course the husbandman would trim such off or rather they cut 
themselves off; such dead branches would represent those who 
commit the unpardonable sin. But, the branches here mentioned 
as cut off are what Vine dressers call "suckers." They usually 
make the most show and seem to grow the fastest and are well 
covered with leaves [professions]. Alas how fitly does this 
picture many who starting as members of the body agreeing to 
"take up their cross and follow" the head, make only 
professions, and never bear his fruit-self sacrifice to death. 

Oh, yes, the blood of sprinkling covers the entire household of 
faith, and they shall never perish if they abide under the blood 
and continue to trust in its sufficiency. If cut off from the body- 
bride— vine, they will be cast forth and will be burned "delivered 
over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh that the spirit [life] 
may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus." Their works shall be 
burned-they shall suffer loss of the glorious joint-heirship 

R140 : page 8 

of the bride, but themselves shall be saved. 1 Cor. 3:15. 

All having the new nature are children of God, for "the Spirit 
beareth witness with our spirit that we are the children of God. " 
But will all be heirs? No, only the first-born are heirs; "Christ 
(head and body) "the first-fruits; afterward they that are Christ's 
at his (parousia) presence. " Christ (head and body) "the first- 
born among many brethren" -the great company. All are 
brethren because begotten by the same Father-God, but not all 
first-born, therefore not all heirs. When they were called it was 
in this hope of their calling— viz. : that they should be "heirs of 
God and joint-heirs with Christ," but there were conditions put 
upon them if they would be joint-heirs, viz. : "If so be that we 
suffer (death) with Him, that we may be also glorified together. " 
(Rom. 8:16,17.) 



To be a joint-heir with Jesus means a great deal. It means to 
share all the glory, and all the power, and to inherit all things. 
None but "the bride," "the overcomers" who suffer with him 
shall reign with him. Oh, ours is a high calling-a great prize, let 
us "so run that we may obtain. " 



Q.-Bro. R. we feel so deeply interested in the WATCH 
TOWER and its teachings that we think its monthly visits too far 
apart; would it not be advisable to make it a semi-monthly or a 
weekly at a corresponding advance in price? We should like it 
so, as it is almost the only "meat" some of us get. 

A. -We think it not advisable to change for three reasons: One 
is, that the present price, fifty cents a year, is quite beyond the 
means of many of the readers; Another reason is that to issue 
more frequently would necessitate a great deal of "clipping" and 
publishing of "little anecdotes" and "tales," a surfeit of which 
reading is easily attainable, from thousands of other papers, and 
our third and chief objection is, that we do not think that our 
readers can fully digest the mental and spiritual food put before 
them each month in less time than a month. Permit us to suggest 
that if you read each article thoroughly three times before going 
to another you would get fully three times as much nourishment 
from the paper. Then, too, it would be well to keep a "file" of 
the paper convenient and to re-examine and refresh your 
memory on subjects of previous issues. Careless reading may do 
for light subjects and anecdotes, but God's word and arguments 
drawn from its "deep things" require careful study. 

Q.-Your exposition of Rev. 15, "Song of Moses and the Lamb" 
in last No. is quite satisfactory, except that Moses' song was one 
of deliverance after Israel had left Egypt. I had supposed Egypt 
a type of earth and that we would sing that song after we had left 
earth. Can you explain this feature? 

A. -We understand that this song of deliverance will be sung by 
mankind in general during the Millennial age. But we sing it 
now, because we have now gotten the victory over the world 
(Egypt), and over "the beast and his image," etc., the bindings of 
human traditions and man made creeds, and are no longer in this 
condition of mental slavery to great ecclesiastical authorities. If 
you will notice, those who sing this song have gotten this very 
victory, vs. 2. That it is sung before the pouring out of the vials 
is evident from v. 6. In those vials is "filled up (completed) the 
wrath of God, " and we understand that those who get the victory 
over the beast, etc., are the ones "accounted worthy to escape all 
those things coming upon the world"-a "little flock." 



R140 : page 8 



OPTOMAI. 

The Greek word Optomai rendered, shall see, in Rev. 1:7.- 
"Every eye shall see him," and rendered, shall appear, in Heb. 
9:28 "To them that look for Him shall he appear a second time," 
does not always mean to see with the eye. It rather signifies 
attend and recognize. Illustrations of its meaning attend: The 
priests and elders answered Judas; "See {Optomai— attend) thou 
to that." Matt. 27:4. Again, Pilate said, "I am innocent of the 
blood of this just person; see (optomai— attend) ye to it." Vs. 24. 
Also the word look in Acts 18:15. 

The general signification of the word however, is recognize, as 
may be seen in the following illustrations viz: 

"There appeared (optomai) to him (Moses). ..an angel of the 
Lord in a flame of fire in a bush," and "he drew near to behold 
it." (Acts 7:30.) Moses did not see an angel but a flame, but 
receiving a command of the Lord from out the 

R141 : page 8 

flame, he (optomai) recognized it as the angel. Again, "The God 
of glory appeared (optomai) unto our father Abraham." Acts 7:2. 
From the fact that we are told that, "No man hath seen God at 
any time," we presume this scripture to mean, that God gave 
Abraham instruction in such a manner that he recognized his 
instruction as of the God of Glory. 

Again, Jesus said to Mary concerning Lazarus' resurrection, 
"Said I not that thou shouldst see (optomai) the glory of God? 
John 1 1:40. Mary's eyes saw no glory but she did see Lazarus 
raised, and in the power thus displayed she recognized the glory 
of God. 

Again "All flesh shall see (optomai -recognize) the salvation of 
God." Luke 3:6. In the light of these illustrations of the use of 
the word we can realize that there may be but little seeing of The 
Christ on the part of the world with the eye. See how similar is 
the last illustration with the first text quoted— "every eye" and 
"all flesh" shall recognize Him as the salvation of God. 



R141 : page 8 



THE ORACLE OF MESSIAH. 

Isaiah 52:13-53:12. Connection and structure by John Brown, 
D.D. Text by various eminent translators. 



OPENING PROCLAMATION OF JEHOVAH. 

"Behold, my servant shall prosper; he shall be raised aloft, and 
magnified, and very highly exalted. "-Lowth. 



"As now many are astonished before him (so disfigured in his 
aspect before men, and his figure before the children of men) so 
shall many nations exult in him; kings shall close their mouths 
before him: for what had not been related to them, shall they 
see; and understand what they had never heard. "-Gesenius. 

THE COMPLAINT OF THE PRIMITIVE 
EVANGELISTS. 

"Who hath believed what we have understood by hearing? 
Who perceives what the arm of Jehovah is preparing?"- 
Rosenmuller. 

STATEMENT AND PROFESSION 
OF THE JEWISH CONVERTS. 

"He hath grown up as a twig before him, as a shoot out of dry 
ground. He had no form nor beauty. We looked at him, but there 
was no fair appearance that we should be desirous of him. "— 
Rosenmuller. 

"Despised and neglected by men, a man of sorrows and familiar 
with sufferings, and like one who hideth his face from us [to 
bury his griefs in seclusion]; disdained; and we gave him no 
attention. "-Pye Smith. 

"But it was our griefs he bare, it was our sorrows he carried. We, 
indeed, accounted him smitten; stricken by God, and afflicted. "- 
-Henderson. 

"But he was wounded for our transgressions; was smitten for our 
iniquities; the chastisement, by which our peace is effected, was 
laid upon him; and by his bruises we are healed. "-Lowth 

"All we, like sheep, have gone astray; we have turned each to 
his own way; but Jehovah hath inflicted upon him the 
punishment of us all. He was severely afflicted, yet he submitted 
himself, and opened not his mouth. As a lamb that is led to the 
slaughter, or as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he 
opened not his mouth."— Henderson. 

"By an oppressive judgment he was taken away— the men of his 
age who shall describe?"— Brown. 

"For he was cut off from the land of the living; on account of the 
transgression of my people was he smitten."— Henderson. 

"A grave is assigned him with the wicked; but his tomb is a rich 
man's: for he hath done no injustice, and no guile is in his 
mouth. But Jehovah is pleased to crush him with sufferings ! If 
he will offer himself a sacrifice for sin, he shall see his posterity, 
he shall prolong his days, and the gracious purpose of Jehovah 
shall prosper in his hand."— Pye Smith. 



THE CLOSING PROCLAMATION OF JEHOVAH, 

CONFIRMATORY OF THE STATEMENT OF THE 

JEWISH CONVERTS. 

"The effects of his soul's pain he shall see, and shall be richly 
satisfied. By his knowledge my righteous servant shall make 
many righteous, and shall take away their iniquities. "-Pye 
Smith. 

"Therefore will I distribute to him the many for his portion; and 
the mighty people shall he share for his spoil: Because he 
poured out his soul unto death, and was numbered with the 
transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and made 
intercession for the transgressors." -Lowth. 

W. I. M. 



R141 : page 8 

WHEN ELSE OR HOW ELSE? 

A sister writes that she did not like the application of the 
parable of the "wedding garment" in our last issue. To this sister 
and to any others who may feel so we wish to say, that the 
fulfillment of the parable referred to, seemed so marked and 
complete in every particular that we felt it to be our duty to call 
attention to it. Of all the parables which Jesus uttered is it not 
true, "I have told you before it come to pass that when it is come 
to pass ye might believe. " We have looked for years for a 
fulfillment of this parable the only one for which we had no 
satisfactory solution to offer. Now, we see it fulfilled in every 
particular-the laying aside of the robe of Christ's righteousness, 
and the foretold going into outer darkness denying the presence 
and all of the prophetic light which proves it. 

Notice too the time-just when the virgins are "going in to the 
wedding." Some already have been for some time in the guest 
chamber believing that the Bridegroom is present and are 
preparing their robes and waiting for the union. Tell us when 
else, or how else could it be fulfilled, if you can think of any 
other way and time? 

The WATCH TOWER desires to be a faithful servant of God 
and of "the household of faith." "Who then is a faithful and wise 
servant whom his Lord hath made ruler over his household to 
give them meat in due season. Blessed is that servant whom his 
Lord when he [Elthon]-has come— shall find so doing." Matt. 
24:46. 

(An exegesis of this scripture given in tract called "The object 
and manner of our Lord's return," pages 52 and 53-which see.) 
If our words were severe they were lovingly so, for we sought 



by calling attention to the outer-darkness of the parable to keep 
some from going blindly into it. 

Does not the thought of the fulfillment of this last to be fulfilled 
parable seem to bring us down very close to the time when the 
last wise virgin may come into the light, the door to the "high- 
calling" to be shut, the union, or marriage of bridegroom and 
bride be accomplished by our being changed from natural to 
spiritual bodies like unto Christ's glorious body, that being like 
Him we may see Him as He is? Oh glorious hope! The "chaste 
Virgin church" -"little flock" is said to "make herself ready. " 
Are you seeing to it that the robe of Christ's righteousness is 
clean and white "unspotted from the world. " "Without spot or 
wrinkle, or any such thing?" and are you doing all you can to 
help others to the same condition of readiness? This is the will 
of God concerning you. 



R141 : page 8 



Returned Home. 



We have returned, having spent very pleasantly and we hope 
profitably two weeks with little bands of waiting ones. As usual 
we found them very loving ones, partakers to a marked degree 
of this element of the divine nature- love. We visited Elyria and 
Cleveland, Ohio, and Lapeer, Almont, Belle River, Brockway 
Centre, and Detroit, Mich. To most of them we were strangers in 
the flesh "unknown and yet well known," for we had all drank of 
the water from the spiritual Rock— Christ. We want to visit all 
the dear flock that we may know them and will be ready for 
another trip during October. 



page 8 



Bro. A. D. Jones. 



Will be in the vicinity of New York City and Philadelphia 
during September. If any living in this direction desire him to 
give a series of discourses on The object, manner, etc., of the 
return of our Lord, he will take pleasure in serving you. Neither 
pay, nor traveling expenses asked. This is true of all our 
preaching brethren associated with the WATCH TOWER. We 
leave money matters entirely with Him who says, "All the gold 
and silver of the mountains are mine and the cattle upon a 
thousand hills." Address immediately A. D. Jones, Pittsburgh, 
Pa. 



R142 : page 1 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., OCTOBER, 1880. 

NO. 4. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 
L. A. ALLEN, .... HONEOYE, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R142 : page 1 



THE NARROW WAY TO LIFE. 

"Enter ye in at the strait gate, because strait is the gate and 
narrow is the way that leadeth unto life, and few there be that 
find it; for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leadeth to 
destruction, and many there be which go in thereat." Matt. 7:14. 

All life is the same. It all issues from the same fountain. God is 
that fountain. In him, and in him only, is life unlimited, 
exhaustless, ever-continuous and uncontrolled by any 
circumstances. The name which describes this perfection of life 
is Immortal. It signifies death-proof, consequently disease and 
pain-proof. Many, who have not closely noted the scriptural use 
of the word immortal, have used it with reference to man and to 
angels, but scripture ascribes it to God, the Father, only, as we 
will prove shortly. 

The sun is the great fountain of light to earth, illuminating all 
things, yet it causes many varieties of color and shades of light, 
according to the nature of the object upon which it shines. The 
same sunlight shining upon a diamond, a brick, and upon 
various colored glasses, produces strikingly different effects. 
The light is the same, but the objects upon which it shines differ 
in their capacity to receive and transmit it. So, too, with life. It 
all flows from the one inexhaustible fountain, and it is all of the 
same kind. The oyster has life, but its organism is such that it 
cannot make use of much life, just as the brick cannot reflect 
much of the light of the sun. So with each of the higher grades 
of life in beast, fish and fowl. Like the various colored glasses 
under the sunlight, so these various creatures show forth 
differently the various qualities and powers they possess when 
life comes in and animates their bodily powers. And as the 
diamond is so perfect in its nature, and so adapted that it can 
receive fully and reflect so as to look as though it possessed 
within itself the light, and were itself a miniature sun, so with 
mankind, one of the master-pieces of God's creation, made only 
"a little lower than the angels." This perfect creature was made 
so complete in his organism (before sin marred it) as to be able 
to receive and retain life, and never grow dim. 

Adam was formed grandly and perfectly, and filled with life. He 
was more grand than any other earthly creature, because of the 
grander organism, mental and physical. Yet let us remember that 
as the diamond could reflect no light except when shone upon 
by the sun, so man could possess and enjoy the life given him 
only so long as he was supplied from the fountain-God. Man is 
no more a fount of life than a diamond is a fount of light, and 
one of the very strongest reasons for knowing that we have no 
exhaustless supply of life in ourselves is that, since sin entered 
our race, it has lost life. Millions have gone and are going down 
into death. God had arranged that man should have access to life 
giving trees, and that, by continually partaking of their fruit, he 
should continually live,- "eat, and live forever." In this respect, 



also, he was like the diamond, for it must have the light supplied 
every moment. Sin entering, our race lost its right to life, and 
was shut away from the trees of life [plural], and so "in Adam, 
all die. " But God has provided Christ a ransom for sin, and soon 
in, or by Christ, shall all be made alive, or be brought back to 
the original perfection of the race. As the diamond loses its 
beauty and brilliancy when the light is withdrawn, but is lighted 
up again with the sunrise, so mankind loses life when God 
withdraws life from him. "Yea, man giveth up the ghost [life], 
and where is he?" Job 14:10. "His sons come to honor, and he 
knoweth it not, and they are brought low, but he perceiveth it 
not of them. Vs. 21. "For there is no work, nor device, nor 
knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave whither thou goest. " Eccl. 
9:10. Because of the sin-offering and sacrifice of Christ, all shall 
go forth from this condition of death. "All that are in their 
graves shall come forth. " There shall be a restitution of all 
things, a restoring to the condition [as at first] in which man can 
receive back again, and richly enjoy life as it is provided for him 
in full measure from the fountain— God. 

But we asserted that we would prove scripturally that Divinity is 
the only fountain of life, and that all other forms of life-angels, 
men, fish, birds, beasts, etc.— are only vessels which hold, each 
its full, all differing in capacity and quality, according to the will 
of the Maker. First, then, we read that God "only hath 
immortality. " [The fullness of life which could not cease under 
any circumstances.] 1 Tim. 6:16, and 1:17. Secondly, the Son, 
"the first-born of every creature," "the only begotten," "the 
express image of His [the Father's] person," he who was "in the 
form of God," and was "made so much better than the angels;" 
"for unto which of the angels said he [the Father]: "Thou art my 
Son, this day have I begotten thee." Heb. 1:4,5. This one, we are 
told, partakes of the Father's nature, and consequently of the 
same principle of immortal life. So we read-" As the Father hath 
life in himself [God's life is in himself, and not drawn from 
other sources, or dependent upon other things], so hath he given 
to the Son to have life in himself." Thus, we see that immortality 
is possessed only by Father and Son. But amazing news ! God 
purposed to call out of the human race a few, "a little flock," 
who, by obedience to certain conditions, shall become "sons of 
God," and these, instead of remaining men and continuing of the 
human nature, shall become "new creatures," "partakers of the 
Divine nature," receiving a Divine form (body) being made "like 
unto Christ's glorious body;" not a natural body, but a spiritual 
body, for "it is raised a spiritual body, and that which is born of 
the Spirit is Spirit. " "We shall be changed but "it doth not yet 
appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear, 
we shall be like Him" who is "the express image of the Father's 
person" and share in the "glory to be revealed." Nay more, not 
only will they be in the Divine form and nature, but being of that 
nature, they will possess the same kind of life— immortal life. 



Hence we read: "And this is the record that God hath given unto 
us [believers] eternal life and this life is in His Son" -"He that 
hath the Son hath life; he that hath not the Son hath not life. " 1 
John 5:11. 

Again it is written: "Thou hast given Him (Jesus) power over all 
flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou (the 
Father) hast given him" (John 17:2.) "And as many as were 
ordained to eternal life believed" (Acts 13:48.) "God hath called 
us unto eternal glory"- "And this is the promise which he hath 
promised us even eternal life." (1 John 2:25.) And though it is 
promised as a gift, yet it is only to a certain class that he ever 
agreed to give it, viz: to those believers in Jesus "who by patient 
continuance in well doing seek for glory, honor and 
IMMORTALITY." Rom. 2:7. To those who flee from iniquity 
and "follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, 
meekness -who "fight the good fight of faith (and thus) lay hold 
on eternal life, whereunto thou art also called." 1 Tim. 6:12. 

But the way is a difficult one, hard to walk in "because strait is 
the gate and narrow is the way that leadeth unto life and few 
there be that find it (life)." Just how difficult the way is may be 
judged from Jesus' words: It is not only to believe on him, but to 
follow him, and obey his voice— "My sheep hear (obey) my 
voice and I know them and they follow me, ('take up their cross 
and follow me') and I give unto them eternal life." John 10:27. 
Yes dearly beloved, if we would be of those who would receive 
immortality, let us seek it earnestly. Let us have our "fruit unto 
holiness (entire consecration) and the end thereof [will be] 
everlasting life." Rom. 6:22. 

The new, Divine nature begins with us here, when we believe on 
Jesus as the ransom from sin, and covenant with God that we 
will "die with Him that we may also live with Him"- 
[conversion]. From that moment we are recognized as God's 
children and "he sends forth His Spirit into our hearts," 
"whereby [we] are sealed [marked off as separate from the 
world] unto the day of redemption. " This is our new life begun. 
By this new life we are to crucify the old will— our will as 
natural men-and while in the world to "live according to God in 
the Spirit. " The Spirit in us is the germ of immortality. Thus we 
even now are partakers of the Divine nature but the fullness is to 
be reached when we enter into life. We are now begotten of the 
Spirit by the word of truth that we should be a kind of first 
fruits, but we do not reach birth until we are raised [from the 
dead] spiritual bodies. Our new nature lives in these mortal 
bodies as in a house— "But we know that if our earthly house of 
this [building] were destroyed we have a building of God, &c.~ 
our spiritual, immortal body. 

But beloved, the new life would be easily choked and Paul 
assures us that when thus begotten of the truth, "if [we] live after 
the flesh [we] shall die [lose our life principle] but if [we] 



through the Spirit do mortify [put to death] the deeds of the 
body [human nature] we shall live; " for the sons of God are all 
those led by the Spirit of God. Rom. 8:13-14. The work of 
crucifying must take hold upon all our actions- "For he 
[begotten of the 

R142 : page 2 

Spirit] that soweth to the flesh [lives in willful sin] shall of the 
flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the spirit, shall of the 
spirit reap life everlasting." Gal. 6:8. It is a rugged, steep, 
narrow way that leads to life, and were it not that strength is 
furnished us for each successive 

R143 : page 2 

step of the journey, we never could reach the goal; but His word 
encourages us— "Be of good cheer I have overcome;" "my grace 
is sufficient for thee. " The whole world is in the broad road and 
going down to destruction —death. Jesus opened the narrow way 
bringing life and immortality to light through the gospel; i.e. he 
made it possible for us to reach it by paying our ransom on the 
cross and making us free from sin and becoming also our 
example and leader into the Divine life. 

The balance of our race now thronging the broad road to death, 
are to be restored because their guilt and sin are atoned for and 
will be permitted. As through the disobedience of one man all 
were placed upon the broad road and swallowed up of death, so 
through the obedience of one [Christ] all will be forgiven and 
brought back to life. But when brought back to "their former 
estate"— the perfection of the original -they will not have life in 
the same sense that the Divine family will have it. 

The restored race will no doubt live eternally. God will supply 
the means of continuing their life as long as they are obedient 
and that we are told will be forever. Doubtless their present 
experiences with sin will prove a blessing throughout eternity. 
The words incorruptible, incorruption, immortal and immortality 
are translations of the Greek words athanasia, aphtharsia and 
aphthartos which occur in all only 1 8 times and are always used 
in connection with God or the saints, and are never associated in 
any way with angels, mankind or lower orders of creation. With 
a glimpse of this "crown of life" and the honor and glory 
associated with it, who will say that our all- wise Father has 
made the pathway too difficult. Its difficulties will act as a 
separating principle to separate and refine a "peculiar people, " 
"a little flock" to be "heirs of the kingdom," "heirs of glory," 
heirs of God and joint heirs of Jesus Christ our Lord-if so be 
that we suffer [death] with him. 

As we toil upward on the narrow way, Angels look on amazed at 
the grandeur of the plan which is able not only to rescue a fallen 
race from death but to display "the exceeding riches of God's 



grace and loving kindness toward us who are in Christ Jesus. 
Eph. 2:7. And it will yet be more clearly seen in the ages to 
come. Yes, when the plan was first foretold through the 
Prophets, Angels desired to look into it and to know concerning 
the time, and manner of time of their fulfillment, (See 1 Pet. 
1:12.) and an "innumerable company of Angels" still watch our 
progress and gladly become "ministering spirits, sent forth to 
minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation" [Heb. 1:14,] 
and soon be their rulers: For, "know ye not that ye shall judge 
[govern] Angels?" [1 Cor. 6:3.] The Father, too, who has called 
us with so high a calling looks upon us with loving sympathy 
and desires that we make our calling and election sure by 
complying with the conditions. And there is another who 
watches us with intense interest; it is He who redeemed us from 
death by his own precious blood and invited us to become his 
Bride and joint heir. If he loved us with such love while we were 
yet sinners, judge of his love now that we are his betrothed. He 
knows all about the narrow way— was tempted in all points as we 
are, without yielding, and now he stands ready to succor and 
strengthen us as we need and ask his help. 

In view of all these things, let us brethren and sisters, "come 
boldly to the throne of heavenly grace that we may obtain mercy 
and find grace to help in every time of need, " while we fight the 
good fight of faith [warfare of new and old nature] and lay hold 
on eternal life. 



R143 : page 2 



ANTI-CHRIST. 



This word occurs five times, and is found only in John's 
epistles. Anti signifies against; hence, anti-Christ means against 
Christ. It will readily be seen, then, that the term will apply to 
anything or any person opposing Christ. Peter was anti-Christ 
when he endeavored to dissuade Jesus from dying on the cross, 
and Jesus so indicated, when, turning to him, He said: "Get thee 
behind me, Satan" (adversary). He was Jesus' enemy, because he 
sought to prevent His doing the Father's will. Paul, also, was at 
one time anti-Christ, when persecuting the body of Christ (the 
church), as Jesus said to him when stricken down on the road to 
Damascus: "I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest (oppose, injure). 
All who, like Paul, persecute the church, or, like Peter, attempt 
to dissuade from duty and sacrifice, and put hindrances in the 
way to prevent the body from taking up the cross and following 
the head (Jesus)-all such are evidently anti-Christ. The 
adversaries of the body of Christ are more especially the latter, 
who, claiming to belong to the same family, cast a stumbling- 
block before the weak ones. 



In this sense Anti-Christs have been numerous since the days of 
Jesus, and we are assured that the closing of the gospel age will 
be a time above all others in which the principles and doctrines 
of Jesus Christ will be antagonized and opposed by many Anti- 
Christs (opposition from many sources). 

We should recognize a difference between false Christs 
(pseudo-kristos) and anti-Christs (anti-kristos). Jesus tells us 
(Matt. 24:24) that in the end of the age there shall arise many 
false prophets [teachers of error] and false christs. As all true 
believers in Jesus, obedient to their head, constitute the body of 
the true Christ [anointed], so, the various churches which 
recognize the authority of another head than Jesus constitute the 
body of a false Christ. Thus, the Roman church recognizes the 
Pope [papa; father] as the head of that church. The church of 
England recognizes its Government as its head, protector and 
"defender of the faith;" so, also, do the churches of Germany 
and Russia. These are false Christs, and the basis upon which 
they were established was false teachings of false prophets 
[teachers]. Of these, Papacy is especially noted as the chief in 
scripture, and is sometimes spoken of as "The Man of Sin," who 
ensnared and seduced so many of Jesus' virgin church with the 
delusion that the kingdoms of this world had become the 
kingdom of God, and that the time to suffer with Christ was 
over, and the time to reign begun. Thus was the church 
corrupted by the "Man of Sin," and so became the "harlot" and 
the "mother of harlots." [Rev. 17.] Many are her offspring. [See 
Z.W.T., vol. 1, Nos. 6 and 7]. 

But we must draw the line more closely, and suggest that every 
company of religious people who recognize as a head and 
authority any man or set of men, is in that proportion, false to 
the real head. 

We know that the various Christian sects claim to recognize 
Jesus as their head and director, but by their works they deny it; 
for let an occasion arise for a church trial, and the condemned 
will be tried, not by the teachings and words of Jesus, but by the 
"Standards of the Presbyterian Church," or by the "Authorities 
of the Methodist Church," or otherwise according to the 
denomination in which it occurs. Thus they acknowledge other 
heads and authorities than Christ. 

Again, as there is only one true Head, so there is only one true 
body of Christ. Jesus is the true head, and every follower and 
disciple united to that head by living faith is reckoned a member 
of the body, having his "name written in heaven." Whence, then, 
are these numerous so-called churches, or bodies of Christ, and 
their various heads? They are the offspring of error; false 
systems; false Christs; and give a confused idea to the world, 
who might well inquire, with Paul: "Is Christ divided?" No, but 
there are many false Christs, and we are glad to know that those 
Christians in various churches who most honor Jesus as the only 



Head, are earnestly inquiring whether the reason Christians are 
unable to have "one Lord (ruler), one faith, one baptism," is not, 
in great measure, due to their each "teaching for doctrines the 
[creeds or] commandments of men. " 

And among these we must, to some extent, class many religious 
denominations who worship the tenets and laws of their church- 
their body, over which they have appointed a head, or 
controlling power. Let us lay aside every such yoke of bondage, 
and be most fully Christ's freemen, receiving assistance in our 
pathway to the divine likeness from whomsoever and whatever 
we can, but never looking to any man or men as our leader, nor 
depending on any but "The Great Shepherd of the Sheep" and 
"Captain of our Salvation." 

Now these false Christs (churches) are to a certain extent Anti- 
christs. Also, in proportion as their teachings and systems are 
untrue, they are upholding error, and consequently are opposed 
to Christ and the truth. It is for this reason that "The Man of Sin" 
(Papacy) is said to oppose all that is called God. Attempting to 
gain the homage of mankind to itself as the head of all, it of 
course, in that proportion, antagonizes and opposes the true head 
of the true church. 

But are these the only Anti-Christs, the only ones opposing 
Christ? By no means. The world is still opposed to the Christ of 
God, both head and body because it knoweth Him not. Infidels 
in common with Jews deny the man Christ Jesus— deny that 
Jesus is come in the flesh. In the early days of the church before 
false christs and false systems had come in, it was more easy to 
define a Christian than now. So we read: (2 John 7.) "many 
deceivers are entered into the world who confess not that Jesus 
Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver and an anti-christ. 
It has been suggested to us that the word rendered is come in 
this text, might be rendered is coming and thus be made to apply 
to the second coming of Jesus. We have examined carefully the 
word he translated, is come. It comes from the Greek— erkomai 
and is generally 

R144 : page 2 

used to indicate presence as of one who has come. It is 
translated coming only 26 times, and in many of these it, in our 
judgment could have been better translated otherwise: for 
instance (Matt. 25:27.) "at my coming, I should have received 
my own with usury. " Evidently a master would not expect a 
settlement until he had come, not while on the journey coming. 
We should therefore translate- "on my arrival." The same word- 
-erkomai —while rendered 26 times, coming, is rendered came 
182 times, and this usual translation agrees with its use in the 
scripture under consideration -"who confess not that Jesus 
Christ is come in the flesh; this is Anti-Christ. 



We know that it could not mean that Jesus is coming in the 
flesh. This he did once when he came as a sin-offering in a flesh 
body prepared for the purpose-"A body hast thou prepared me, 
etc. " But he comes not again to death and consequently would 
have no use for a body of flesh: "Yea, though we have known 
Christ after the flesh, yet, now henceforth know we Him (so) no 
more." The same apostle continues the same subject saying: (1 
John 4:3.) "Every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is 
come (erkomai— came) in the flesh is not of God; and this is that 
spirit of Anti-Christ, whereof ye have heard that it should 
come. " Here again John is not discussing the second coming of 
Jesus but is endeavoring to prove his having come once. (See 
verses 14 and 15.) This was the only thing necessary to combat 
in that day. People believed that Jesus had lived, but denied his 
being-the Christ, the sent of God, as the same class of anti- 
christs do to-day who deny that "Jesus is the Son of God. " 

The same thought is expressed again (1 John 2:18.) "Ye have 
heard that Anti-Christ shall come; even now there are many 
anti-christs. Now he proceeds to describe as before whom he 
meant by Anti-Christ, using the same argument as before, vs. 
22. "Who is the liar but he who denies that Jesus is the 
ANOINTED? This is the anti-christ-he who denies the Father 
and Son; no one who denies the son has the Father." (Diaglott). 

Thus we have seen from various standpoints what constitutes 
Anti-Christ. Those against which we most guard are the power 
and influence of the various false heads and so called bodies of 
Christ, seeing to it that we recognize but one fold and one 
shepherd and that we heed not the voice of strangers but flee 
from them. And let us take heed lest we become adversaries of 
our Lord and Master as beloved brother Peter once did and 
thereby deserve the reproof- "Get thee behind me Satan." Let us 
not hinder by word or act any who are seeking to crucify the 
flesh— the human nature— and to thus abide as members of the 
body of Christ, branches in the vine, else we shall to that extent 
be opposed to Christ or anti-christ. 



R144 : page 3 



MOUNTAIN OF THE LORD. 

Yes ! a brighter morn is breaking, 
Better days are coming on; 
All the world will be awaking 
In the new and golden dawn. 

In the day of coming glory, 
Men will show fraternal hand; 
Each will tell to each the story, 
Till it spreads to every land. 



On the top of Zion's mountain, 
God prepares His house again; 
At its threshold springs a fountain, 
Flowing for the souls of men. 

From the earth's remotest stations, 
Men will come to hear the word; 
And, in all the world, the nations 
Shall be nations of the Lord. 



--Pure Gold. 



R144 : page 3 

Why did Christ Come in the Flesh? 

There can be no doubt that all that Christ has done or will do 
are proofs of Divine Love towards our fallen humanity. It is safe 
to assume that man's necessities are all taken into account in the 
gospel. More than man needs would not be gospel; less than he 
needs would be an imperfect provision; neither is possible to an 
Infinite Provider. 

That Christ as an intelligent person had a glorious existence with 
the Father before the creation of the world seems clearly the 
teaching of the Bible. Proofs of His preexistence have been 
given. In this article we regard it as proved. From this stand- 
point we proceed. 

When He left the glory He had with the Father, He did not die. 
The glory of that life and the life itself should not be 
confounded. There are some who regard Christ, while on Earth, 
as a mere man with a fallen nature. Others regard Him, during 
the same period, as a mere man with an unfallen or perfect 
human nature. Of the two we believe the latter view is nearer the 
truth. But we believe the Bible teaches that He was more than 
human. 

That He was a mere man, whether with a fallen or a perfect 
nature, seems inconsistent with the idea of His preexistence; and 
yet both the classes referred to above believe in His 
preexistence. If He was Divine, and ceased to be Divine when 
He came in the flesh, where is the security that we will not lose 
our Divinity when we are made like Him? 

It seems clear that His Divinity was retained in humanity 
because He repeatedly spoke of Himself as having come down 
from heaven, and because He, though passing through trial and 
sorrow as a man, was yet possessed of the authority and 
exercised the prerogatives of a God. He was the object of 
unreproved worship even when a babe, by the wise men who 
came to see the new-born King. Matt. 2:2-1 1. Even the angels 
delighted to do Him honor. "When He bringeth the first- 



begotten into the world, He saith, "And let all the angels of God 
worship Him." Heb. 1:6. 

He never reproved any one for acts of worship offered to 
Himself, but when Cornelius offered such service to Peter-the 
leading apostle— "he took him up, saying, stand up; I myself 
also am a man." Acts 10:26. The great apostle of the Gentiles 
scarcely restrained the idolatry of the people in sacrifice offered 
to himself and his fellows, giving as a reason why it should not 
be done: "We also are men, of like passions with yourselves." 
Acts 14:15. Had Christ not been more than man the same reason 
should have prevented Him from receiving worship. This is 
emphasized by the fact that even a heavenly being sent to John 
on the isle of Patmos would not permit that mortal man to 
worship him, "See thou do it not, I am thy fellow-servant, and of 
thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus: worship God." 
Rev. 19:10. 

Christ spoke "as one having authority, and not as the Scribes." 
Matt. 7:29. The Fountain of truth was in Himself. The Creator 
could regulate and heal both moral and physical difficulties; so 
he forgave sins, and healed all manner of diseases. That He 
could do the latter He urged as proof that He had power to do 
the former. Matt. 9:6. Had he been only a man, strange indeed 
would have been the fact "That even the winds and the sea obey 
Him." 

But the object of the present writing is not so much to give 
evidence of the blending of the Divine and human natures in 
Christ, as to present some thoughts as to the importance of such 
a combination. That such a union was a necessity, we regard, 
however, as the best evidence of its reality. This subject of the 
Incarnation and double nature of Christ, has received our 
attention to a greater or less extent, for quite a number of years, 
as is well known by many of our readers. It cannot then truly be 
said that we are taking such ground for the purpose of opposing 
positions that are of later date. We freely confess that the subject 
appears more important now than ever before, and as the 
Scriptures are examined more and more, it seems necessary to 
modify even our own former ideas on this and kindred subjects. 
No fallible man should "drive his stakes so deep as not to be 
able to pull them up when necessary. " 

In harmony with the idea of the two natures in Christ, as we now 
see it, is the fact that Christ was both Priest and Sacrifice, and so 
offered Himself- "gave Himself a ransom for all." 1 Tim. 2:6. 
This fact of the New Testament, is clearly illustrated, by the 
high priest under the law offering the beast-a lower nature -as 
a sacrifice for sin. The high priest, without a beast to offer, 
would have been an imperfect type of Christ. Paul reasons that 
as the high priest was ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices, it is 
necessary that Christ should also have something to offer. Heb. 
8:3. And in the tenth chapter he tells us what Christ took for the 



purpose of making an offering, or sacrifice. The sacrifices and 
offerings which were offered according to the law being types 
only, were insufficient, "For it is not possible that the blood of 
bulls and of goats should take away sins." Ver. 4. Instead of 
these beasts which the typical high priests offered, our High 
Priest had a body prepared for Him, and this body He offered. 
See verses 5 and 10. 

This body He took, or assumed, so that it became a part of 
Himself. 

R145 : page 3 

This change in His condition is what the apostle had in mind 
when he said of Christ: "Who being in the form of God... took 
upon Him the form of a servant, and [so] was made in the 
likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man He 
humbled Himself and became obedient unto death, even the 
death of the cross." Phil. 2:6-8. It will be observed that the death 
was the last act of his humiliation and not the first. 

It is necessary to discriminate between Him and the body which 
He assumed. If as seems clearly taught, the body was the sin 
offering, or that which He as our High Priest sacrificed, then 
surely the sacrifice did not consist in taking the body. He took 
the body to sacrifice it, and His death closed that work. The 
body clearly refers to the humanity of Christ, and it was 
sacrificed by its life being taken away. 

We fully believe the purpose of Christ taking our nature, or 
coming in the flesh was manifold, and we will consider different 
phases of the subject and their relation to one another. 

The first we notice is that of a Ransom. This means to recover 
by paying an equivalent, or to buy back what was lost. He tasted 
death for every man. Heb. 2:9. "He gave His life a ransom for 
[the] many"- "a ransom for all." Matt. 20:28 and 1 Tim. 2:6. 
"Forasmuch as the children are partakers of flesh and blood He 
also Himself likewise took part of the same"— [For what 
purpose?] -that through death He might destroy him that had 
the power [keys] of death, that is the devil, and deliver them 
who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to 
bondage. Heb. 2:14-15. 

The above is an important passage because it distinctly states 
that Christ took our nature for the purpose of delivering from 
death those under its power, by destroying that power. That it 
refers to natural death is clear because that is what flesh and 
blood are subject to. Had it been some other kind of death, it 
would not have been necessary to assume flesh and blood in 
order to suffer it, and so taste death for every man. This question 
involves the whole subject of our loss in Adam and gain in 
Christ, so far as pertains to all men regardless of their 
responsibility. "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be 



made alive." 1 Cor. 15:22. As all men were counted sinners and 
condemned to death on account of Adam, even so, in the same 
sense, and to the same extent, all men are counted righteous and 
justified to life on account of Christ. Rom. 5:12,18,19. It is not 
possible for us to limit one side of this statement, only by the 
other side- and both are unlimited. Here is stated the "sin of the 
world, (Adam's sin was the world's sin because he was the 
world-the race of natural men being in him)— and Christ is the 
"Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world. " This is 
the atonement for what men sometimes call "original sin," and 
all its results. 

Adam was a perfect natural man, and God dealt with him 
accordingly. He gave him a law adapted to that life, and gave 
him, until after he sinned, access to a tree that could preserve 
that life. The curse or penalty of his sin was "Dying thou shalt 
die," (Gen. 2:17, margin) and all that was necessary, in order to 
the execution of that penalty, was to shut him away from the 
life-preserving tree. This was done, and the consequence is that 
the whole race of mankind are either dead or doomed to death, 
and passing down. 

Now if to ransom means to buy back by paying an equivalent 
(and we think no unprejudiced English reader will deny it) then 
Christ must of necessity assume a perfect humanity and lay 
down that life as a voluntary sacrifice. If it be asked, how could 
Christ be tempted if he had a perfect humanity? We answer by 
asking how could Adam be tempted if he had a perfect 
humanity? A fallen humanity is not the result of temptation but 
the result of sin, and a perfect nature could not have fallen if 
such a nature could not have been tempted. All that we claim on 
this point is that Christ as a ransom was as perfect as what Adam 
lost. 

It does not appear from the record that Adam was created 
perfect in the sense of being strong and incorruptible. The 
opposite of this is true, for he sinned at the very first temptation, 
and corruption was the result. That which is incorruptible cannot 
be corrupted. Jesus, when speaking of those who have passed 
from corruption to incorruption, says of them "Neither can they 
die any more." Luke 20:36. 

But if Adam sinned so easily, thus proving his weakness, why, if 
Christ was only as perfect as Adam, did not He sin? We answer: 
It seems clear to us that if Christ was only a fallen man He 
would have been as sure to sin as all other fallen men; and if 
Christ had been only a perfect man He could have sinned as well 
as Adam. We believe that the reason He did not sin, was not 
because of the innate strength of His humanity, but because of 
the all-sustaining indwelling Divinity. 

Then why does He deserve credit? We answer, no credit is due 
to the humanity, or to the flesh, in the work of saving man. It is 



all of God, and the strength of all overcomers, whether it was 
Jesus or any of His followers, is due to the indwelling Divine 
Spirit. This brings us to consider another necessary use of the 
double nature of Christ. 

The coming of the Divine One; into the flesh was necessary in 
order to ingraft, so to speak, Divinity into humanity. Some see 
one of these reasons and not the other. Like the two natures they 
are blended but not to be confounded. 

Christ as a Redeemer, paid the ransom, but the object for which 
men are redeemed is that they may be regenerated. And Christ is 
not only a Redeemer but also a Second Adam— i.e. the head of a 
new and spiritual race. 

First the natural and afterward the spiritual, is applicable to the 
relation between the two Adams, as well as to other features of 
the plan. Because the type was an earth man, does not set aside 
the truth that the antitype is a spiritual man- "the Lord from 
heaven." 1 Cor. 15:47. 

All that a ransom secures is a recovery of what was lost— natural 
life— hence the ransom is the basis of restitution; and therefore if 
men ever receive more than they lost, it will be because Divinity 
is ingrafted into their restored humanity. It is God's plan for the 
race in general to save them by resurrection from the Adamic 
curse first, and afterward bring them to the knowledge of the 
truth, thus placing within their reach all that obedience to the 
truth can secure them; but He deals with us-Christians-as 
exceptions to the rule. As we are counted dead in Adam before 
we die, so we are counted alive in Christ beforehand, and 
brought to the knowledge of the truth. Being begotten by the 
Spirit, by the word of truth, through the exceeding great and 
precious promises, we become partakers of the Divine nature. 2 
Pet. 1:4. This is 

R145 : page 4 

called Christ, in us the hope of glory. 

The Christian, like his Lord when He was in the flesh, has two 
natures, and this gives us the basis of the warfare between the 
Old Man and the New Man; between the flesh and the Spirit. On 
account of this fact, Christ is our Head— our example in 
suffering, in patience and in loyalty. He is also our Leader, our 
Commander and Forerunner. We follow Him not only as a 
pattern of life, but also in the order of development from the 
natural to the spiritual. 

He is also our Leader in sacrifice, for the flesh nature must be 
destroyed. As He was both Priest and Sacrifice, so are we. "If ye 
through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall 
live." Rom. 8:13. Nothing seems more clearly taught in the New 
Testament than that the possession of, and being controlled by 
the Divine Spirit, is the only means of success in keeping the 



body under, and of bringing the members under obedience to 
our Lord. 

The necessary condition of the higher life is the death of the 
lower one, by the crucifixion of its evil affections and desires. 
Thus it is we are to have fellowship with His sufferings and be 
made conformable to His death. Phil. 3:10. "For in that He died, 
He died unto sin once; but in that He liveth, He liveth unto God. 
Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, 
but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ, our Lord. " Rom. 
6:10,11. 

This death and resurrection is that which is represented by 
baptism; that is, the real baptism involves the death to sin and 
mortality, and the resurrection to holiness and immortality, and 
water baptism is the appropriate symbol. Water baptism is not 
on that account less important, but rather more so, because of its 
depth of meaning. But if any see no further than the form or 
symbol, their faith will not lay hold on the reality, as expressed 
by the apostle: "Know ye not that so many of us as were 
baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into His death. 
Therefore we are buried with Him by baptism into death; that 
like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the 
Father [Divinity], even so we also should walk in newness of 
life," Rom. 6:3,4. 

The Divine Spirit, or new nature, imparted to us, is the priest by 
which our bodies are to be made a living sacrifice. The object of 
this sacrifice is that sin should not reign in our mortal bodies, 
but that these same members of these mortal bodies should yield 
themselves "as instruments of righteousness unto God." Should 
there be in any mind a doubt of the correctness of this 
application, let him carefully read the whole sixth chapter of 
Romans. 

Precisely the same thought in regard to killing and making alive 
these bodies of ours, by the indwelling Spirit of Christ, is 
expressed by the apostle in the eighth chapter. "But ye are not in 
the flesh [the old nature], but in the Spirit [new nature], if so be 
that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now, if any man have not 
this Spirit of Christ he is none of His. And if Christ be in you, 
the body is dead [put to death by the Spirit] because of sin, but 
the Spirit is life because of righteousness. [But the body is not to 
remain dead; only its old sinful nature or life was to be 

R146 : page 4 

destroyed]. But if the Spirit of Him that raised up Christ from 
the dead dwell in you, He that raised up Christ from the dead 
shall also quicken [make alive] your mortal bodies by His Spirit 
which dwelleth in you." Rom. 8:9-1 1. It is the Spirit that 
mortifies or puts to death the deeds of the body, and the same 
Spirit that gives the new life. 



Whoever will read the sixth, seventh and eighth chapters of 
Romans may see that the apostle is seeking to teach them and us 
a great lesson for this life, of death to sin and resurrection to 
holiness, and that the work can only be accomplished by the 
Spirit in-dwelling, and overcoming the old nature which dwells 
in these members. Was not this then the great practical object of 
the Incarnation, to ingraft the Divine Spirit into humanity and 
thus save humanity? 

The same principle of death and life holds good throughout the 
plan, whether in symbol or reality. All may see that the old 
nature or corrupt life is not to be restored to those who have the 
Spirit of Christ in them. The life it imparts is a new and spiritual 
life. The body is to be raised, but by "a process of Divine 
Chemistry which we may not fully understand" will be changed 
"according to the working whereby He is able even to subdue all 
things to Himself." Phil. 3:21. 

One more reason for the double nature of Christ we would 
notice is this: That He might both be able to sympathize with 
and help us. "For in that He Himself hath suffered, being 
tempted, He is able to succor them that are tempted." Heb. 2:18. 
"Seeing, then, that we have a great High Priest that is passed 
into the heavens, Jesus, the Son of God, let us hold fast our 
profession. For we have not an High Priest who cannot be 
touched by a feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points 
tempted like as we are and yet without sin. Let us therefore 
come boldly unto the throne of grace that we may obtain mercy, 
and find grace to help in time of need." Heb. 4:14-16. 

Two persons in the same weak and helpless condition might 
sympathize with each other, and yet perish together; but one 
standing on a rock can help the other out. Mere humanity, fallen 
or unfallen, is unable to rise into spiritual life. In Christ, both 
natures being combined, we have the sympathy which 
experience gave Him and also the power to help. He first lifted 
His own humanity ("Destroy this temple and in three days I will 
raise it up," and "He spake of the temple of His body." This is 
true of His own person and also of His body, the church), and 
from the standpoint of His perfect spiritual life He beckons us, 
and there He will meet us. What He is, we may well expect to 
be. "I shall behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied 
when I awake in thy likeness. 

J. H P. 



R146 : page 4 



THE TWO NATURES. 



Jesus' "being in the form of God," implies Divine powers, etc.; 
this on our account he left, taking "not the nature of angels," 



(which would have implied angelic powers and qualities) but he 
took the nature of men, which implies the qualities and powers 
of man, (before man sinned). He undoubtedly knew of His own 
pre-existence as he frequently referred to it as glory had with the 
Father before the world was; and "For this cause (death) came I 
unto this hour." (John 12:27.) and "For this cause came I into the 
world that I should bear witness to the truth. (John 18:37.) In a 
word we understand that the man Jesus up to his 30th year was 
in every respect like Adam except that he knew what sin and 
death meant and had seen their destructive operation on the 
human family for 4000 years while Adam did not "know good 
and evil. " Adam had never seen a sinner nor a sinner's 
punishment-death; therefore while created sinless and perfectly 
able to abstain from sin, yet not realizing "the exceeding 
sinfulness of sin" and its destructive effects, he sinned as God 
had foreseen and fore-arranged he should do. 

This knowledge which Adam lacked Jesus possessed as we read: 
"By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many." 
Isa. 53:11. The man Adam was created by the operation of 
God's spirit (Gen. 1:2.) The child Jesus was formed equally by 
miraculous power of the same spirit. Both were holy [pure 
sinless]. Jesus grew in wisdom and in stature until he reached 
his thirtieth year. Now the work for which He came into the 
world must begin. What was the work for which this body was 
prepared? Paul answers -"for the suffering of death." And now 
He is represented as saying: "Lo I come [as] in the volume of 
the book [Bible] it is written of me, to do thy will O God." Heb. 
10:7. Thus Jesus covenanted at 30 years to do the Father's will 
[the special work for which he came] and going to John at 
Jordan he made the same outward sign of His covenant which he 
asks us to make, of our covenant, when he was immersed. Thus 
he expressed his determination to die for our sins by being 
buried in water, and His trust in the promise of the Father to 
raise him again to the Divine life. 

But even a perfect human being could not crucify himself so the 
Father imparted the Divine Spirit to the man Jesus and from that 
moment he is the anointed [the Christ] "The man Christ Jesus." 
And he went up out of Jordan in the power of the Spirit," filled 
with the Spirit for "the Father giveth not the Spirit by measure 
(in limited quantity) unto Him. " Now He is different from Adam 
for Adam never partook of the Divine Spirit and nature. We saw 
in article on BAPTISM in last issue [a second reading of which 
we suggest,] that our baptism represents a similar covenant to 
die; to be "conformed to His death:" to be "Baptized into His 
death. " And as Jesus could not crucify the flesh until anointed 
with the Spirit so with us; He is our pattern and fore-runner. We 
follow "in His footsteps" in every particular. Now, let us closely 
examine his death, for unto it we are to be conformed. 



In our own view, it is a mistake to suppose that our giving of 
ourselves "living sacrifices, wholly acceptable unto God," is the 
giving up of the sinful desires of our human nature. Not so. It is 
the giving up of things that are right and proper enough for men. 
Let us look unto Jesus: As a man (tempted in all points like as 
we are, yet never yielding) with a human nature, He had to 
withstand the same temptations of the devil, and to avoid the use 
of His perfect human power for self-exaltation. 

As the only perfect man, he could have placed himself speedily 
at the head of all earthly governments; could have inaugurated 
wise and beneficial reforms and laws, and could have had the 
respect and homage of all the fallen race. But instead of doing 
according to the desires of his earthly nature and will, he did as 
he had covenanted: "Lo, I come to do thy will, O, God." And so 
he did. Wherever he went, and whatever he did, he ascribed all 
the honor to the Father. "The Father that dwelleth in me, he 
doeth the works." As the spirit in Jesus was the miracle working 
power, yet never used by him as a means of gratifying the 
human appetite, or of exalting self (see Matt. 4:3-7), so we, who 
possess a measure of the same spirit, would find it powerful to- 
day, if we could but have faith to exercise it. But it would be sin 
to use this spiritual power for the gratifying of our human nature 
when it was given us wherewith to crucify it. When the 
multitudes hung on his words, and said, "Never man spake like 
this man," he declared: "As I hear, I speak." (John 12:49.) 
Again, when the people, perceiving his real human greatness 
and perfection, desired to bestow earthly power upon him, we 
read: "Jesus, perceiving that they would take him by force and 
make him a king, withdrew himself to a desert place, alone. " 

These things were lawful to his human nature, but they were not 
expedient; for by so doing he could neither redeem the race from 
death, nor bring "many sons to glory and immortality. And often 
the conflict between the human and divine natures in Jesus was 
so great that he needed and spent whole nights in prayer. He 
came to the same "throne of heavenly grace" (not to obtain 
mercy, for he needed not mercy, being without sin), but to "find 
grace to help in every time of need. " And when, at the close of 
his three and a half years of self-sacrifice for the good of others, 
the hour of death came, it was the severest trial to his human 
nature. To permit himself, pure and sinless and benevolent, to be 
crucified as a vile criminal, and open not his mouth in self- 
defense; to be regarded as an impostor, in some degree at least, 
by his followers; to permit the soldiers to mock and scourge and 
kill him, while having done no sin, he had a right to live. He 
could have asked the Father, and he would have given him more 
than twelve legions of angels to defend him. These things, one 
and all, were severe trials to the human nature, and he must have 
failed without the aid of the Divine nature. 



No wonder he said: "Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I 
say? Father, save me from this hour! But for this cause came I 
unto this hour: Father, glorify thy name." (John 12:27). No 
wonder if when he came to Gethsemane, he again found it 
needful to go to the Father for help to do his will, saying: "If 
thou be willing, remove this cup (death) from me. " Then he 
obtains strength, and continues, "Nevertheless, not my (human) 
will, but thine be done." Luke 22:42. (Vss. 43 and 44 are 
omitted in old MSS.) 

Now, we can readily see that to be conformed to his death does 
not mean that we should give up only sinful things to which we 
never had a right. Many things are proper enough to us as 
human beings, that 

R146 : page 5 

we covenanted to give up if we might have the Divine nature. 
To illustrate: It is proper enough for a 

R147 : page 5 

worldly man to seek the honor and respect of his fellow men by 
such lawful use of his talents as would commend him to their 
esteem. It would be right enough for him to participate in 
worldly governments, both by voting and holding office. It is 
right for him to seek all uninjurious pleasures; operas, concerts, 
games, &c; to seek wealth and ease and human happiness. It is 
not wrong for earthly women to engage in the same pleasures, 
and to wear braided hair, jewelry and costly apparel, if rightly 
and honestly obtained. But if any man or woman be in Christ a 
new creature, these should remember that their covenant was to 
crucify the natural will and mind of the flesh, and to develop the 
new nature, and they will find that every such natural pleasure 
permitted in their hearts fills a place consecrated to God, and 
excludes a measure of the joys of the Spirit, as well as requiring 
some of the time which they have consecrated wholly to God. 

A mistake is made by Christians in trying to apply to the world 
rules and laws given only to saints. The worldly man does not 
covenant to make his body a living sacrifice. We do. True, we 
must, as long as we abide in the flesh, eat, drink and wear, but 
the amount of time which we shall give for these necessary 
things should be decided according to our understanding of 
God's will as expressed by his word, and the example of Jesus. 
Our earth life should, like Jesus' life, be spent more for others 
than for self- "Doing good to all men, as we have opportunity, 
especially to the household of faith. " Each one has opportunity 
to carry out this principle of self sacrifice in the everyday affairs 
of life. The mother may spend her life and sacrifice her comfort 
for her children; the father for his family; the teacher for his 
pupils; the editor for his readers, &c; for charity should begin at 
home, though it should not end there. 



In our judgment, the common habit of speaking and thinking of 
the new nature as being an engrafting of a spiritual element into 
a natural man and of the blending in us of the human and divine 
natures, are serious and hurtful errors. There is no league, no 
blending or uniting of the two natures. When we receive the new 
nature, it is not that we may blend and unite it with our old 
human nature, but that we may crucify and put to death the 
human. Not my will and God's will, my plans and God's plans, 
my work and God's work, blended. They will not blend. Like oil 
and water, they are of different natures. My will, plan, work, 
&c, must all be lost. Though our wills were perfect human 
wills, as Jesus' was, we must ignore them, and say with him— 
"Not my will, but thine, be done. " We can see no blending of 
two natures in our Master, but a complete control by the Divine, 
and a crucifying of the human. "Let us walk in his footsteps as 
he hath set us an example. " 



WHAT peace He bringeth to my heart, 
Deep as the soundless sea, 
How sweetly singeth the soul that clingeth, 
My loving Lord to Thee. 



R166 : page 5 

IN most situations of life the consciousness of innocence is our 
best shield, and our firmest security. 



R147 : page 5 

AND AFTER DEATH THE JUDGMENT. 

"As it was appointed unto men once to die, but after this the 
judgment, so Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many; 
and unto them that look for him, shall he appear the second time 
without sin unto salvation." Heb. 9:27-28. 

Perhaps no text of scripture has ever been more widely 
misapplied than the above; it is generally supposed to refer to 
mankind in general, and to mean that there comes a judgment to 
them after death. But by reading this 27th verse in connection 
with vss. 26 and 28, it will be seen that the "men" referred to 
were the various high priests of Israel. Paul is trying to show us 
that these "men" in the sacrifices which they "offered year by 
year continually, " were but types of Christ; that though they 
offered and went into the Holy place every year, Christ as the 
antitype needed only to go in once. Christ's sacrifice was that of 
his own life, while that of these typical men was the blood of 
others, that is to say, these typical priests instead of laying down 
their lives and then being given a new, or spiritual life (as in the 



case with Jesus) were told to kill "a bullock" which was for, or 
instead of their own, natural lives; thus in figure the priest died, 
every time he slew the bullock. Now after thus killing the 
bullock it remained for the high priest to take the blood into the 
holy place and see whether it would be accepted. This was the 
judgment— trial. If the work had been all properly done, it was 
accepted of God and was the basis of at-one-ment for the people 
and the after blessing. Now notice that, "As it was appointed 
unto (those) men once to die, (as represented by the bullock) and 
after that the judgment, (to see if their sacrifice was acceptable) 
so Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many. " 

Our head, Jesus, having given himself for us-the church (Eph. 
5:25-27.) presented the evidences of his death in the flesh, 
(typified by the bullock.) Then came the trial- Was it a perfect 
sacrifice? If so it would be accepted. It was perfect and was 
accepted of God and while the Head remained in glory, the spirit 
of the Head came upon all believers (at pentecost) anointing 
them as His body, to have share in His sufferings and to be 
made conformable unto His death, as represented in the goat 
sacrifice. Lev. 16. 

Soon the body will have finished its work of "filling up that 
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ. " Col. 1 :24. Then the 
Head comes to the body and takes it into the Most Holy, the 
sacrifice of the body being accepted through the merit of its 
Head. Then the appearing to bless all the people takes place. 
(Lev. 9:23.) When he thus appears to bless, is it the head alone 
which appears think you? No, "when he shall appear we also 
shall appear with him IN GLORY." "We know that when He 
shall appear we shall be like Him." 1 John 3:2. We will be like 
him when he appears not after he appears. Will he appear in the 
flesh and we in the flesh? No, that would not be "in glory. " 
Besides if you will examine the context you will readily see that 
the spiritual body is meant. 

He took a flesh body only as a sacrifice— "A body hast thou 
prepared me" (for sacrifice). "He took upon him the form of a 
servant for the suffering of death. " But when he comes forth the 
second time (head and body complete) it will not be to repeat 
the work of sacrifice, "for this he did once" but he comes forth 
unto salvation and he comes "IN GLORY." 

Thus the prophets foresaw and foretold "the sufferings of Christ 
(head and body) and the glory that should follow:" "For verily 
when we were with you we told you before that we should 
suffer tribulations. No man should be moved by these 
afflictions, for yourselves know that we are appointed 
thereunto." 1 Thes. 3:3-4. 

Take joyfully then dear brethren the sufferings of the present, 
that when they are ended, we may be joined to, and "appear with 



Him in glory," for then "ye shall be glad also with exceeding 
joy." 

TO WHOM DO WE APPEAR? 

is a question of interest. The type (Lev. 9:23.) shows that the 
appearing is to "all the people." Their typical priest so appeared 
and so blessed "all the people" for whom the sin offerings had 
been made. Israel being the type of the world as the house of 
Aaron (type of Levi) had before been used as a type of the 
household of faith," from which the "little flock" of priests are 
selected: So our appearing will be to bless the people-the world 
of mankind; to raise up and bless the race fallen in death and 
sickness and degradation; to raise them up to perfect manhood 
as at first-"the restitution of all things which God hath spoken." 

Throughout the "Day of atonement" -typical of the 6,000 years 
of sin's reign, in the latter part of which 1900 years the sacrifices 
have been offering—during that "day of atonement" the people 
were instructed (Lev. 16:29) that they should "afflict their souls" 
etc., typical of the world's painful and afflicted condition during 
sin's dominion and until their sins are blotted out and their at- 
one-ment with God completed. Theirs was only the type; the 
real atonement is almost finished and soon the blessing will 
begin. 

Now it is these waiting multitudes —the people, who are 
awaiting the coming forth of the Great Prophet, Priest and King- 
-"The Christ," "The Seed." Paul says so: "The whole creation 
groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now. " "For the 
earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the manifestation 
of the SONS of God." The human family will not see Jesus the 
head or bridegroom when he comes to get His "Jewels," "His 
body," "His bride." He comes as he went away— quietly, 
unknown to the world. (But not again in the flesh for though we 
have known Christ after the flesh yet now henceforth know we 
him (so) no more. ") Earth's millions are groaning for deliverance 
from "the bondage of corruption" and though they may not have 
clear ideas of how it comes, yet in due time the deliverance shall 
come and they will recognize it as being the work of the "sons 
of God." "And it shall come to pass that every soul that will not 
hear (obey) that prophet (teacher) shall be cut off [die] from 
among his people. " And all who do obey him shall be delivered 
from the bondage of corruption [sickness, pain and death] into 
the glorious liberty of the sons of God. As redeemed human 
children they shall 

R148:page5 

come again into the same freedom from sickness and death as 
that enjoyed by angels, by Adam before he sinned, etc. Pain, 
corruption and death are only the accompaniment and bondage 
resulting from sin. 



Though "every eye shall see Him, and they also which pierced 
Him, " we do not believe He will appear (and we with Him) to 
all at once, but that, as indicated in our text, it will be to those 
that "look for Him." The seeing will not be that of the natural 
eye, for "without holiness no man shall see the Lord. " The holy 
ones are the saints. "We shall see Him as He is," for we shall be 
like Him. " There are other ways of seeing than by the natural 
eye. To see means to recognize; to perceive. When Jesus was 
present in the flesh, many saw Him with the natural eye. Few 
saw Him really. Eyes had they, but they saw not. 

Again: "a blind man could truthfully say, "Wonderful things in 
the Bible I see." Paul says we are to watch and "see the day 
approaching, " &c. We thus use the word see as meaning to 
recognize. Now we understand that Jesus, our head, is now 
present as our "Morning Star" (day-bringer), preparing a "little 
flock." (We don't claim to know them all). The world and many 
of the virgins (pure ones; saints), are asleep, and know not of the 
"day star's" having risen. Soon the few prepared ones are caught 
away unknown, and, with the dead of the same class, constitute 
"the prophets and saints" of Rev. 11:18— the bride -the 
overcomers, who, under and in their leader and head, Jesus, are 
to "inherit all things "-be members of the "first-born"— therefore, 
"heirs of God, joint heirs with Jesus," of whom He spake, 
saying: "Fear not, little flock; it is your Father's good pleasure to 
give you the kingdom. " 

"Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom 
of their Father," whose kingdom, prayed for 1800 years, will 
then have come: "Thy kingdom come," and following gradually 
comes the next clause, "Thy will be done on earth as in heaven. " 
It requires all of the millennial age to fully accomplish God's 
will on earth as in heaven, and to utterly wipe away sin and its 
results: corruption, pain and death. 

Those who will first recognize this millennial day as begun, and 
its sun of righteousness as having risen, the kingdom of God as 
having been "set up," or commenced its reign, will be the "great 
company who go through the coming time of trouble and come 
up (to the family condition, as partakers of the Divine nature), 
but not being the overcomers -the bride— they do not sit in the 
throne, but therefore are they before the throne. " We say that 
this class, the left of the church when the bride is taken, will be 
the first to recognize the kingdom as being established. As we 
see by Rev. 19:5-9, "A voice came out of the throne, saying, 
'Praise our God, all ye, His servants, and ye that fear Him, both 
small and great.' And I heard, as it were, the voice of a great 
multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of 
mighty thunderings, saying, 'Allelulia! for the Lord God 
omnipotent reigneth.'" They realize the reign as commenced, 
and the bride as being taken, and that they are left out of that 
little flock. But the plan of God begins to open out before them, 



and they find Him much more loving and kind than they had 
ever 

R147 : page 6 

supposed while they were bound in and to Babylon; at whose 
overthrow they rejoice. They begin to praise God, saying: "We 
may rejoice and exult, and give glory to Him, because the 
marriage of the Lamb came, and his wife prepared herself. " 
[Diaglott]. 

Then (vs. 9,) a promise is made to this second company, viz,: 
that they come to the "marriage feast," when they, the "palm- 
bearers," shall be ushered into the presence and joyous and 
eternal fellowship of "the crown-wearers, the kings and priests 
unto God, and thus the entire family or "first-born" and many 
brethren be complete, and together unite in showing forth the 
praises of the King of Kings and Lord of Lords to the world. 

The second class who will recognize the kingdom as "set up" 
will be fleshly Israel. When toward or at the close of "the time 
of trouble" they shall have been gathered in great numbers and 
wealth to Palestine, and when the "nations shall come up to take 
a spoil and prey," etc., (Ezek. 38:11.) For "the day of the Lord 
cometh, and thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee. For I 
will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle,... and half of 
the city shall go into captivity, &c....Then shall the Lord go forth 
and fight against those nations as when He fought in the day of 
battle. And His feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of 
Olives," &c. (Zech 14:1-4). This, apparently the first realization 
Israel will have of the kingdom's having come (Chap. 12:2,3,7- 
10), seems to discuss the same topic and describe the effect 
upon them of their marked deliverance. They recognize (look 
upon) Him whom they have pierced. They seem to be able to 
establish the identity of the Deliverer as the one they had once 
despised, crucified. 

Our understanding is, not that they will see Jesus or any one 
with their eyes, nor that Jesus and His church will appear in their 
midst and fight and kill their enemies (we war not with carnal 
weapons), but that after they have been badly beaten by the 
great multitudes of their enemies, the Lord will appear and show 
Himself and fight for them "as when he fought in the day of 
battle." But how was that? Think of it! How he overthrew great 
kings and strong nations before them; nations so much stronger 
than they that it was a miracle. Thus God was in the midst of 
Israel, and delivered them from all their enemies round about. 
As then, so again he will reveal himself as their deliverer, and 
they shall say: "Lo, this is our God: We have waited for him, 
and he will save us." So the work of revealing progresses until 
"all shall know him, from the least to the greatest," and "all 
nations shall come and worship before him, and thus every eye 



shall see (recognize) him, while only the holy shall see him as 
he is. 

Thus, too, we see how "he will be revealed in flaming fire." 
[Judgments.] The judgments which come upon "Babylon" and 
cause her overthrow open the eyes of the first mentioned class to 
recognize the kingdom power. The overthrow (judgments) on 
the attacking nations open the eyes of the Israelites similarly 
while the balance of mankind, living and resurrected nations, 
will find abundant proof of the rulings of the spiritual kingdom 
in the crushing and destroying of their enemies, sin and death, 
for "when the judgments ["flaming fire"] of the Lord are abroad 
in the land, the inhabitants of the world will learn 
righteousness." 

Thus each class, as they become interested and awakened to 
"look for him," shall see him. "To them that look for him, he 
shall appear," and we "also shall appear with him," and thus "the 
desire of all nations shall come. " 



R148 : page 6 

WHEN AND HOW WILL CHRIST COME? 

We have just read, in a contemporary which is seen by many of 
our readers, an article entitled "Christ, and Anti-Christ," in 
which the writer seeks to prove that Jesus, at his second advent, 
will come in the flesh. The proof of his position he bases mainly 
on, 1 John 4:2,3. He quotes the verses thus: "Every spirit that 
confesseth that Jesus Christ erkomai [cometh] in the flesh is of 
God, and every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ 
erkomai in the flesh is not of God. " "For many deceivers are 
entered into the world who confess not that Jesus Christ cometh 
in the flesh. This is a deceiver and an Anti-Christ." 1 John 4:2,3, 
and 2 John 7. 

He continues: "The rendering of erkomai, as it is given by the 
translators in these special texts, was merely because of the 
theology of these Episcopalian ministers. It is the word 
invariably used [mark!] by the apostles when speaking of his 
future coming." Then follows a list of texts, in which he asserts 
erkomai occurs, putting them all in the future tense. 

We are obliged to say that he has made a very serious mistake, 
and one calculated to lead into error any one not familiar with 
the Greek of the New Testament. Yet it is but just to say that it 
was a mistake easily made. Not being familiar with the original, 
he evidently depended upon a Greek Concordance in making his 
quotations. The error probably crept in this way. In such 
Concordances, each word is given usually in its generic 
[general] form only, without reference to the changes it 
undergoes in passing through the various grammatical forms 



which distinguish its moods, tenses, &c. Thus, under the general 
head of "Erkomai" [come] he would find references to passages 
containing such combinations as these: have come, is come, will 
come, may come, also cometh, came, &c. 

If unfamiliar with the Greek forms and without an examination 
of the Greek text he would be totally unable to distinguish 
between the tenses. 

Looking in the concordance then under "Erkomai" he finds 
references to some passages which he knows speak of Christ's 
second advent. If he fails to look further he may conclude that 
"it is the word invariably used when speaking of his future 
coming. " Of course a more thorough search would soon have 
revealed the error. Having thus reached a conclusion — 
unfortunately a wrong one -it is apparent that on finding other 
texts which his theory required to be in the future tense-that 
were translated in the past-he would at once jump to the 
conclusion that they were mistranslated. 

This he has done. Both in his proof texts, and in his list which he 
has given to support his translation of the proof texts, he has 
been thus deceived. His argument briefly but fairly stated is this. 
"Erkomai meaning cometh," is the word invariably used by the 
apostles when speaking of his (Christ's) future coming. " Proof: a 
list of texts referring to the future in which he asserts erkomai 
occurs. Now says he (we are using 

R149 : page 6 

our own words for brevity's sake.) Erkomai is the word used in 1 
John 4:2-3, in which it speaks of a coming of Christ in the flesh, 
therefore the coming in the flesh spoken of, is in the future, at 
his second advent; and all who deny this are by the same 
authority called Anti-Christ -those who are in harmony with the 
WATCH TOWER particularly included. 

Well, we can pardon his allusion to the WATCH TOWER, and 
even excuse his mistake, but we cannot pass it by unnoticed; and 
now let us give briefly the facts in the case- First then: In the 
texts he has quoted the words in dispute are not confined to the 
future, but are in various tenses. Secondly: The word erkomai 
(on which he hangs the whole argument) does not occur in any 
of them. 

We will now quote the texts, and give the original words as they 
really appear: 

"Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come 
[eleeluthota] in the flesh is of God, and every spirit that 
confesseth not Jesus Christ is not of God." 1 John 4:2,3. The 
word does not occur in third verse "This same Jesus, who is 
taken up from you into heaven, shall so come [eleusetai] in like 
manner, " &c. Acts 1:11. "When the Son of Man shall come 
[elthee] in his glory," &c. Matt. 25:31. "Behold, the Bridegroom 



erketail" [Word omitted in best authorities.] Matt. 25:6. 
"Behold, he cometh [erketai] with clouds." Rev. 1:7. "There 
shall come, [eleusantai] in the last days, scoffers." 2 Pet. 3:3. 
"Behold, the Lord cometh." [Eelthe-came; prophetic; like Isa. 
9:6.] Jude 14. "Which is and which was, and which is to come." 
[Erkomenas.] Rev. 1:14. 

A portion of an article from the WATCH TOWER on the latter 
part of Matt. 24, was rather sharply criticized in our 
contemporary's article, in which he also claimed to find erkomai 
again where it does not occur. The scripture reads thus: "Who, 
then, is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made 
ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season? 
Blessed is that servant whom his lord, when he cometh, shall 
find so doing." Brother Russell claimed, in WATCH TOWER, 
that the time spoken of was not at the instant of Christ's arrival, 
as generally believed, but after he has come. The Greek word 
here is Elthon, and it undoubtedly has this meaning. It signifies 
an arrival accomplished; a period after the coming, and during 
the presence of the Lord. It is a participle form of the word, and 
should be rendered "having come. " We might quote a multitude 
of texts in which it occurs, but must be satisfied with a few. That 
we may not be charged with picking up scattered and stray texts, 
we will take a few in succession as we found them at the 
beginning of the book. "The star which they saw in the east, 
went before them, till, having come (elthon), it stood over where 
the young child was." Matt. 2:9. Notice, the star had been going 
before them, but at the period covered by elthon, it had ceased to 
go. Its arrival was accomplished: it stood. 

"And when Jesus was come (elthon) into Peter's house, he saw 
his wife's mother laid, and sick of a fever." 8:14. 

Tell us, was not Jesus PRESENT? We do not know how long he 
was in the house till he saw the sick one, but we know that he 
had arrived, whether she knew it or not. His coming had been 
accomplished. He was present. 

"And when Jesus came into the ruler's house, and saw the 
minstrels," &c. 9:23. We might read, "And Jesus, having come 
into the ruler's house," &c. He had arrived. "And when he was 
come (elthon) into his own country, he taught them in their 
synagogues," &c. 13:54. Surely he was present in this case. 
"Then he (the evil spirit) saith, "I will return into my house from 
whence I came out; and when he is come (elthon), he findeth it 
empty, swept and garnished." 12:44. He had returned, and made 
search, and found this condition of things. "Blessed are those 
servants, whom, the Lord having come, shall find watching. 
Verily, I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them 
sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. " Luke 
12:37. 



Have we been astonished at the wonderful feast of love and truth 
that has been placed before us, without any effort on our part? 
Marvel not; the Master has come, and has made us sit down, and 
with his own blessed hands is serving us a bountiful supply. 
"Behold, I stand at the door, and knock. If any man hear my 
voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup 
with him, and he with me." Rev. 3:20. Some have supposed that 
this text had an application all the way down the gospel age. It 
cannot be so. It was given only to those living in the Laodicean 
period of the church. The spirit so directed. We know that we 
have been feasting with him. Could we do so until he had come 
in to us? Nay, more: Could we have heard the knock until he 
first had arrived, and stood, waiting and knocking for 
admittance? 

And now, dear brethren and sisters, let us look very carefully at 
Matt. 24:44-51 in the light that has been given us, viz.: that our 
Lord has come. 

"Therefore, be ye (ye brethren) also ready; for in such an hour as 
ye think not the Son of Man comes." This was fulfilled. It was 
months after Christ came (in Fall of 74) before the company 
realized it. "Who, then, is a faithful and wise servant, whom his 
lord hath made ruler over his household, to give meat in due 
season? Blessed is that servant, whom his lord, HAVING 
COME (elthon), shall find so doing." Was there such a servant? 
Of course, we do not understand that it means one individual, 
but evidently a small company, best symbolized by a single 
servant. There was such a one, giving meat in due season, and 
receiving the blessing, for at least a period of years. 

"But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord 
delayeth his coming; and shall begin to smite his fellow 
servants," &c. Who is this? He is called that servant, i.e., one 
previously spoken of; one, then, who had been giving the 
household meat when the Lord came. What was that due meat? 
Surely, the time arguments proving 

R149 : page 7 

the presence of the Master. What then? Some part, large or 
small, of that little company must change their minds, and, 
taking back what they have said, declare, "My Lord delays his 
coming. " Mark, there can be no delay until the time of arrival 
has passed. This one, therefore, must have known and taught the 
true time of the coming. Again, to fill the picture, he must begin 
to smite the remainder of the company; and as he is in 
opposition, and proclaiming a delay, it is evident that they must 
be teaching that there is no delay, but that the truth of the past 
remains true. 

Brothers, sisters, how else could this scripture be fulfilled? 
When, but at this time, could it take place? Truly, the King has 
come in to the guest chamber, and is scanning those who have 



been privileged to enter. Can we bear that searching eye, 
looking clear through and through? Lord, help us to examine 
ourselves in the light of present truth. 



W. I. M. 



R149:page7 

A LETTER TO THE WATCH TOWER. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: How true is it that our 
Heavenly Father can bring good out of evil, and cause the wrath 
of man to praise him. At the very time we are cautioned to 
"watch" and "beware," and that "the love of many shall wax 
cold," on account of iniquity abounding, He has arranged a mass 
of concurring events well calculated to increase our faith. I am 
reminded of this every day. I find men fulfilling prophecy; 
saying and doing many things, freely and voluntarily, which 
they have not the remotest idea had any connection with God or 
heaven, and yet which is of such a nature, or has such a relation 
to things which are of interest to the child of God who is 
watching closely every indication of the presence of his Lord, as 
to impress him forcibly with the thought that He is even at the 
door. While stopping in a certain city, not long since, a little 
incident occurred which had something to do with this train of 
thought. 

I was in conversation with a gentleman (not a professor of 
religion, I suppose). We were in his place of business, and 
looking out of the window before me, I saw the tall, symmetrical 
spire of an adjoining fashionable church, which was surmounted 
by a weather-vane in the form of a cock. At first sight and 
thought it seemed to me to be a vain thing to be upon a Christian 
church, and your correspondent expressed his surprise at its 
being in such a place; for although it is a reminder of Peter's 
weakness and denial of his Lord, and inferentially of our 
weakness, yet it is so often used as the emblem of boastful 
power that it seemed quite out of place there, and it seems that 
the gentleman referred to was impressed the same way, for he 
said, looking archly at it, "O, it is in harmony with the principles 
of the churches in these days," giving a peculiar accent to the 
words "these days." 

Soon after, looking out at the building from another point, I 
observed: "Those must be fine windows, judging from the 
appearance outside." "O, yes," said he; "it is a fine church 
inside, but that cannot be said of those who belong to it. " And 
then, striking an attitude, and pointing with scorn toward the 
place, he said, "Why, sir, if you could take all the Christianity 
there is in there and boil it down, you would not get a piece as 
large as a pin's head. " 



Of course, I had nothing to say, but went off into reverie, and 
said to myself (the outgrowth of thoughts presented in the 
WATCH TOWER). That church is struck with lightning, and 
don't know it, but will some 

R150:page7 

day wake up to the fact when it is too late to rebuild it. "As the 
lightning cometh out of the East, and shineth even unto the 
West, so shall also the coming [parousia— presence] of the Son 
of Man be." The lightning has swept away "the refuge of lies," 
and the world sees the dead men's bones and all uncleanness." 
The lightning not only reveals things which were hidden, but it 
has a pleasing or displeasing effect according as the things 
revealed are pleasing or displeasing to the beholder. To children 
who, in the stormy night, watch for the absent father, the 
lightning, to their joy, reveals him near at hand; but to the 
burglar, that same flash reveals approaching justice and doom; 
but in either case the beholders get true views of their 
surroundings. They see the highest objects first and best. The 
churches are the highest objects, and men now see what they are 
and what they should be; although they do not yet see down into 
the valleys of social and civil conditions so as to adjust things, 
but as the storm increases, they will be able to see, and "will 
learn righteousness," and acknowledge "that the Most High 
rulefh in the kingdom of men. " 

Let us lift up our heads "knowing that our redemption draweth 
nigh" 

Cheer up, cheer up; the day breaks o'er thee, 

Bright in the promised shining way! 

Light from heaven is streaming for thee, 

Proving thee near the perfect day. " 

Rejoicing in the light now shining from our Lord's presence and 
hoping for the soon coming change to the likeness of his 
glorious body, of all who have made a covenant with him by 
sacrifice, I am your brother in Christ. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R150:page7 

Questions of Correspondents. 

Q. Bro. R., please give me your view of 1 Pet. 3:18-20, which 
says that Jesus Christ was "quickened by the Spirit by which 
also he went and preached unto the Spirits in prison, which 
sometime were disobedient when once the long suffering of God 
waited in the days of Noah while the ark was a preparing. " 

A. We understand this to teach that the Spirit which raised Jesus 
from death was the same which while the ark was preparing 



preached through Noah ("a preacher of righteousness") to the 
antediluvian sinners, now in the great prison house of death. 

Q. Bro. R., you have shown, I think clearly and scripturally that 
the body of Christ, as well as the head give their lives as 
sacrifices for sins, and that as his was the ransom price of "the 
household of faith, " the body's life given during the Gospel Age 
is accepted as "filling up," or completing the work of the head 
"for the people"-the world. I see too that it seems to be the clear 
fulfillment of the goat sacrifice of Lev. 16., but there is one text 
which troubles me, i.e. Col. 1:24, where Paul says: "I now 
rejoice in my sufferings for you and fill up that which is behind 
of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body's sake which 
is the church. " My difficulty is that the sacrifice is for the church 
while the type (Lev. 16) teaches that the sacrifice for the church 
was completed in the death of Jesus as typified by the bullock's 
dying for Priests and Levites, and that Paul's sacrifice and that of 
every other member of the body of Christ is "for the sins of the 
people" (the world), and is represented by the goat. 

Can you suggest how we may harmonize these scriptures? 

A. God accepts the offering of the High-priest, head and body- 
the second Adam and his Bride as the ransom price of the 
world's life, as the offset of the disobedience of the first Adam 
and his wife. 

Adam and Eve were one in the transgression; Jesus Christ and 
his bride are one in the redemption of the world. Now consider 
that God has covenanted to accept our sacrifice of earth-life and 
nature; and has promised us the higher-the Divine-and we, 
Jesus and His body have accepted the conditions and covenanted 
to die. Next the question arises— How shall we die? Shall we go 
to the altar and knife as did the bullock and goat in the type? No, 
we have only to remember that the goat was to suffer and die as 
did the bullock which means that we have Christ Jesus as a 
pattern of how we are to give our lives. 

He spent His life according to the Father's will in "doing good 
unto all men as he had opportunity, especially to the household 
of faith." And this is just what the Apostle enjoins us to do also. 
There are hundreds of ways of spending our life-power 
according to the talents we possess; in the household, in the 
workshop, in temperance reform, and in any other way we can 
bless and benefit humanity and exercise the Divine attribute 
love. But while it is good to do for any one, yet, Paul esteemed it 
a special privilege to spend and be spent "for the church which 
is His (Christ's) body. " Jesus' time was spent largely in 
instructing the disciples, and we should esteem it a special honor 
to be permitted to do much and suffer much for each other, as 
long as we have life or strength to spend. 

Suppose I bought an article of you for $100, and came to you 
presenting the money and you said: Here is the article and the 



money too. I want you to spend this money, which is mine. Use 
it for the benefit of those you find needing it, especially any of 
my relatives. You will be acting as my agent and may use so 
much of it on yourself as you find necessary to the 
accomplishment of my work (only). This would illustrate how 
we give ourselves, and how our Father accepts us (the body of 
Christ) as part, with our Head, of the world's "sin-offering" and 
also permits us to be his agents in doing good. Thus we in 
spending our lives and all that God has given us, are merely his 
stewards and were given all powers and blessings, not for 
ourselves, nor to keep, but to use for Him. Let us so do. 

Q. Please explain 1 Pet. 4:6 "For this cause was the gospel 
preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged 
according to men, in the flesh, but live according to God, in the 
Spirit." 

A. This shows the double nature of one begotten of the Spirit— 
the body still human, the spirit of the mind Divine. Peter is 
exhorting to separateness from the world, not only our minds but 
also of our bodies as ruled over by our minds. 

The gospel (good news of our redemption and the promise of 
glory,) was given us, that our lives should be influenced by it 
and that we should be separated from the world as "new 
creatures" thus living according to God in the Spirit and 
regarded by Him as "new [spiritual] creatures" while men who 
see no physical change in us, regard us still "as men in the 
flesh," and think it strange if we do not act as natural men. 

"The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit." He 
understands not the begetting to a new nature, new hopes and 
aspirations, and thinks a self-sacrificed life unnatural; and so it 
is unnatural. Therefore we must have the new nature implanted 
before we can crucify the old. 



R152:page7 

SEND A POSTAL CARD. 

We desire to send the WATCH TOWER to all who are 
interested in it sufficiently to read it carefully, but have none to 
waste. We will not indulge in the begging, urging and dunning 
process so common to religious journals. You know that the 
second volume commenced July, 1880, and if interested in and 
desirous of its continuance, you should in some way signify 
your wish. You know that the paper is FREE to all who want to 
read it and consider themselves unable to pay for it. You know, 
too, that we expect at least a postal card from each subscriber 
each year. If, therefore, you desire a continuance of the WATCH 
TOWER'S visits this year, and have not so informed us, do so at 



once, or be neither surprised nor offended if you do not receive 
the November issue. 



R152:page7 

NOT UNTIL NOVEMBER. 

In answer to a number of requests, we had purposed visiting 
several places in New York state, where little bands of 
subscribers reside, among others, Brockport, Honeoye, 
Dansville, etc., but will defer so doing until the early part of 
November. 

We have had numerous and urgent calls for WATCH TOWER 
Tracts on various topics, and purpose (D.V.) issuing several as 
soon as possible. They will be cheap tracts for gratuitous 
distribution and will be furnished at a very low price to those 
agreeing to distribute them, or free to those so desiring them. 
We will use a portion of October in this way instead of 
traveling. 



page 7 



EXTRACT FROM LETTER. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:— I was very much pleased with article 
in last number on "Baptism." It is in harmony with my thoughts 
on the subject. I have thought for two years or more, that those 
who thought, only of water baptism, when thinking of being 
baptized into Christ, were taking the shadow and leaving out the 
substance; just as they do, who ask to be provided with daily 
bread, and mean, mainly, natural bread. 

The real baptism is of vital importance; and it seems to me that 
when one has reached that point, he will give expression to it, by 
water baptism in a proper way, just as surely as it is true that out 
of the "abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh." 

By some of the friends, our ideas of being dead with Christ, are 
considered a little extreme, and so they may think in regard to 
these on baptism, but the former lead to the latter. 

Your brother, B. W. KEITH. 



R150 : page 8 



THE SCAPEGOAT. 



If the goat that was slain represented the saints, the "little 
flock," did not the scape-goat represent "the great multitude" 



that come out of great tribulation and wash their robes? After 
much thought, we had about come to this conclusion, but, on 
presenting it to others, difficulties became apparent, and we now 
suggest that the scape-goat represents that portion of the world, 
or "children of the devil," which are professedly Christian, and 
on account of whom the multitude of Christians are in the 
bondage of conformity to the world. It seems that the "little 
flock" represent the whole church, and will gather the "great 
multitude" around them as the lodestone will gather the particles 
of steel mingled in the dust. These particles of steel are treated 
as dust only till they are separated. So our thought is that the 
multitude of Christians, mingled with and in bondage to the 
worldly element, are counted as the scapegoat only till they are 
separated; then they are exalted to their proper relationship to 
the saints. "Without holiness, no man shall see the Lord." 

We think we see several scriptural facts that will serve to 
illustrate our view of the case. 

First: The meaning of the word scapegoat seems to indicate the 
idea. The Hebrew word, Azazel, rendered scapegoat, is said to 
mean devil. This fact has led some to believe that the devil 
himself is to be the antitypical scapegoat; and does not the 
definition favor the idea?-One goat to represent the Lord, and 
the other the devil. Our idea is, that one goat represents the 
Lord's children, or wheat, and the other the children of the devil, 
or tares, as in the parable of wheat and tares of Matt. 13. 

Second: It seems illustrated by the case of Israel in bondage in 
Egypt. Let Aaron be as the saint, the mass of Israel the "great 
multitude, " and Egypt, who held them in bondage, as the 
scapegoat. Israel suffered with Egypt until they were separated, 
and the object of all the plagues was the complete deliverance of 
the "great multitude." But, as has been shown in another article, 
all Israel were exempt from the "seven last plagues," and 
therefore 

R151 : page 8 

the great burden of wrath fell on the Egyptians. 

Take the case of the Jewish nation, as Christ found them, on this 
point. There we see a company of first ripe ones, those who 
accepted of Christ before their house was left desolate. All who 
accepted Him afterward, and before the wrath came on them to 
the uttermost, were wheat, though later ripe, but the chaff was 
burned with fire unquenchable. It was on that generation that 
Christ said all the righteous blood should come. Matt. 23:34-36. 
Does not this put them in the attitude of the scapegoat, receiving 
the sins at the hands of the priest? It was (as in Egypt) in their 
extreme calamity, that the Christians escaped from that 
generation by fleeing to the mountains, when they saw 
Jerusalem encompassed with armies. Luke 21:21. In this, we see 
the first fruit, the later fruit, and the scapegoat; and this is no less 



clear to our mind because the later fruits were the greater 
number, and because, until they were separated, they were 
included under the curse on that generation. 

It seems clear to us that the manner of the disposition of the 
Jewish church was intended, in its important features, as a 
pattern of the manner of the disposition of the gospel church, - 
that this is the great event to which several types, parables and 
prophecies point. As in the pattern, there is the first ripe, the 
later ripe— both wheat-and the tares: the "little flock" not defiled 
with corrupt churches; the "great multitude," who are defiled by 
contact with Babylon, but who come out of Babylon, and thus 
wash their robes from the world spots; and, third, the Babylon 
element that does not come out, but drink the wine of wrath 
without mixture, and go down as a millstone into the sea. It is 
Egypt, the chaff of the Jewish nation, the tares of the gospel 
church, or Babylon, that, each in their turn, receive the uttermost 
wrath, or wrath without mixture, as represented by the "seven 
last plagues; for in them is filled up the wrath of God." Rev. 
15:1. 

This uttermost wrath did not come on Israel in Egypt, nor upon 
the later ripe wheat of the Jewish house. Neither did it come on 
the later ripe wheat of the gospel church; i.e., the great multitude 
who come out of Babylon in obedience to the call, and thus 
wash their robes. Does not the scapegoat represent those who 
receive the uttermost wrath, and thus bear the sin? They did 
leave the world by profession, and were a part of the nominal 
church, or kingdom of heaven, but were tares, or children of the 
devil, all the time. They were sown among the wheat, but they 
never were wheat. They never had been even counted holy in 
God's sight, as are all the wheat, whether first ripe or later ripe. 
They had never defiled their garments, for they had no garments 
given them. Nothing can be defiled that was never clean. 

The defiled ones are like Esau, who lose their crown, their 
birthright. Heb. 12:14-17. Once lost, it can never be regained. 
But Esau was not cast out of the family. He took the place of the 
younger brother as a servant; and so those who defile their 
garments with Babylon, lose their crown, but, by washing their 
robes, become servants in the heavenly temple. Rev. 7:14-15. 
They come out of great tribulation, as did Israel from Egypt, but 
they are exempt like them from the "seven last plagues." Jacob 
and Esau are used by Paul to represent the first-born and later 
born in the same family, and he makes the defiled one take the 
place of the later born. But it is evident that the tares do not 
belong to either of these classes. 

Whoever will read the sixteenth chapter of Revelation will see 
that the seven last plagues do not come on those that repent, 
come out from Babylon, and wash their robes, but upon Babylon 
itself, or those who have the mark of the beast, and do not repent 
of their evil deeds and give God glory. Verses 9-11. They have 



no part either as kings and priests or as servants with this gospel 
crop. The church, order and paraphernalia which they delighted 
to sustain, because it gave them power to enslave and control the 
mass of Christians, will go down to rise no more, and they will 
be lost in the great sea of mankind. 

The parallelism between the ending of the Jewish and Gospel 
ages, and also the idea that the rejected portion of each house is 
the scapegoat, are sustained in our mind by comparing the words 
of Jesus in reference to the blood of the righteous: "All these 
things shall come upon this generation" (Matt. 23:35-36,) and 
the statement of John in reference to Babylon: "And in her was 
found the blood of prophets and of saints, and of all [that fear 
God's name] that were slain upon the earth." Rev. 18:24. 

It seems clear that the downfall of Babylon is necessary to the 
deliverance of God's people, the line between the church and the 
world, and between truth and error must be drawn, hence 
Babylon in her fall, not only bears, but bears away the sins of 
God's people. 

We would call attention to the judgment scene of Matt. 25, as 
having in it the illustration of much that we have said. The scene 
is laid after the saints have ascended to the Father with Christ 
who came forth to meet them in the holy place. They are now 
one in power and glory as were Moses and Aaron, and go forth 
to execute judgment. The nations are gathered before Christ and 
those whom He calls "These my brethren." Verses 40-45. That 
the nations here mean the Christian nations, is evident, because 
no others have been brought in contact with Christ in the 
persons of His saints. Here are included the "great multitude" of 
Christians called the "sheep" and the Babylon element, or tares- 
the children of the Devil-called "goats." They are all as the 
same until they are separated, but as the object of Moses and 
Aaron when they went forth to execute judgment was to 
separate and deliver Israel, and to bring Egypt down; so here we 
see first the separation and the "Come ye blessed" to the sheep, 
followed by "Depart ye cursed" to the goats. 

As we have seen it was after the first three plagues that the Lord 
said: "And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen in which 
my people dwell.... And I will put a division between my people 
and thy people," &c. Ex. 8:22-23. Then follows on Egypt the 
seven last plagues. This looks like the separation of the sheep 
from the goats, followed by the "fire" on the goats. 

Practically, we believe this separation will be fulfilled by the 
great body of Christians, who are left in the world when the 
saints or little flock are taken away to meet Christ, cutting them 
loose from their conformity to the maxims and customs of a 
worldly church, washing their robes and making them white and 
thus raising the standard of a pure Christianity to the world. The 
entrance into the temple in heaven cannot be immediately 



effected, as Israel was not delivered out of Egypt, until the 
fulfillment of the seven last plagues. Rev. 15:8. 

It would seem that this washed or separated state, while men are 
yet mortal, may possibly be lost. This is the state of those on "as 
it were a sea of glass." This danger of losing it is implied in the 
statement made after six of the seven last plagues are poured 
out: "Behold I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth and 
keepeth his garment, lest he walk naked and they see his 
shame." Rev. 16:15. The coming as a thief extends over the 
whole period from His coming to meet His saints until these 
judgments on Babylon are complete; and it is clear that no man 
is absolutely above danger of falling until he is immortal. 

We are impressed with the thought that a certain class who had 
been forgiven have that pardon revoked, and so share the fate of 
the world. The idea of pardon being revoked seems strange to 
many Christians, as it once did to us, but such an idea is clearly 
taught by the Savior in the parable of the two debtors. Matt. 
18:23-35. One owed his Lord "ten thousand talents," and "the 
Lord of that servant was moved with compassion, and loosed 
him, and forgave him the debt. " This was because he was 
willing to pay and could not. The other debtor owed this 
forgiven one an hundred pence, and he took him by the throat 
(just as some professed followers of Christ apply the law to their 
fellow disciples) and in the face of his inability to pay, and his 
plea for mercy, he cast him into prison. And when his Lord 
heard it, he was angry and delivered him to the tormentors "until 
he should pay all that was due him. " 

Here is a case of pardon revoked; and after giving this 
illustration the Savior says, "So likewise shall my Heavenly 
Father do also unto you if ye from your hearts forgive not every 
one his brother their trespasses." Our sins are forgiven at 
conversion, but are not "blotted out" until the sanctuary is 
cleansed and the hands of the priest are laid upon the head of the 
scapegoat, or until "the times of refreshing shall come from the 
presence of the Lord." Acts 3:19. And the way to retain 
forgiveness is by forgiving others their trespasses. If we would 
be on the side of the Lord's goat instead of the Devil's we must 
follow the Lord's methods of dealing with others. "If any man 
will come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross 
and follow me. " Matt. 16:24. J. H P. 



page 8 

SOME NEW THOUGHTS. 

R151 : page 8 

In the article above, Brother P. suggests some food for thought 
regarding the type of the sin-offering, scape-goat, etc. We fully 



agree with the general view expressed relative to tares, Babylon, 
etc., not representing the church in any sense, neither the "little 
flock" nor great company. 

But we must yet hold to our views, as heretofore expressed, that 
the scapegoat represents the "great company," not Babylon, 
tares, etc., for several reasons. First: The scape-goat was brought 
to the door of the Tabernacle, and had been accepted of God. 
Surely this is not the case with hypocrites in the church. 

R152 : page 8 

If they present themselves, they may deceive men, but not God. 
Again: God intimates that as far as He is concerned, He has no 
choice (shown by casting lots) as to which shall be the sacrifice 
or sin-offering. This would not be true of a hypocrite. God 
would not accept of a tares sacrifice for sins; the offering must 
be pure, free from sin. Jesus was such in fact. We are so, 
because justified by Him, and we think that both goats standing 
thus before God must represent, not tares, but justified ones- 
Christians. 

This class of true (though not faithful) Christians stand side by 
side with the faithful ones who do follow their Lord's example, 
and crucify the will of the flesh. These are overcome by the 
world, and though they would love the approval of their Lord, 
cannot bear the frown of men. Like the unfruitful branches, they 
do not bear the fruit of the vine, but merely leaves, and are, 
therefore, "castaways" from the high calling and honors of the 
overcomers. These are not accounted worthy to escape those 
things coming upon the world, and go through at least a part of 
the world's trouble, the object being the "delivering over to 
Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be 
saved on the day of the Lord Jesus." This is made necessary by 
their having failed to crucify the fleshly nature according to their 
covenant. And as we have already seen, it is necessary for all to 
lose the fleshly nature and form, either by "destruction" or 
"sacrifice," in order to the obtaining of the Divine form and 
nature. "I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye 
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God— 
your reasonable service. " 

The subject is large and will bear much examination, which we 
hope all will give it. 



R152 : page 1 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., NOVEMBER, 1880. 

NO. 5. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 
L. A. ALLEN, .... HONEOYE, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R152 : page 1 



"CAUGHT UP IN THE CLOUDS." 

"The dead in Christ shall rise first: Then we which are alive and 
remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to 
meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we ever be with the Lord. " 
IThes. 4:17. 

The scene here described is undoubtedly the same event, as 
shown by the same Apostle in 1 Cor. 15:51,52, where he calls it 
our change from a natural, corruptible, weak, earthly body, to a 
spiritual, immortal, powerful, heavenly body. Those members of 
"the seed" (of God), Christ, who lie in death's cold embrace, 
shall arise spiritual, immortal, etc., but we who are alive and 
remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall be changed in a 
moment, in the twinkling of an eye. These descriptions seem to 
portray the change of all who have part in "the first 
resurrection," the victors overcomers -who had not worshiped 
the beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark. 
Because changed to immortal (incorruptible) beings, "on such 
the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of God 
and Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years." (Rev. 
20:4-6.) 

This must be a description of the change of the "little flock" or 
"bride" since the second or great company are not called 
overcomers, and do not overcome the beast, image and mark, 
but are subject to their power, until they (beast, etc.) are 
overthrown in the time of trouble already commenced upon 
them. It is the "body of Christ" who are the overcomers. "To 
him that overcometh, I will grant to sit with me in my throne 
even as I overcame. " "He that overcometh shall inherit all 
things." Now notice that it is this class only which is mentioned 
in our text- "The dead in Christ" (members of "the body") and 
the living of the same class, who are "caught up"--more properly 
"caught away." (So rendered in the Diaglott.) 

The change in our being which takes place in connection with 
our catching away as shown in the corresponding passage of 1 
Cor. 15:51,52, viz.: from natural, earthly bodies to spiritual, 
heavenly bodies, would seem to indicate to us that this change is 
itself the catching away referred to— "and so shall we ever be 
with the Lord." When changed- "made like unto Christ's 
glorious (spiritual) body"— we will from that instant be as 
invisible to fleshly beings as He is, and as Angels are. Our Lord 
we recognize as invisibly present, and Angels are said to be 
"ministering spirits sent forth to minister for those who shall be 
heirs of salvation," and to "encamp round about them that fear 
God," though we see them not. 

This change from the natural to the spiritual life and body will 
be our "second birth." We were begotten of the flesh, and in due 
time were born of the flesh— a fleshly, human body, in the 
likeness of the first Adam. This was our first birth. Again we 



were begotten of God with the word of his truth, that we should 
be (future) a kind of first fruits of his creatures (Jas. 1:18.) and 
we will reach that condition when "born of the spirit"-into the 
full likeness of the "second Adam"-the Divine spiritual life and 
body. Thus we have even now become new creatures in Christ 
Jesus, and partakers of the Divine nature, and our change will be 
this new life completed. Then what Jesus said of all spiritual 
bodies will be true of us also. "That which is born of the Spirit is 
spirit.... The wind bloweth where it listeth and thou hearest the 
sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, or whither it 
goeth; so is every one that is born of the Spirit-invisible, 
incomprehensible to humanity. "So shall we ever be with the 
Lord." 

Our text says we are "to meet the Lord in the Air. " The Greek 
word here used for air, is in three other places used symbolically 
to represent government or controlling power over Earth (Eph. 
2:2, Rev. 9:2 and 16:17.) We believe it to be used in the same 
way here: When changed -made like him and united with him 
we are associated in power and it becomes our work "to execute 
the judgments written: This honor hath all his saints." (Psa. 
149:9.) 

As to the time of our change, that it is at, (or during) the 
sounding of the "last trump,"— the "seventh," Rev. 10:7, and 
11:15-18— and after the Lord himself has descended is plainly 
stated. We need not here repeat the evidences that the "seventh 
trump" began its sounding A.D. 1840, and will continue until 
the end of the time of trouble, and the end of "The times of the 
Gentiles," A.D. 1914, and that it is the trouble of this "Great 
day," which is here symbolically called the voice of the 
Archangel when he begins the deliverance of fleshly Israel. "At 
that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince. (Archangel) 
which standeth for the children of thy people, and there shall be 
a time of trouble such as never was since there was a nation. " 
Dan. 12:1. Nor will we here, again present the conclusive Bible 
proof that our Lord came for his Bride in 1 874, and has an 
unseen 

R153 : page 1 

work as Reaper of the first-fruits of this Gospel Age, (Rev. 
14:16) in separating between wheat and tares and gathering the 
living into a condition of readiness for their change. The final 
preparation is made when the Bridegroom comes, and they that 
are ready for union, go in with him to the marriage-into the 
"guest chamber" where they may finish the last touches of 
personal adornment. Then comes the inspection and casting out 
of one not having on a wedding garment; after which the 
marriage takes place, for his wife will have "made herself 
ready." (Rev. 19:7.) 



Jesus himself does not make the Bride ready, but the knowledge 
of his presence, and the thought of the coming union with him 
when ready, make her zealous in the use of the agencies already 
provided for her preparation -the Spirit and the Word of truth. 

We have seen that in his days of presence it will be as it was in 
Noah's days-The world will know not. (Matt. 24:39, Luke 
17:26.) We are told that the day of the Lord is a day of trouble, a 
day of clouds and thick darkness. (Zeph. 1:15. Joel 2:2.) We are 
told also that "as the lightning which shineth" (not as the 
shining, but as the invisible electric fluid which causes the 
shining) "so shall the Son of Man be in his day." (Matt. 24:27. 
Luke 17:24.) Now if he is to be as lightning and his day, a day 
of clouds as the above texts assert, are they not in harmony? In 
the natural storm when we see flashes from lightning and hear 
peals of thunder, it gives evidence to us that atmospheric 
changes are taking place, that the vitiated and corrupt "air" is to 
be changed and we rejoice that it will be pure after the storm. 

We now find a harmony in the account of our gathering. As we 
long since found "the voice of archangel" and "the trump of 
God" were symbols of the closing epoch of this age and its 
troublous events, so now we find "the clouds" to symbolize the 
gathering of the trouble in that epoch; "the lightning" to 
symbolize or illustrate our Lords presence "in His day," and that 
"air" is used as the symbol of the spiritual throne from which 
Satan ("the prince of the power of the air") is to be deposed, and 
to which our Lord and His joint-heirs are to come. 

The great time of trouble as a storm has been and continues 
gathering over Earth. The air (the spiritual "powers of darkness," 
surrounding and ruling over "the present evil world," under the 
direction of "The Prince of the powers of the air," (Eph. 2:2,) 
"the Prince of this world"-age,) becomes more and more 
vitiated until the storm breaks. The Prince of darkness now 
works in the hearts of the children of disobedience to the 
accomplishment of his own will— viz: in oppressing and 
opposing justice and truth to the affliction of mankind. The 
clouds are gathering and men's hearts are beginning to fail for 
fear of the approaching storm— "for fear of those things that are 
coming on the Earth. " Soon it will break in all its fury. But 
though it fills all hearts with fear and dread, in its final results, it 
will prove a great blessing to the earth (mankind), displacing the 
present "powers of the Air" ("powers of darkness, "-spiritual 
wickedness in high-controlling-places") and giving place to 
Earth's rightful ruler-Jesus and his Bride, also spiritual beings 
(powers of the air.) So after the storm shall the "Sun of 
righteousness rise with healing in his wings," and the kingdom 
of darkness shall give place to the kingdom of light, and 
mankind will rejoice in the pure air and cloudless sunlight of 
that perfect day. 



Notice also that the flashes of lightning come from among the 
clouds, and become more and more vivid as the storm increases. 
How the various scriptures interpret each other: "As the 
lightning, so shall the Son of Man be in his day." "Behold he 
cometh with clouds." "The day of the Lord is a day of trouble, of 
clouds and thick darkness." "He maketh the clouds His chariot; 
He walketh upon the wings of the wind." Psa. 104:3. 

Israel at Mount Sinai was a type of the world receiving 
instructions from God during the time of trouble. They saw the 
fire from the Mount enveloped in clouds, so in the time of 
trouble, the world will learn of the Lord's presence by the 
judgments [fire] issuing from the kingdom [mountain] though 
obscured and enveloped by the clouds and 

R153 : page 2 

darkness [trouble] of that time. Yes, "He shall be revealed in 
flaming fire." (2 Thes. 1:8.) 

Moses describes the scene when the people did exceedingly fear 
and quake, &c: "Thou stoodest before the Lord thy God in 
Horeb when the Lord said unto me-Gather me the people 
together and I will make them hear my words and they shall 
learn to fear me all the days that they shall live upon the Earth. " 
So during the day of wrath, God will plead by judgments with 
all flesh and they will learn a lesson never to be forgotten. "And 
the mountain burned with fire unto the midst of heaven, with 
darkness, clouds and thick darkness. And the Lord spake unto 
you out of the midst of the fire. Ye heard the voice of words but 
saw no similitude. " As they learned the lesson and knew of 
Jehovah's presence, &c, but "saw no form," so during the time 
of trouble it will be also "Behold he cometh with clouds and 
every eye shall see [optomai, recognize] him. " All will indeed 
recognize his presence as indicated by "the great day of his 
wrath having come," but none but the Saints shall "see Him as 
he is" for, "Without holiness no man shall see the Lord." Israel 
said "Behold the Lord our God hath showed us His glory and 
His greatness and we have heard his voice out of the midst of 
the fire. If we hear the voice of the Lord our God any more then 
we shall die. " And they entreated that Moses should be 
thereafter a mediator to communicate God's will and they would 
obey Him. (Deut. 4:11.) 

Get the reality of which that was but a shadow and we can see 
how "The glory of the Lord shall be revealed and all flesh see it 
together," and yet none but the Holy see the King and none but 
those born of the spirit-spiritual bodies can see the Kingdom of 
God. (John 3:3.) 

Psa. 97:1-6, describes the establishment of the Kingdom of God: 
"Jehovah reigns,... clouds and darkness are round about him... 
fire goes before him and burns up his foes on every side. His 
lightnings enlightened the world, the earth [people] saw and 



quaked. Mountains [Kingdoms of Earth] melted like wax at the 
presence of Jehovah, at the presence of the Lord of the whole 
Earth and all the peoples saw His glory." [New trans.] 

How this harmonizes with all the other pictures of the day of 
wrath. First, the clouds of trouble; second, the presence of the 
Lord (as the lightning) whose presence is manifested to the 
world by flashes of light and knowledge which will more and 
more disclose to the world His power and glory and reign, and 
this fire of judgment consumes all opposition to the reign of 
righteousness. 

We conclude then that if "He cometh with clouds" of trouble, 
etc., we shall be "caught away in clouds" of the same sort; that is 
after he has come. If we are prepared, we shall be caught to meet 
him during the gathering of the trouble, before the storm bursts. 

David [anointed] was doubtless a type of the church in her 
deliverance, as pictured in the song (2 Saml. 22) in which he 
says (vs. 10) "He bowed the heavens also and came down and 
darkness was under his feet.... He was seen upon the wings of the 
wind, and he made darkness his pavilion round about him.. .and 
thick clouds of the skies.... He sent forth and took me; ...He 
delivered me from the strong enemy" [death]. Yes our Lord 
when he has come and made trouble and darkness his pavilion 
lifts his bride-delivers her from the strong enemy of the fleshly 
nature, into the perfection of our new nature like unto Christ 
glorious body. Lord help us to be ready for the change that we 
may be thus "caught away." 

Forever with the Lord, 
Amen, so let it be, 
Life from the dead is in the word; 
Tis immortality. " 



R153 : page 2 

BEYOND THE VAIL. 

In his letter to the Hebrews, the Apostle frequently refers to a 
vail. He is writing to those who were familiar with the earthly 
tabernacle, its arrangements and services. The Apostle 
endeavors to show that it was only a type or figure designed to 
illustrate spiritual truths. 

There were three curtains, two of which were called vails. Let us 
see: If we had visited the Tabernacle in the wilderness, the first 
object to meet our attention as we approached would have been 
the white linen curtains which completely surrounded 
everything (both Tabernacle and its court) so high that we could 
not see over it, and reaching to the ground so that we could see 
nothing under it. All the work within is hidden from our eyes. 



This is "the curtain" or vail of ignorance and unbelief. This vail 
now prevents the world from understanding the work of 
sacrifice for sin, etc., now going on inside (in the church). This 
curtain now covers the hearts and minds of the heathen and the 
Jews. "The vail is upon their heart," "the same vail untaken 
away." This vail of ignorance and unbelief obstructs their view 
during this gospel age, while God is taking out a people as the 
body of the High 

R154 : page 2 

Priest, etc., and receiving through this High Priest the "sin 
offering." But soon their full ransom will be complete and 
accepted, and then "the vail shall be taken away." (2 Cor. 3:14- 
16.) This is the same thought given us by the Prophet when he 
declares, God "will destroy in this mountain [kingdom, the 
glorified church] the face of the covering [death] cast over all 
people, and the vail [ignorance and unbelief, etc.] spread over all 
nations." (Isa. 25:7.) 

But now, for the purpose of developing a peculiar people, this 
great temporary barrier is allowed to remain, and there is only 
one way through it called "the gate. " This gate represents belief 
in Jesus as the way of approach to God. Once seeing the gate we 
may look in and see the altar and laver, indicating to us that His 
sacrifice paid the price of our ransom. We are still of the world, 
but seeing the love of our Creator and of Jesus as manifested in 
our purchase, we are impressed with the thought of the 
"exceeding sinfulness of sin," and realizing for the first time, the 
"great love wherewith he loved us," we say, Lord we can never 
repay your goodness and love, but let us do something which 
will show our appreciation. The Father says to us: Have you 
heard the call of my word? It is that any of you, may, if you will, 
enter by this road which my only begotten Son trod, into full 
sonship, partake of the Divine nature and have spiritual bodies, 
etc. 

We could not understand all that was meant. Our ears were dull 
of hearing, but we felt grateful and desired to show it, and went 
forward. We entered in through faith. We are no longer without, 
among unbelievers, but within, among "the household of faith"- 
the Levites. We look at the altar, and are told that it represents 
sacrifice, and that God expects self-sacrifice. We look at the 
"laver" full of water, and are told that it represents the word of 
God, and that we are to use it and put away sins— be "clean 
through the word. " We make some trifling sacrifices upon the 
altar, and splash a little in the water, and feel perfectly 
contented. We act and play and dally very much as those do (the 
world) who are yet beyond this "curtain"-in unbelief. But God 
has sent to us heralds, who, coming in among the company, 
proclaim, "We beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God"-if 
you feel gratitude for the manifest love of God, and desire to 
please Him and enter into the blessings to which you are called— 



"your high calling"-that you do more than you have yet done. If 
you would follow the example of our Lord, as you have agreed 
to do, you must not only lay these toys upon the altar, but your 
all. I beseech you that "you present your bodies a living 
sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, your reasonable service. " 

Some heed not the voice, they are so much engaged with the 
earthly toys. But some are aroused. They leave those earthly 
trinkets, and give their attention to following the example of 
Jesus and the apostles, presenting themselves to God as living 
sacrifices, and "reckoning themselves dead indeed to sin" and to 
the "world. " They have now undergone a complete change. 
They have now entered from the "court" into the "tabernacle" 
itself, passing through "the first vail. " (This word translated vail 
is from a different Greek word from that translated vail in 2 Cor. 
3:14-16, referred to above, as representing the "curtain.") Those 
who pass through this first "vail" into the "holy place" are the 
ones who fulfill their "covenant by sacrifice," called saints. All 
believers coming through the "curtain" are "called to be saints," 
but only those who obey the call and yield themselves sacrifices 
"make their calling and election sure." 

Thus this first vail represents clearly our death to the world. The 
flesh is left outside, voluntarily given over to death and 
destruction, while we as new creatures in Christ, go beyond this 
vail, and enjoy a newness of life. Thus we fill two pictures: our 
earthly nature has been given up, deprived of life, and is being 
taken without the camp to be destroyed, while our new nature is 
at the same instant within the first vail, not as men, but as 
members of the High Priest's body. We are not only dead with 
Him, but also alive with Him. "We are buried with Him by 
baptism into death" (Rom. 6:4), "wherein also ye are risen with 
Him." (Col. 2:12.) The natural body is no longer we, for "we are 
not in the flesh, but in the spirit." (Rom. 8:9). 

We claim then that our going through this first vail represents 
the death of the natural fleshly will or mind, and that our 
entering the inside of the Tabernacle represents our entrance to 
the condition of the spiritual or new nature. "For ye are dead," 
(as men.) "If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things 
which are above; set your affections on things above, not on 
things on the earth, for ye are dead." (Col. 3:1-3.) For God "hath 
raised us up, (in the spirit of our minds,) and made us sit 
together in heavenly places (spiritual conditions) in Christ Jesus. 
[Eph. 2:6.] 

Progressing in our new nature we come to the second vail, but 
we cannot go through this vail until the flesh has been entirely 
destroyed— represented by the burning of the body of the sin- 
offering without the camp. But remember that the flesh of "the 
goat of sin-offering" represents the fleshly bodies of all the 
members of Christ, and its destruction ("burning") requires all of 
this gospel age. Though Paul's body was yielded up and 



destroyed long ago, he must wait; he cannot enter through the 
second vail until all we who are fellow members of the same 
body, likewise have the body of flesh destroyed, for "They 
without us shall not be made perfect." [Heb. 11:40.] Consider 
for a moment what it will be for us to be made perfect. Would it 
be the perfecting of the fleshly nature? Oh, no ! We gave it up to 
destruction as a sacrifice, before we passed the first vail, and the 
life that we now live and seek to have perfected is the spiritual, 
Divine life. Having begun in the spirit and progressed thus far, 
could we be perfected through the flesh? Certainly not. We now 
have the "mind of Christ," "the spirit of Christ," "the spirit of 
adoption," "our new nature," and enjoy it much. What we lack 
of being perfect is a spiritual body in harmony with our 
"spiritual mind," new nature. And this is what we are waiting 
for, this condition of perfection. "When that which is perfect is 
come that which is in part shall be done away. " Now we are in 
part natural, but the natural part will soon give place to the body 
which God has promised us-a spiritual-like unto Christ's 
glorious body. "I shall be satisfied when I awake in thy 
likeness." 

We have seen that there are two stages to the second birth; first, 
the begetting of the spirit when we get our new life in the old 
body, where it develops at the expense of the body; second, our 
birth by the resurrection, when we shall be "born from the 
dead. " So now, we see the same general lesson taught by the two 
vails of the Tabernacle. To enter the presence of God-the plane 
of spiritual or Divine life— both of these vails representing the 
flesh must be passed. Beloved brethren, you have all come in 
through the outside "gate," through the curtain, you are believers 
in Jesus, know of his having ransomed us. You among many 
have been called to be saints and heirs of God. Are you making 
that calling sure? Have you made the covenant to die with Jesus- 
-"The covenant of sacrifice?" Are you doing according to your 
covenant, walking in newness of life, obeying the law of your 
new nature— Love? If you are, I need not ask, I know that the 
result is the crucifying of the "old man." 

If you are within the first vail, thank God and take courage, 
remembering that to "keep your body under," you must have all 
the spiritual strength and light to be derived from the unleavened 
bread and the golden candlestick. Let us press on close up to the 
second vail, and there at the golden incense altar offer an 
offering acceptable and of sweet savor to God through Jesus 
Christ. 



R156 : page 3 



Put on thy Beautiful Robes, Bride of Christ. 

Put on thy beautiful robes, Bride of Christ, 
For the King shall embrace thee to-day; 
Break forth into singing; the morning has dawned, 
And the shadows of night flee away. 

Shake off the dust from thy feet, Bride of Christ; 
For the Conqueror, girded with might, 
Shall vanquish the foe, the dragon cast down, 
And the cohorts of hell put to flight. 

Thou art the Bride of His love, His elect; 
Dry thy tears, for thy sorrows are past; 
Lone were the hours when thy Lord was away, 
But He came with the morning at last. 

The winds bear the noise of His chariot- wheels, 
And the thunders of victory roar; 
Lift up thy beautiful gates, Bride of Christ, 
For the grave has dominion no more. 

Once they arrayed Him with scorning; but see! 
His apparel is glorious now: 
In His hand are the keys of death and of hell, 
And the diadem gleams on His brow. 

Hark! 'tis her voice: Alleluia she sings, 
Alleluia! the captives go free! 
Unfolded the gates of Paradise stand, 
And unfolded forever shall be. 

Choir answers choir, where the song has no end; 
All the saints raise hosannas on high; 
Deep calls unto deep in the ocean of love, 
As the Bride lifts her jubilant cry. 



-Selected. 



R154 : page 3 



GATHERING TO CHRIST. 

"Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a 
covenant with me by sacrifice." Psalm 1:5. 

This gathering is not at death, nor continuously before and 
during the Gospel age, but takes place after and in consequence 
of the Lord's return. This is one of several things to transpire 
after the Lord's coming, as indicated by the context. From the 
third to the fifth verse inclusive, is evidently a prophecy of that 
to which Paul refers in 2 Thess. 2:1: "The coming; of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and our gathering together unto him. " 



This is one of the evidences that what is foretold in the Old 
Testament that God will do, is fulfilled by the Son of God, and 
which proves the unity of their work. 

That this refers to the second coming is evident because the first 
was in the past when Paul wrote. That it does not refer to His 
final coming, or manifestation to the world, is clear, because 
when He thus comes "all the saints" are to come with Him. 
Zech. 14:5. Their gathering to Him must precede their coming 
with Him. Jesus says: "I go to prepare a place for you; [the 
church as represented by the twelve] and... I will come again and 
receive you to myself." John 14:2-3. 

It is evident that the object of Christ's second coming is to 
receive or gather His church to Himself. Because of this and 
because neither 

R155 : page 3 

Christ nor Paul mentions any interval of time for work between 
the coming and the gathering, it is most commonly supposed 
that the gathering is immediately after His coming. So when we 
speak of the Presence of the Bridegroom, and express our 
conviction that He has come to deliver His own and gather them 
into the heavenly Canaan, we are met with the objection, "If He 
has come to gather us, why are we not gathered, and why do all 
things continue as before, and we are left to toil on in the 
enemy's land?" From the standpoint of the objector our claim is 
a seeming absurdity; and for those who have never seen the 
evidences there is room for great sympathy. When a position is 
not understood it is readily perverted, and we need patience 
when we are misrepresented. 

Whoever will read the passage from which our text is chosen, 
will see that there is a fiery scene, or some kind of judgment, 
[fire means judgment,] and therefore an interval of time, either 
long or short, in which that work of judgment is to be done, 
between the coming and the gathering. The fact that this interval 
is not mentioned by Christ and Paul, in the passage referred to 
above, is certainly not proof that such an interval does not exist. 
The whole truth is seldom, if ever, found in one connection. In 
Luke 19:15 and onward is an account by the Lord Himself, of a 
work of examination after He had returned, and before the 
reward. As the reward is to be with Him and like Him, (these 
two things being included in each other,) this is evidence that 
there is an interval of time between the coming to gather the 
saints and the gathering itself. Of course we believe that the 
intervening work is in reference to the gathering, that being the 
object for which He came. 

There are facts associated with the deliverance of Israel from 
their bondage in Egypt, which we offer as having a bearing, 
typically, on this subject of the Lord's coming and the 
deliverance of the church. In that picture it appears that the 



nation of Israel represents the whole church, or household of 
faith, including not only the saints, -a "little flock,"-but also 
"them that fear His name, small and great,"- "a great 
multitude, "-while Aaron represents that portion of the church 
called "saints," who are to be most directly associated with 
Christ as a Great High Priest, and in the work of executing 
judgment. The gathering of the saints unto Christ, is doubtless 
foreshadowed by Aaron going to meet Moses in the Mount of 
God. And, it will be observed, this event had reference not only 
to the execution of judgments on the Egyptians, but also through 
the plagues to the deliverance of Israel. 

In the third chapter of Exodus we have the record of the Lord 
appearing to Moses at Horeb, or Sinai, -"the Mountain of God." 
Ver. 1 . The Lord appeared in the burning bush. There is no 
reason to suppose that Moses saw the Lord. He was present yet 
invisible, but Moses had evidence that the Lord was there, by 
His word. This is one of the evidences that a spiritual being can 
be present and yet be invisible. The ground was holy. 

After announcing Himself, the Lord said: "I have surely seen the 
affliction of my people which are in Egypt, and have heard their 
cry by reason of their taskmasters; for I know their sorrows; and 
I am come down to deliver them." Verses 7-8. Here are stated 
the fact that He had come and the object for which He came, and 
yet we know it was a considerable time after He came to deliver 
them, before they were actually delivered. The relation between 
the Lord's coming then, and the deliverance of Israel, is as 
intimate as the relation between the Lord's coming now, and the 
gathering of the church. "I am come down to deliver them" is as 
closely connected as "I will come again and receive you to 
myself. " Now we know that there was time between that coming 
and deliverance; will not our readers admit the possibility, yea, 
the probability, of there being an interval of time between this 
coming and deliverance? To enforce this thought, put yourselves 
in place of the Israelites, toiling on under the terrible Egyptian 
bondage. If Moses should come to you with the statement, "Be 
of good cheer, comrades, the Lord has come to deliver you," 
would there not be as much reason to dispute the claim as there 
is to dispute the one we make, and for the same reasons: "We 
are not delivered and all things continue as they were?" 

There was, of course, a longer time between the coming and the 
deliverance of the whole nation, than between the coming and 
the exaltation of Aaron. All was done on time and order. 
"Aaron, the saint of the Lord," (Psalm 106:16) escaped the 
plagues, and assisted Moses in their execution as a means to the 
salvation of Israel-the Lord's son, even His first-born. Exod. 
4:22. And here some are to be accounted worthy to escape the 
things coming on the earth; (Luke 21:36) as overcomers to sit 
with Christ [the prophet like unto Moses-i.e. the antitype] in 
His throne, and have power over the nations to break them, 



(Rev. 2:26-27 and 3:21,) "To execute vengeance upon the 
nations, and punishments upon the people. ...To execute upon 
them the judgments written: this honor have all the saints." 
Psalm 149. 

The double statement, "Vengeance upon the nations" and 
"punishments upon the people, " may have more importance than 
might be supposed. The record is given of ten plagues upon 
Egypt, three of which came on both Egypt and Israel, but from 
the "seven last plagues" all Israel were exempt. To appreciate 
fully the above statement, one must read six chapters in Exodus, 
beginning with the seventh. It is when the fourth plague is 
threatened that the Lord says: "I will sever in that day the land 
of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarm of flies 
shall be there; to the end thou mayest know that I am the Lord in 
the midst of the earth. And I will put a division between my 
people and thy people: to-morrow shall this sign be." Chap. 
8:22-23. 

In describing the scenes associated with the deliverance of the 
church down here, John the Revelator speaks of "seven last 
plagues" also, which we may reasonably expect to stand in the 
order foreshadowed in the type. "Seven last plagues" implies 
that others preceded them, as in the type. 

We think the same order of events is to be found in the antitype 
as in the type. In Rev. 14:1 we see 144,000 overcomers with 
Christ on Mount Zion. "These are they which were not defiled 
with women" [churches, only corrupt churches would defile,] 
and are "the first fruits unto God and to the Lamb." Verse 4. We 
believe this company are the saints as represented by Aaron; and 
as Moses and Aaron went together in their work, so these 
"follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth. " These went up to 
meet Christ, their brother, in Zion-the Mountain and City of 
God. (Heb. 12:22, Emp. Diag.) 

If it be asked "If Sinai was the place of meeting of Moses and 
Aaron and was called the Mount of God, why do the saints meet 
Christ at Zion instead of Sinai? We answer: All we have to deal 
with are the revealed facts. Sinai was the Mount of God in the 
legal and typical dispensation, and from it the Lord shone forth 
in the thunderings and lightnings of the law. But we have Paul's 
assurance that "ye are not come [or coming] unto the mount that 
might be touched, and that burned with fire... but ye are come [or 
coming] to Mount Zion and unto the city of the living God, the 
heavenly Jerusalem, &c. Heb. 12:18-22. From this we learn that 
Zion is the Mount of God in the Gospel age and onward; and we 
learn, too, that it is a heavenly and not an earthly mountain. 

Heavenly and spiritual are used interchangeably in the Bible, as 
in 1 Cor. 15:44-49. From the fitness of things, it is safe to reason 
that the inhabitants of a spiritual mountain will themselves be 
spiritual, and therefore that the saints meet Christ in the spiritual 



condition— the ideal of Christian perfection. "Be ye also perfect, 
even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. " This is a 
heavenly and not an earthly ideal. 

This thought is clearly illustrated by the fact already mentioned 
that Moses stood as God [a spiritual being] and not as a man, in 
his dealings with both Aaron and Pharaoh. Moses came the first 
time as a man and was rejected, but when he came as a God he 
delivered his people. What was true of Moses is true of Christ, 
for Moses is a type of Christ. It is evident that Aaron was as 
surely a type of the spiritual saints, as Moses, in the exercise of 
the great power, was a type of the spiritual Christ. Coming in 
glory does not necessarily mean shining with a literal light. The 
judgments and deliverance then, were because Moses and Aaron 
came with the glory of their power. So also will it be of Christ 
and the saints. 

The 144,000 being the first fruits to the heavenly or spiritual life 
are, or represent, God's temple in heaven, as the living, mortal 
part of the church has always been, or represented God's temple 
on earth. And in the judgment scene that follows, and harvest of 
the earth, (not of the first fruits) as described in Rev. 14:14-20, 
the angels, or messengers, are said to come out of the temple 
which is in heaven. 

It seems that after the exaltation of the "little flock," and 
contemporary with the above-named judgment scene, there goes 
forth the message, "Fear God, and give glory to Him; for the 
hour of his judgment is come, &c." Verse 7. This language 
seems to be addressed to the "great multitude" who, at the time 
the "little flock" are exalted, are found in adulterous union with 
the 

R156 : page 3 

world, and therefore defiled with corrupt churches, as the "little 
flock" were not. Verse 4. Because of the confusion they are 
called Babylon. The object of this message and the attending 
judgments "or punishments upon the people" is to cause the 
downfall of Babylon, by producing a complete separation 
between Christians and the world with whom they have been 
united and under whom they have suffered as slaves. Never did 
the Israelites serve the Egyptians more slavishly than is the 
nominal church serving the world. They dare not as yet assert 
their independence. 

But there must come a change. The standard of Christianity 
must be exalted. The "great multitude" must wash their robes, 
and make them white. Rev. 7:14. Had their garments not been 
"defiled" they would not have needed washing. Christ gives all 
His people clean robes, but the mass have suffered their 
garments to become spotted with the flesh and by contact with 
the world. 



R156 : page 4 

We suggest that this exaltation or washed state of the church is 
foreshadowed by the complete separation of Israel from Egypt 
in the land of Goshen, and that the three first plagues represent 
the means by which the change is to be brought about. We 
understand that washed and separate state to be the "Sea of 
glass" condition. Rev. 15. If it was a victory to be exempt from 
the "seven last plagues" in Goshen, it can be no less so now. 
Surely no one will say that it will not be a great victory when the 
"great multitude" of Christendom shall rise from bondage to the 
Beast, His Image, &c. It will be a glorious victory for them, for 
truth and for God. One of meager interest in comparison, was 
the type. Coming to our own day we can see another shadow of 
it in the judgment that broke the shackles from four millions of 
human slaves. But the victory that will bring men to the "sea of 
glass" is as much greater than those, as spiritual things are 
greater than natural things. 

Remember the ones addressed by this judgment message is a 
motley crowd,— a world church. Those who obey the call get the 
victory; and those who do not obey it but continue on the 
world's side, or continue to worship the beast after the message 
is given, will suffer the full expression of wrath as represented 
by the "seven last plagues." This terrible fate is expressed by the 
third angel. 

As the exemption from the seven last plagues in Goshen 
preceded the final deliverance from Egypt, so it seems that the 
"sea of glass" condition which is "mingled with fire" precedes 
the final entering of the temple in heaven of this "great 
multitude" of victors. Though protected from the plagues, yet 
"No man was able to enter into the temple, till the seven plagues 
of the seven angels were fulfilled." Rev. 15:8. 

The real "sea of glass like unto crystal" is before the throne 
(Rev. 4:6) and is not mingled with fire. This of Rev. 15, which is 
"mingled with fire" is "as it were, a sea of glass." The people 
protected in Goshen were, "as it were," saved, but not actually 
saved from Egypt until after the plagues, when the Lord brought 
them out, that they might serve Him. Ex. 4:23. 

That the great multitude who are protected from the plagues on, 
"as it were, a sea of glass," do finally enter the heavenly temple 
and take their places as servants "before the throne" which is the 
locality of the real "sea of glass like unto crystal," seems evident 
by comparing Rev. 4:6 and 7:9-15. The sea of glass is "before 
the throne" and the great multitude serve "before the throne" in 
the temple. If we are now occupying, "as it were, a sea of glass," 
it seems as if it would prove that the throne had been already 
established before which the sea of glass is located. We confess 
our ambition has been and is to have a part with Christ in His 
throne, and not to occupy the sea of glass before the throne,— 



i.e., to rule and not merely to serve. The condition on which this 
high position is to be gained has been ably presented by others, 
and of the responsibility involved in the sacrifice more may be 
said in another article. "If we suffer we shall also reign with 
Him." 

J. H. P. 



R156 : page 4 

COVENANT BY SACRIFICE. 

"Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a 
covenant with me by sacrifice." Psalm 50:5. 

Who are the saints? According to the above, none are saints 
who make no sacrifice. It is clear that the New Testament makes 
a distinction between saints, and them that fear [reverence] 
God's name, small and great. Rev. 2:18. And yet, as has been 
shown, this "great multitude" are to find a place before the 
throne in the heavenly temple. "And He that sitteth on the throne 
shall dwell among them. They shall hunger no more, neither 
thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them nor any heat. 
For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed 
them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: and 
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes." Rev. 7:15-17. 

These evidently see the Lord, dwelling as they do in His 
presence, and yet Paul tells us that "Without holiness no man 
shall see the Lord." Heb. 12:14. Now if this great multitude do 
see the Lord, it proves that, when they see Him they are holy 
and therefore saints. How can we explain this seeming paradox? 
We are brought to this conclusion that all who ever enter the 
heavenly city either as Kings or as servants— i.e. as the 
government, or as citizens— must be holy or saints, but that there 
is order in their development. The King and priest company are 
the first ripe, and therefore the throne of the heavenly city is 
established first. Rev. 4:2. This is "the throne of God and of the 
Lamb;" and also of a company represented by twenty- four 
elders with crowns of gold. Rev. 4:4, 5:6, 7:17 and 22:3. 

At the time of the establishment of the throne, or rather perhaps 
the exaltation of the "little flock," or those who are ready for it, 
to the throne, the great multitude are not saints proper, and, like 
unripe grain, are left to ripen; and there is a difference also in 
the means or process of ripening. The little flock are out from 
the world, in voluntary obedience to the injunction. "Present 
your bodies a living sacrifice" and "Be not conformed to this 
world;" (Rom. 12:1-2.) while the multitude are living in close 
conformity to the world and are only separated from it at last, as 
was Israel from Egypt, on account of special acts of judgment. 



"Those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice" seems 
definitely to refer to the faithful few-the "Non-conformists." 

In presenting some thoughts on this subject of sacrifice, we wish 
to indorse in part what has already been presented in our paper 
by other brethren. We have been slow to accept this view, and 
cannot yet accept all the conclusions which have been drawn by 
the brethren. And we would here say that we honor as one of the 
chief Christian virtues the spirit that differs in opinion and yet 
lives in harmony; keeping "the unity of the Spirit in the bonds of 
peace." Eph 4:3. That 

R157 : page 4 

is the kind of bondage under which we are laboring. 

We call attention first to the tenth chapter of Hebrews. The first 
verse speaks of "those sacrifices which they offered year by 
year," during the typical service of the earthly tabernacle. 
Notice, first, it is not one sacrifice, but plural-sacrifices. 
Second, these were not the daily sacrifices, but the yearly, or the 
sacrifices of the tenth day of the seventh month— the atonement 
day. This is confirmed by the third verse. "But in those 
sacrifices there is a remembrance again made of sins every 
year. " This is still further confirmed by the fourth verse, in 
which is mentioned the kind of sacrifices- "bulls and goats." By 
turning to Lev. 16, it will be seen that such were the animals 
offered by the high priest on the annual day of atonement. 

It has been clearly shown that the tenth day of the seventh 
month, or atonement day under the law, was a type or shadow of 
the whole gospel age, including the closing work of our Great 
High Priest, as well as the opening work. This being true, let us 
mark this point, that the sacrifices of this age were not typified 
by the daily offerings of the lower order of priests, but only by 
the annual offerings of the high priest. And as there were daily 
offerings for the people after as well as before the atonement 
day, so there will be offerings for the people after as well as 
before this atonement day— the gospel age. It is also evident that 
the provision of mercy by the sin-offerings on the atonement 
day was the basis for all other offerings, both before and after. 
Let this be specially noted by any who are in doubt as to the 
application of the benefits of the atonement after the gospel age. 

Looking at the sacrifices— bullock and goat— of Lev. 16, in the 
light of facts given in the New Testament, there are reasons for 
believing that the bullock represented the body of Christ, which 
was prepared for sacrifice (Heb. 10:5), and that the goat which 
was slain represented the bodies of the saints, which they are 
called upon to sacrifice. Rom. 12:1. This is in harmony with the 
idea that the gospel age is an age of suffering, beginning with 
the personal sufferings of Christ, the Head, and not being 
complete until we, as the members of His body, have filled up 
what is behind of the afflictions of Christ. Col. 1 :24. When the 



sufferings of Christ are ended, the glory will follow (1 Pet. 
1:11), and "if we suffer, we shall also reign with Him. 2 Tim. 
2:12. 

Christ, our Head, is our example in suffering as in other things, 
and it is a remarkable fact that it is Christ in us that enables us to 
make our bodies a sacrifice— to "mortify the deeds of the body." 
Rom. 8:10-13. These facts seem clearly foreshadowed in the 
type. 

Let it be borne in mind that it required both priest and beast to 
represent our Lord Jesus Christ in His two natures, and that the 
beast in the type, and the body of Christ in the antitype, were the 
offerings. In Lev. 16:6 and 10, we learn that the bullock was for, 
or represented, Himself; i.e., the high priest. Not that the priest 
was doomed, and had a substitute in the beast, but illustrating, as 
best the type could (not being the very image of coming good 
things Heb. 10:1), the relation of the two natures of Christ, as 
both Priest and Sacrifice. 

The same two verses tell us that the bullock was to "make an 
atonement for himself, and for his house. " We do not think it is 
safe to make the second "himself" mean any more than the first 
"himself," in the same verse. They both refer to Aaron himself, 
and Aaron's house clearly means the whole tribe of Levi, of 
which Aaron was the representative or head. The tribe of Levi in 
this picture clearly represents the church of Christ, or household 
of faith, while the camp of Israel as clearly represents the world 
of mankind, as distinct from the church. 

The two goats are taken from the congregation of the children of 
Israel (ver. 5), and they were as a sin-offering for the people (not 
for Aaron's house, as was the bullock), "because of the 
uncleanness of the children of Israel." Verses 15,16. This was 
fully accomplished by one dying and the other being a 
scapegoat. Verses 21,22. 

Now, in harmony with the idea that the church follows Christ in 
sacrifice, we find the goat on whom the Lord's lot fell, followed 
the bullock in sacrifice in every particular. This has much force 
in our mind. The theory that has not room for all these facts 
cannot be a perfect theory, however much may be claimed for it. 

What was done with the bullock? First, he was slain; then, the 
high priest carried its blood, not the body, or sin offering, either 
dead or alive, but the blood, which was the evidence of its death, 
into the most holy place, and sprinkled it "upon the mercy seat 
eastward, and before the mercy seat," or in the form of a cross— a 
symbol of death. Verse 14. And the fifteenth verse tells us that 
he did precisely the same thing with the blood of the goat. And 
so the same disposition was made of their skins, their flesh and 
their dung— they were carried "without the camp," and burned 
with fire. This similarity seems in force between Christ and the 



faithful. "Let us go forth, therefore, unto him without the camp 
bearing his reproach." Heb. 13:13. 

We would consider somewhat 



THE ORDER OF SACRIFICE. 

The sixteenth of Leviticus, like much more of the word, is 
written somewhat obscurely, and were it not for the fulfillment, 
it would be more difficult to apply. Much as has been written to 
show that it was after the death and resurrection of Christ that 
He put on the "holy linen garments," or what was represented by 
them, we calmly and earnestly express our conviction that 
neither Christ nor His type- the high priest under the law -had 
any right to make a sacrifice until dressed with the priest's 
garments appointed for that work. 

It seems clear that Christ's body was not fully prepared for the 
sacrifice until He was thirty years of age— a perfect man being 
needed to represent all humanity in Adam. When the body was 
prepared, He came and was baptized, saying, "Thus it becometh 
us to fulfill all righteousness." Matt. 3:15. This act was 
doubtless foreshadowed by the high priest washing himself with 
water, and so putting on the holy linen garments. Lev. 16:4. 
Clean linen is the symbol of righteousness. Rev. 19:8. 

This simple linen attire of the priest during the day of sacrifice 
and atonement should not be confounded with the garments for 
glory and beauty worn by the priest on other occasions, and 
described in Exodus 28. 

We are satisfied that the work of Christ, from His baptism 
onward, cannot be understood until we recognize His two 
natures, or double life. We would say, also, we believe that the 
three apartments in the holy ground-the court, the holy 

R157 : page 5 

place, and the most holy place- represent the three conditions of 
Christ, the natural, the spiritual, and the celestial-the immediate 
presence of the Deity. Until His death, He was bodily in the 
court, but in spirit He was serving as a priest in the holy place. 
In this, Christians are like Him. We live a double life-natural 
and spiritual. Actually or bodily, we are natural, or in the flesh, 
but are counted in the spirit, because the Spirit, or Divine nature, 
dwells in us. Rom. 8:9. Without this double, neither He nor we 
could be both priest and sacrifice, and we know that human 
nature will not crucify itself, and cannot be subject to the law of 
God. 

Christ was strengthened to live, and in spirit served in the 
unseen, and, while He was denying Himself, it was a sweet 
incense ascending to the Father. This, too, was a necessary 
prerequisite to the death of the offering, and was represented, we 
believe, by the high priest putting the incense beaten small on 



the censor full of burning coals before the Lord. Lev. 16:12,13. 
This was an emblem of a life well pleasing unto God, which was 
necessary in order to the acceptance of the sacrifice. Outwardly, 
He was doing good to men, spending His life for them, and, 
therefore, inwardly, it was sweet incense to the Lord. 

The living sacrifice we are to make, which Paul says is our 
reasonable service, seems to be of the same character. What 
truly blesses men is pleasing to God. The real sacrifice of Christ 
might properly be said to include this service. Paul seems to 
express this thought when of Christ he says: "And being found 
in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, and became obedient 
unto death, even the death of the cross." Phil. 2:8. His last act 
was as much, and no more, a part of His obedience, than His 
first. Isaiah seems to express the same thought, "Because He 
hath poured out His soul [life] unto death." 53:12. That is, He 
kept giving until He had given all He had. 

When the body was dead, the law had no further claim (the life 
had been shed), and, in the resurrection, it was changed that it 
might be adapted to the spiritual life. Before, He was bodily 
visible, but spiritually in the sanctuary, as Christians are now; 
but after the resurrection, He was bodily in the sanctuary, or 
holy place. The Spirit had conquered, and therefore made Him a 
spiritual body. In this risen state, the world saw Him not, but for 
special reasons He was manifested to His disciples. 

This sacrifice of the Head was to make an atonement for the 
church; and when Christ ascended into the celestial state, or 
immediate presence of God, and, like the high priest, presented 
the evidence of all He had done, the fact that the Father was well 
pleased was proved by the descent of the Holy Spirit, as the 
representative of both the Father and Son, to espouse the virgin 
church, and also to enable her, as 

R158:page5 

represented by the goat, to do just what He had done— make the 
needed sacrifice, and so, in due time, to share his glory. 

That the Holy Spirit is Christ's representative in His church is 
shown in John 14:16-26; 15:26, and 16:7-15. And that it is by 
the indwelling of this Spirit, or Christ in us, that we are counted 
members of Christ, and, therefore, appointed priests that we may 
overcome the flesh, putting it to death, thus making our bodies a 
living sacrifice even unto death, is the general teaching of the 
New Testament. 

The period of Christ's earth life was to Him what the gospel age, 
from Pentecost until this sacrifice of the church is complete, is 
to us. His life, devoted to God, on account of man, was sweet 
incense in heaven. So as we follow His example, our lives are 
sweet incense in heaven. As His sacrifice was not complete until 
He was dead, so ours is not complete until we are dead (or its 



equivalent for those "who are alive and remain"-the Lord 
saying "It is enough"). As the blood of the bullock (representing 
its death, or a complete sacrifice) being sprinkled in the form of 
a cross on the mercy seat, was not fulfilled until the ascension of 
Christ into the Holiest, does not analogy require, if the goat 
represents those who are faithful in sacrifice even unto death, 
that its blood, being sprinkled in the form of a cross on the 
mercy seat, should be fulfilled after the resurrection and 
ascension of the saints? If not, we would ask, why not? 

As Christ's sacrifice was complete and accepted before the 
salvation of the church began, for whose benefit it was directly 
made, so the sacrifice of the church must be complete and 
accepted before the salvation of the world begins, for whom it 
was made. Christ, the Head, gave Himself for the church, that 
He might present her spotless; Eph. 5:23-27; so the sacrifice of 
Head and Body complete reaches the world. 

Nothing seems clearer than that this sacrifice and victory are 
represented by baptism, the real death to sin and mortality and 
the resurrection to holiness and immortality being represented 
by the symbolic death and resurrection. The symbol is the form 
of the sacrifice, but to make the sacrifice itself is a life work. 
This is the real baptism. Christ said "I have a baptism to be 
baptized with, and how am I straightened until it be 
accomplished. " He evidently referred to His death. He had a cup 
to drink; it was the cup of death. This cup He also pressed to the 
lips of His disciples, "Drink ye all of it." He drank it to the very 
dregs. Shall not we drink it by being "faithful unto death." To 
such is promised the "crown of life. " In that He died, He died 
unto sin once; but in that He liveth He liveth unto God. Likewise 
reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive 
unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord." Rom. 6:10,1 1. 

Many promise to drink this cup and die this death by obeying 
the form; but only those who pay their vow unto the Lord, and 
thus make the covenant by sacrifice, are counted saints and are 
to be gathered unto Christ, as represented by Aaron meeting 
Moses. Only such seem truly represented by the goat that was 
slain. 

J. H. P. 

[Oh that the deep import of the matters presented above could 
be fully realized by all the dear flock. What a change it would 
make in many lives. How many, who have covenanted with God 
to sacrifice the earth life and spend it with all its talents and 
powers in His service are really spending it for self. Instead of 
self-sacrifice the rule of life and action seems to be self- 
protection; instead of self-denying it is self-gratification. Truly 
our lives are much like the world's; they have only the natural 
life to care for and so spend their time and every effort in 
seeking earthly good but we are seeking heavenly riches— things 



above. We may deceive ourselves but "Be not deceived, God is 
not mocked. " If we covenanted to sacrifice and take up our cross 
and follow the example set by Jesus "we should walk in His 
footsteps." We well know how he spent his life, not in self- 
gratification nor in any other selfish way, but for others. 

The fleshly nature will oft suggest to us: You cannot do as Jesus, 
Paul, Peter, etc., did. Let our new nature answer: I may not be a 
vessel to as much honor and as much used by the Master as were 
the apostles, yet in my sphere, be it ever so humble, I can be as 
completely consecrated and as anxious to be used and spent in 
the Lord's service as they were. 

A broken and emptied vessel, 
For the Master's use made meet. 

If I am ready for the service and He does not use me, then it will 
not be my fault. But we feel assured that there is not one in all 
God's family who is ready and emptied of self the Master would 
not use. The reason we are not more used, seems to us to be, that 
we all have more or less of self in which keeps the Lord and his 
service out. Lord, help by the grace promised for every time of 
need, help us to empty ourselves completely of self-conceit, 
self-reliance, self-concern, self-will, selfishness, and give us 
instead, concern only to know and do Thy will; to rely only 
upon Thy strength; and to be imbued with the Divine principle 
Love, that we may love Thee with all our heart, mind, soul and 
strength, and our neighbor as ourselves. The above article of 
course does not need our commendation, but we heartily indorse 
its sentiments and would bespeak for it a careful and prayerful 
second reading by you all. Notice especially that while the house 
of Levi represents the household of faith only the priests, those 
associated with Aaron in making the sacrifice are reckoned as 
members of his body. The church of the first-born-the heirs- 
members— all follow the example of the head. The many 
brethren come after, but the first-born is heir and inherits all 
things. Oh, that is the prize we are wanting! Let us remember 
that it is not the knowledge of the prize, which gives it to us, but 
the laying aside of every weight... and so running as to obtain. It 
is not our making the covenant to die, etc., which makes us 
overcomers, but our keeping it makes us heirs, "Heirs of God, 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord if so be that we suffer with 
Him." Rom. 8:17.-EDITOR.] 



R158:page5 

THE TABERNACLE, No. 3. 

[We have been hindered for some time from following up our 
series on this subject, and gladly take it up again.] 



We have already looked at the court and its gate. We have 
entered, and, so to speak, have passed the altar and the laver. 
And now, having been consecrated as priests at the laver, having 
brought our sacrifice —our flesh life-and laid it down with 
Christ on the altar of burnt offering-crucifying the flesh; being 
made conformable unto his death— we are prepared to go on 
unto perfection. 

We stand at the door of the Tabernacle. Like the gate of the 
court, it is made of snowy linen curtains. We look at it closely. It 
is radiant with blue and purple and scarlet, and covered with 
needlework. We have already seen, when looking at the entrance 
to the court, that Christ is the door; and now again we discover 

"Tis the very same Jesus." In admiration we gaze at the 
beautiful colors, symbolic of his faithfulness, his majesty and his 
saving grace. We see him as the faithful and true— one who 
sticketh closer than a brother-as our glorious King and Head 
and as our Savior who redeemed us with his own precious 
blood. The needlework appears to symbolize those Christian 
graces which, though slowly developed, and perfected through 
toil and suffering, make a garment of beauty at last. 

Shall we enter this mystic lodge? Are we desirous of seeing its 
light, and of learning its mysteries? Do we obligate ourselves to 
walk in obedience to its teachings, and obey —even unto death— 
the mandates of its Royal Master? We may do it with safety. 
There is no dark unhallowed work here, fearful of the light. Yes ! 
we have taken the obligation, we have passed through the 
ceremony of initiation, we have been clothed with its spotless 
regalia- the beautiful garments of the Royal priesthood, the 
robe of Christ's righteousness, without which none can enter. 
Shall we then, bidding farewell to the light and sunshine of this 
world, enter the secret place of the Most High? Without is sin 
and suffering and death; within is life and light and holiness. 

This is the highway of the overcomers; this is the path of the 
just, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day. Within are 
mysteries and beauties which those without who serve tables 
know nothing of. The Levites must not even look at the glories 
within; they are hid from their eyes. 

We enter. A new and heavenly light-spiritual light-breaks upon 
us. We gaze around, and lo, the blue, and purple, and scarlet is 
above our heads and all about us on every hand. We are covered 
and hidden beneath a weight of glory. It is the glory of the 
Master: Jesus and his righteousness. We have believed into 
Christ now "we are in him that is true, in the Son, Jesus Christ." 
Jesus prayed the Father for his disciples "that they also may be 
one in us." "As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the 
Lord is round about his people from henceforth even for ever." 
Psa. 125:2. Not only so, but, pictured on the snowy curtains 
above and on every side, are the cherubim: no flaming sword in 



their hand now. We realize that we are surrounded by God's 
messengers. We have come to "an innumerable company of 
angels." 

R159 : page 5 

Heb. 12:22. We remember that it is written, "the angel of 
Jehovah encampeth round about them that fear him, and 
delivereth them. Ps. 34:7. Like Jacob at Bethel we discover that 
"this is none other than the house of God;" and "are they not all 
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be 
heirs of salvation. " Heb. 1:14. 

In God I have found a retreat, 
Where I can securely abide; 
No refuge, nor rest so complete, 
And here I intend to reside. 

Oh, what comfort it brings, 
My soul sweetly sings: 
I am safe from all danger, 
While under his wings." 

"He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall 
abide under the shadow of the Almighty. ...Because thou hast 
made Jehovah, which is my refuge, even 

R159 : page 6 

the Most High, thy habitation. There shall no evil befall thee, 
neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. For he shall 
give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways." 
Ps. 91:1,9-11. 

Having come so far on our journey, what are our privileges? 
Firstly, we may walk in the light; for are we not in the presence 
of "the true light that lighteth every man (in due time) that 
cometh into the world?" John 1 :9. And "if we walk in the light, 
as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and 
the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin." 1 
John 1:7. God is light, and in him there is no darkness." Not 
only have we light upon our pathway, but strength for the 
journey is provided. An abundant supply of living bread-always 
fresh and sweet —is spread before us. And whether we sing for 
very joy, or pray for needed grace, the sweet incense of Jesus' 
merits rising in a perfumed cloud makes our presence 
acceptable, and our prayers and praises fragrant as they ascend 
before "Our Father." 

W. I. M. 

[To be continued.] 



R159 : page 6 



CLEANSING THE SANCTUARY. 

"And when he hath made an end of reconciling the holy place, 
and the tabernacle of the congregation, and the altar, he shall 
bring the live goat; and Aaron shall lay both his hands on the 
head of the live goat," &c. Lev. 16:20,21. 

It seems that "reconciling the holy place," &c, is the same as 
"cleansing the sanctuary," and the above text clearly locates that 
work after the blood of the goat had been sprinkled on the mercy 
seat, as the blood of the bullock had been before it, and 
immediately preceding the laying of hands on the head of the 
scapegoat. If our view be correct, this locates the cleansing of 
the sanctuary after the ascension of the saints-the "little flock"- 
as represented by Aaron, who went up into the mount of God to 
meet Moses, and received power with him to execute judgment 
and deliver Israel. 

And we would here urge the point, that, if the sprinkling of the 
bullock's blood on the mercy seat was fulfilled after the 
ascension of Christ, and if, as now seems clear, the slain goat 
represents those who follow the Lord in sacrifice, then we ought 
not to expect the fulfillment of the sprinkling of the goat's blood 
until after the ascension of the saints whom the goat represents. 
The acceptance of Christ's complete sacrifice secured to him the 
power requisite to the performance of His work from Pentecost 
forward; so the acceptance of the complete sacrifice of the saints 
will secure to them the power to execute the judgments which 
are to follow their exaltation, for the deliverance of the "great 
multitude" that fear, or reverence, God's name. And it seems that 
just as certain as the slain goat represents the little flock, the 
cleansing that takes place after their ascension cannot have any 
reference to the saints, but to a work for others, in which, after 
their exaltation, the saints are to be the assistants of Christ. 

What can that work be? From facts already mentioned in other 
articles, we are led to the conclusion that the cleansing of the 
sanctuary will find its fulfillment in the separation of the great 
multitude of the church from Babylon, under whom they have 
been in bondage, and by contact with whom they had been 
defiled. This cleansing, or coming out of Babylon, we 
understand to be the washing their robes and making them 
white, and that it was foreshadowed by the separation of Israel 
from Egypt, and their consequent exemption from the seven last 
plagues, which came on Egypt. This exemption in Goshen we 
understand to be the foreshadowing of the state of the washed 
ones, or who have gained the victory over the corruptions of 
Babylon, as they stand on "as it were, a sea of glass, mingled 
with fire. " Then a thousand shall fall at their side, and ten 
thousand at their right hand, but it shall not come nigh them. 

If, as seems clear to us, the scapegoat represents Babylon, or 
those on whom the seven last plagues are to come, then this 



separation, or washing of the great multitude, stands in the right 
place to fulfill the type of cleansing the sanctuary; i.e., after the 
exaltation of the little flock, and just before the seven last 
plagues. 

Our position, briefly stated, is, first, that the sacrifice of the 
bullock represented the sacrifice of the body prepared for Christ, 
and that the sprinkling of its blood on the mercy seat represented 
the presentation of Christ's complete sacrifice before the Father 
when He ascended on high. 

Second: That the sacrifice of the Lord's goat represented the 
sacrifice of our bodies, as we, by the power of the Spirit, which 
is Christ in us, are made conformable unto His death; and that 
the sprinkling of the goat's blood on the mercy seat represented 
the presentation of the complete sacrifice of the saints before the 
Father, when they ascend on high. 

Third: That the "reconciling of the holy place," or "cleansing of 
the sanctuary," which took place after the sprinkling of the 
goat's blood on the mercy seat, represented the separation of the 
"great multitude" of the household of faith from Babylon, by 
washing their robes from the defilements of Babylon, in both 
doctrine and practice, and that the separate, or cleansed state, is, 
"as it were, a sea of glass, mingled with fire." 

Fourth: That laying hands on the head of the scapegoat 
represented the pouring of the seven vials of wrath upon 
Babylon, after the great multitude are separated or cleansed. 

Fifth: It is further evident that this scapegoat work must be 
accomplished before the complete ending of the gospel age, or 
antitypical atonement day, the closing work of which brings not 
only the reward of prophets and saints, but also of them that fear 
God's name, small and great, and the destruction of them 
(Babylon) that destroy, or corrupt, the earth. Rev. 11:18. 

Sixth: The fact that no man of these, on, "as it were, a sea of 
glass," is permitted to enter into the temple in heaven until after 
the plagues are fulfilled (Rev. 15:8), seems clearly represented 
by the statement in Lev. 16:17. "And there shall be no man in 
the tabernacle of the congregation when he goeth in to make an 
atonement in the holy place, until he come out, and have made 
an atonement for himself, and for his household, and for all the 
congregation of Israel. " This necessitates the scapegoat work as 
well as the things that precede it. Vs. 10. 

The reason we present these things is the apparent harmony, to 
our minds, between the facts of the gospel dispensation 
elsewhere revealed and the sixteenth chapter of Leviticus. We 
have endeavored to find in the picture an illustration of the 
landscape, so to speak. We do not present these thoughts in the 
spirit of dogmatism or concision. We are sure that the Lord will 
do all things after the counsel of His own will, whether we 



understand that will or not, but we believe it is our duty and 
privilege to search and learn all we can about His ways. Even 
the effort to learn is beneficial, if we do not think more highly of 
ourselves than we ought to think; and if we have been, or may 
be, able to discern truth, all credit is due, not to us, but to the 
Spirit of truth. 

One thing we wish to emphasize: not so much those who 
understand the philosophy of the sacrifice are to be sharers with 
Christ, as those who make the sacrifice; as not those who 
understand the process of digestion are benefited by the food, 
but those who digest it. If our view of this work of sacrifice be 
right, we are sure it has not been commonly known, but we are 
as sure that many, during the age, have been conformed to the 
will and death of Christ. It is not supposable that the woman 
who cast two mites into the treasury understood this view of the 
sacrifice and things associated, yet Jesus assures us she did more 
than the many others, because she gave her all. All that we have- 
-our life, time, talents and property— are the Lord's, and we are 
stewards for Him. "Ye are not your own; ye are bought with a 
price; therefore, glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, 
which are His. " 

J. H. P. 



R160 : page 6 



AARON AS A PRIEST. 



Whom does Aaron as a priest represent? In brief, we answer, 
Christ; but Aaron with Moses as an administrator of judgment 
represents the saints with Christ. In the deliverance of Israel he 
is administrator of judgment; while in the work of atonement, as 
revealed in Lev. 16, he is priest. 

But if Aaron as priest represents Christ, in order to understand 
the subject, it is necessary to answer the question, Who is 
Christ? This may seem to some a strange question, but to us it is 
very important. We think it has been shown that the Christ of the 
Scriptures is a compound being. Divine and human, and that 
there are two stages of His existence after his birth in the flesh, 
first the natural, afterward the spiritual. In the first He was a 
Divine being in human form, and in the second a human being 
in Divine form. He is "the root and the offspring of David" since 
His exaltation as well as before. Rev. 22:16 and Rom. 1:3-4. The 
mystery of Godliness includes His being exalted to glory as well 
as the manifestation in the flesh. 1 Tim. 3:16. 

It has also been shown from time to time that the Christ of 
scripture is a complex being, presented to our minds by the 
figure of a man— Head and Body;— Jesus Himself being the 
Head and believers being the many members of the one Body. 



This being true it follows that there is a progressive 
development of Christ from Jesus in the flesh, until the last 
member of His Body is exalted to glory. What was true of the 
Head is also true of each member of the Body, first a 
manifestation in the flesh, and afterward an ascension to glory. 

Because the Head was exalted to glory at the beginning of the 
gospel age, and the Body is not so exalted until the end of the 
age, it follows that Christ is represented as acting in both 
Heaven and Earth at the same time during the gospel age. It is 
that same Divinity which, dwelling in the humanity of Jesus, 
constituted Him the Son of God, which dwelling in us 
constitutes us the sons of God. In Him it was native, while we 
derive it from Him, as branches derive their life from the vine. 
The Spirit of truth manifested in the church is Christ's 
representative, was given as an evidence of the acceptance of 
our Head and the completeness of His work, and is termed 
Christ in us. Rom. 8:9-10, Gal. 2:20 and 4:19, and Col. 1:27. 

In this last verse He is called, "the hope of glory, "-the only 
hope of success. As He conquered by virtue of the Spirit, so it is 
only by the Spirit that we can overcome and reach glory. Paul 
says, "I can do all things, through Christ that strengtheneth me." 
Phil. 4:13. 

All this work of the gospel age is the antitype of the work of the 
atonement day,-the tenth day of the seventh month-under the 
law. And as Aaron made the sacrifices then, and as Christ either 
in Himself or in us, makes the sacrifices in this age, it follows 
that at the beginning of the atonement day Aaron represented 
Jesus Himself; in the sacrifice of the goat he represented Christ 
in the saints, who follow the Lord in sacrifice; and in cleansing 
the sanctuary and laying his hands on the head of the scapegoat, 
he represented Christ and the saints, who execute judgments and 
deliver. 

It seems as if this principle of growth must apply as surely as the 
idea of Christ is progressive. As Aaron's work of that day 
represents the whole work of the gospel age, we cannot escape 
the conclusion that at the beginning he represented the Head, 
and at the end represented the whole Body, or perfect Christ. 

The closing work of Aaron,-the change of garments and the 
washing of his flesh,-we have purposely left unmentioned until 
now. The consideration of the work of the atonement day-both 
type and antitype —has changed our ideas of this washing. We 
will endeavor to present our present view of the subject, without 
reference to the past. An increase of light on any subject 
modifies former ideas. We think this subject of the washing has 
never been presented in the light of the true character of Christ 
as the Divine in the human, and as progressive in development. 
We will not claim perfection of thought, but present our ideas 



with the assurance that truth will stand the test, and imperfect 
ideas will be pruned by further investigations. 

We believe further, that this subject of washing can only be 
understood in connection with a right view of baptism. We think 
our readers have had placed before them of late a very clear 
view of this subject. There is a symbolic baptism, and a real one. 
The symbolic is a sinking into and rising from the water. The 
real baptism has two phases-first the denial of self and living to 
God, or, as Paul expresses it, dying to sin and living to holiness; 
(Rom. 6,) and second, dying to mortality and living to 
immortality. 

These two phases of the real baptism 

R160:page7 

are the real "washing of regeneration" without which it is not 
possible to enter the heavenly kingdom. Christ Himself was the 
first to pass through the process of regeneration. The symbolic 
baptism represents the real, and when any person submits to the 
form, loyally, he is counted what he is to be— clean or holy. The 
symbolic baptism stands at the entrance of the earthly phase of 
Christian life. Regeneration complete, is the second birth, or 
entrance upon the perfect and independent spiritual life. 

As Aaron at first represented Jesus alone, so the first washing of 
Aaron's flesh was fulfilled in that phase of baptism which 
introduced our Savior to the work of the ministry, with the "holy 
linen garments" or, representing Him as a righteous servant. 
And all who follow Him in the voluntary sacrifice of self and 
the world, are counted as dead with Him, buried with Him, and 
risen with Him. This one baptism, or washing, carried to its 
legitimate consequences, brings both Christ and the saints into a 
state of immortality. Then why should Aaron wash his flesh a 
second time? Because the "great multitude" of the household of 
Christ, represented by the house of Aaron, and for whom 
atonement was made by the first sacrifice, have failed to present 
themselves a voluntary sacrifice, and are therefore not entitled 
according to the original arrangement to the Divine life and a 
place in the kingdom. 

It is true that before this second washing they have been 
separated and washed their robes, and thus have done what is 
involved in the first phase of the real baptism, but it is not with 
the "great multitude" as with the "little flock"— a voluntary 
sacrifice; they are driven to it, so to speak, under the influence 
of peculiar judgments. So the first washing could not properly 
represent them. 

It is evident that Christ Himself and the saints once washed and 
glorified need not the second. We have seen that before the 
second washing of Aaron the blood of the goat had been 
sprinkled, representing the ascension of the saints; the sanctuary 



was cleansed representing the separation of the "great 
multitude" from Babylon, giving them a position on, "as it were, 
a sea of glass;" and the hands laid on the scapegoat, representing 
the pouring of the seven last plagues on Babylon. Now all that 
remains to be done for that multitude is their complete 
deliverance from the world, as Israel were delivered from Egypt 
after the plagues. These are the only part, (and they are the great 
part) of Christ's body who at that point of time remain 
unwashed. When that is done, all are rewarded, -Christ his 
saints and the great multitude who are to serve before the throne. 

That the great multitude are Christ's in the sense we have 
presented seems evident even from the fact that they have robes; 
that is, they had been counted holy, or had Christ's righteousness 
imputed to them. But they had defiled their garments by contact 
with Babylon, and therefore their loss of the crown, and the need 
of the judgments to separate them. 

Christ is acting as priest in all who are possessed of His Spirit; 
and that work of the Spirit cannot be complete until all the 
household are immortal. 

The garments worn after the first washing were the "holy linen 
garments," representing the righteous servant; and this is the 
condition of every member of the body, from Jesus down, 
during the period of sacrifice, or other earthly work. But the 
garments worn after the second washing, are "the garments for 
glory and beauty" or the ordinary garments of the high priest, 
except on the day of sacrifice. Language is unmeaning if the 
garments "for glory and beauty" described in Exodus 28 are the 
same as the simple attire of the priests during the work of 
sacrifice. We know that the holy linen garments were worn only 
on the day of atonement, or tenth day of the seventh month, but 
in Ex. 28:29-30 we learn that the glorious garments were to be 
worn before the Lord continually. 

We know that if Christ had not been a priest during His earth 
life, He could not have offered the sacrifice, and we know also 
that He wore the robe of righteousness, but not the robe of glory 
until His ascension. And we have the assurance that if we wear 
the robe of righteousness, and follow Him in sacrifice, we shall 
be glorified with Him. From which it is evident that the garment 
to be worn after the second washing is the glorious garment. 

The work of the high priest under the law was an annual 
repetition in type, of what Christ does only once, and he would 
not have been a type of the Christ if, when he had gone through 
with the service of the tenth day of the seventh month for the 
first time, he had after the second washing put on his old 
clothes. Of course, if, as we believe, he wore the glorious 
garments "continually," that is all through the year, except on 
the atonement day, it would follow that when he came to the 



first washing of all succeeding atonement days, he would lay 
aside 

R161 : page 7 

the glorious garments to begin again the work of sacrifice, and 
put them on again after the second washing. 

When once the perfect Christ is glorified, it is evident that they 
will not lay that glory aside until the work is done which was 
represented by a whole year under the law, and it will never 
need repetition. The one perfect sacrifice lasts forever. Heb. 
10:12. His priesthood will be as endless as His mediatorial 
reign, and that continues after His coming until all His enemies 
are subdued. 

But some one may ask: "If, as you claim, He was a priest when 
He was here in the flesh, and will continue to be a priest after 
His return during His reign, how will you harmonize Paul's 
statement: "If He were on earth, He should not be a priest." Heb. 
8:4. If any one will carefully read the context, he will see that 
Paul is contrasting the typical priesthood of the tribe of Levi, 
and the antitypical priesthood of our Lord, who sprang out of 
Judah. The typical is the earthly, and the work of the antitype is 
the heavenly. The statement of Paul is equivalent to saying: "If 
this service were the typical, our Lord who sprang from Judah 
would not be a priest, for there are priests of the tribe of Levi, 
who offer according to the law. " Please read the context for 
yourselves. Whoever is determined, in spite of the context, to 
force the idea that Christ could do no part of His work as a priest 
on earth, must either deny that Christ is a "priest forever after 
the order of Melchizedek, " or that He will return to earth until 
that "forever" is ended. All Christ's priestly work is heavenly, 
though part of it is performed on earth, because He is a priest by 
virtue of His Divinity or heavenly nature. And what is true of 
Christ the Head is true, in turn, of each member of the body. 
Christ in us, to perform the work of sacrifice, is the hope of 
glory. How significant then the exhortation of the apostle, 
"Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is 
God that worketh in you, both to will and to do of His good 
pleasure. " The Divine in the human is the only hope of 
humanity. 

J. H. P. 



R161 : page 7 



ISAAC AND REBECCA. 

We have already seen that many of the narratives of the old 
testament aside from being historical, have a special interest to 



us from the fact that the persons and acts described are often 
used as types of spiritual truths now due to us. 

The Apostles, especially Paul, often referred to these types. In 
Romans 9:7-8, and Gal. 4:22-31, he shows that Abraham was a 
type of God; that his wife Sarah, was a type of the Gospel 
Covenant; that Jesus Christ (and we in him) is the offspring of 
that covenant, which "is the mother of us all. " Hagar the bond- 
maid typified the Law covenant and her offspring, the fleshly 
Israel, and all whose relationship to God comes not of grace, but 
by keeping the law, are the offspring of that covenant. [There 
are people to-day whose claim is that they are God's children 
through keeping the law— the seventh day, Sabbath, etc.] 
Abraham had "a seed" by Sarah in whom centered the promises 
of blessing to all the families of earth. So in the antitype God 
has "a seed" through the gospel or grace covenant in which seed 
all promises of blessings center; "which seed is Christ" "and if 
ye be Christ's [body, bride] then are ye Abraham's seed [God's 
seed] and heirs according to the promise." (Gal. 3:29.) 

We have heretofore looked at some of the typical features of the 
getting of Isaac's bride— Rebecca, believing it to be a picture of 
the taking of Jesus' bride, but a closer examination reveals some 
points not heretofore noticed. Let us therefore re-examine it. 
Isaac chose not his own bride, but Abraham chose for him 
through his servant, illustrative of the fact that God the Father, 
through his spirit (the servant) is choosing the bride of Christ. 
(John 17:2-24.) As the servant represents the Spirit, so we 
understand that the camels upon which he came to Rebecca 
(which also carried the presents) represented The Word of God. 
When the servant arrived he sought the virgin who when asked 
to entertain him, would voluntarily offer respect to his camels. 
Just so, we must "gladly receive the word" if we would be 
accepted as the bride. As the servant kept secret the account of 
the riches of Abraham, and Isaac's being the only heir, and his 
errand being to select a bride for him, until Rebecca had 
received the camels, so the Spirit does not communicate to us 
the news of "our high calling in Christ, until we entertain the 
word as well as the Spirit. When Rebecca had thus received the 
camels, etc., the servant gave her a face ornament of gold and 
gold bracelets for her hands, so when we receive the spirit and 
word of God our faces show it, and our hands also, (Gold 
symbolizes Grace.) We cannot be blessed of the Spirit without 
its affecting our lives and in whatever our hands find to do we 
will be constantly showing the graces (presents) of the Spirit. 

Rebecca "ran and told them of her mother's house these things." 
So, when the bride of Jesus has received even a few of the gifts 
of the Spirit she "loves to tell the story." Rebecca's brother when 
he saw the adornments entertained the servant and camels. So 
many of the bride's moral friends rejoice at her adornments of a 
meek and quiet spirit, &c, and because of these receive the 



Spirit and word as a visitor, but not as she receives them, viz. : as 
guide and helper on to Isaac. 

When entertained, the servant declares his mission; Rebecca 
accepts the invitation to go and receives further presents, this 
time both silver and gold (knowledge and grace), and to her 
friends who did not hinder her going, he gave "precious things." 
So with us, it is not when we first receive the Spirit and Word 
but when they are lodged with us as our guests, that the 
wonderful news of our high calling is declared to us. When we 
accept of it and its conditions -leaving our "Father's house, etc."- 
-we receive further blessings of the heretofore hidden treasures, 
both knowledge and grace and come to possess and learn some 
of "the deep things of God. " 

Rebecca starts at once on her journey, so must we; the Spirit has 
a work to do and will not delay; if we are the bride we will want 
to start at once for our new heavenly home— and joyfully forsake 
the earthly; its attractions do not for a moment compare with 
those of our heavenly Father's house. Rebecca followed the 
guidance of the servant and rode on the camels. So we are led of 
the Spirit, and supported and carried forward by the word of 
God. Rebecca's "damsels rode upon camels" also, and followed 
her, consequently they were also under the guidance of the 
servant. So we are told of a "great company" following the bride 
of Christ. "The virgins, her companions that follow her," (Ps. 
45:14). All are bound for the same Spiritual heavenly condition, 
but only the bride is to be joint heir, inheriting all things. "He 
that overcometh shall inherit all things." 

Now they near the end of the journey. Soon Isaac and Rebecca 
will meet and our interest increases as we realize that what has 
so far been so clearly a picture should give us an idea of how we 
shall meet our Lord. Isaac comes out and meets Rebecca on the 
way and himself leads her into the mother Sarah's tent. So our 
Lord is to come to get His Bride and will lead her into the full 
possession of things pertaining to the Sarah covenant. For us to 
enter into and possess all things pertaining to our covenant will 
include our "blessing all the families of the earth," and though 
we expect very soon to be united to our Lord, yet we expect to 
journey with him until A.D. 1914 (End of "Gentile time") before 
we can share with him all the blessings promised us, by our 
covenant -fully enter in to the mother's tent. 

We read that Isaac "came by the way of the well, Lahai-roi. " 
Has 

R161 : page 8 

the name of this well anything of special significance, or why is 
it so particularly mentioned? Hagar gave the well this name, 
"For she said: Have I also here looked after Him that seeth me. 
Wherefore the well was called Beer (well) Lahai-roi." (Gen. 
16:13,14.) She realized that the Lord had been present, seen and 



talked with her, yet she had not seen Him, though she had 
"looked after [for] Him." The mentioning in this type that Isaac 
came by this well may have a significance, if so, we should 
suppose it meant to teach that our Lord, when coming to meet 
us, comes by way of the unseen presence. 

The servant informs Rebecca as to the presence of Isaac, and 
immediately she leaves her virgin companions, putting on a vail 
which hides her from their sight. She alights from the camel, and 
is with Isaac. 

"Forever with the Lord! amen, so let it be." Now, what does this 
feature of the type teach us? We believe that we are still going 
forward on the word. The Spirit is still our leader and instructor. 
He is now telling us of Him who comes by way of unseen 
presence that He is here present. Some members of "the bride" 
have already heard, others are hearing daily. When all have been 
instructed, the next step in order will be our leaving the second 
company-disappearing from their sight— going beyond the vail 
of the flesh— entering the perfect spiritual condition; changed in 
a moment from mortal to immortal; from natural to spiritual; 
made like unto Christ's glorious body. Then "we shall see Him 
as He is," for 

R162 : page 8 

"we shall be like Him " Glorious hope, joyous moment. Soon 
the new nature will be freed entirely from the restraints of the 
fleshly body and have "a body as it hath pleased Him." Soon we 
shall alight from the camels, and leave the servant's guidance 
when we pass under the vail. When that which is perfect is 
come, we will have no further need of the sustaining and helping 
promises of the word, nor of the guidance of the comforter, for 
"we shall know as we are known," and "see as we are seen." 

We seem to be very near the time of our change. Seek to keep it 
ever in mind. It will help you over the hard places of life, cheer 
your heart, and help you "to keep your body under. " See, also, to 
be as much as possible used as the mouthpiece of the Spirit to 
inform the "espoused virgin" church of the Lord's presence. 



R162 : page 8 



WILL THE SPIRIT BE WITHDRAWN? 

It has been a theory with many dear brethren looking for our 
approaching change, that when the "bride"-"little flock," is 
changed in a moment, withdrawn from the world, the Spirit of 
God will leave the earth, and that those left will be without the 
comforter. We have before this expressed our belief that this 
view is erroneous, that the second or "great company" which 
does not escape the time of trouble but go through it and "wash 



their (world-spotted and stained) robes and make them white, 
etc.," though not overcomers, and therefore not permitted as part 
of "the first-born" to sit in the throne and be joint-heirs, are 
nevertheless Children of God, and as such are entitled to the seal 
of their sonship the Spirit, and that it will be necessary that they 
be clean and white, and he sent messengers to have the Spirit to 
guide them during and through the time of trouble. 

We now see by the above type of Rebecca, the servant and her 
maids, a strong support for this view. Notice that when Rebecca 
passed under the vail she left the maids with the servant, while 
Isaac conducted her to his home. So when we pass beyond the 
vail (our change) the spirit remains with the great company 
while our Bridegroom conducts us to His throne. 



R162 : page 8 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Q.-Does the Scripture to your understanding teach, that Saints 
who constitute the bride of Christ, will be made perfect as 
natural beings before being "changed" to spiritual bodies? 

A. -We do not so understand the Scriptures. You cannot find a 
text in the Bible which says that the Saints will be restored to 
perfection of the flesh. We were reckoned as justified to life by 
Jesus' death, but this life to which we were entitled, we 
covenanted to give up and make a sacrifice of. Are we to take 
back that which we sacrificed? By no means. God's arrangement 
with us is, that if we give up the natural a sacrifice, He will give 
us instead, the spiritual. We accepted the conditions, have 
already received a spiritual mind instead of the natural, and are 
now only waiting for the change of our natural body to the 
spiritual- the completion of God's promise. Read carefully 
article- "Restitution for whom?"-in August (1880) No. of 
Z.W.T., page 4. 

Q.-Bro. R., please explain the baptism of the Holy Ghost and 
fire. Matt. 3:11-12. 

A. -The baptism of the Holy Ghost is treated of in an article in 
this paper. To understand John's words we should reflect that he 
addressed mixed classes of the Jews. "There came out to him all 
Judea and Jerusalem to be baptised. " The scribes and pharisees 
also came. John came as the introducer of Jesus and the gospel, 
and looking forward he prophetically foretells the result. Some 
will receive Jesus, and these will be baptised with the Holy 
Ghost: Others will not receive Him and their house (Jewish) will 
be left desolate and baptised with fire— the judgments which did 
come upon them as a people after their rejection of Jesus. Verse 
12 is but a repetition of the same thing in other words. He says 
of Jesus- "whose fan is in his hand and he will thoroughly 



purge his floor. " This shows the work of Jesus during his three 
and a-half years ministry. As a winnower he separated the wheat 
of the Jewish people from the chaff. "He will gather the wheat 
into His garner [gospel dispensation] but burn up the chaff with 
unquenchable fire"— the dreadful trouble which wiped them as a 
people from national existence. 

Q.--I read with deep interest an article in last month's paper, 
called "Anti-Christ," and heartily agree with it. Now I want to 
inquire whether we can, properly speaking, call any church the 
church of Christ which does not possess the gifts of the Spirit as 
we are told the first church had them? 

A. -Among the gifts of the Spirit mentioned by Paul is that of 
Apostles. Now this gift was never intended to be continued to 
the church except as we have it, viz: We have them present and 
teaching the church now through their writings. But there were 
only to be twelve apostles, and they are promised [when the 
Kingdom takes possession of Earth] twelve thrones; none but 
the twelve are to rule over the twelve tribes of Israel. Again, 
Jesus said when addressing them, that he had chosen them who 
were witnesses, as the apostles of the church. Then none since 
Jesus' day could be apostles, since none but they were witnesses 
of His resurrection, &c. When Judas lost his place as one of the 
twelve, Peter found the scripture (Acts 1:20-25,) which stated 
that another should take his place (Bishopric— office of bishop 
or apostle) and the eleven met together and selected one who 
had seen Jesus, etc., as a witness of his resurrection. They cast 
lots upon two and selected Mathias to be one of the twelve 
apostles. But they evidently were mistaken in their actions [the 
spirit was not yet given]. Jesus had his own plans for selecting 
the twelfth apostle and fulfilling the prophecy. Jesus chose Paul 
and ordained him to be an apostle (Rom. 1:5.) and since all of 
the apostles must be eye witnesses of his resurrection, Paul was 
caused to see him— "last of all he was seen of me also... who am 
not meet to be called an apostle." [1 Cor. 15:9, see also, 2 Cor. 
11:5, and 12:11, and Gal. 1:17 and 19.] Thus we see that God 
never recognized any but twelve apostles. And that it was never 
designed there should be any more, we see from Rev. 21:14, 
where the names of the twelve apostles (no more) are mentioned 
in connection with the foundations. 

The apostle tells us that there are differences of administration, 
but the same Lord. So we see it to be; for instance, as to the 
apostles' method of teaching the church. God has seen fit to 
continue, to some extent, these gifts. We have in the church 
"teachers, evangelists, pastors," &c, but many of those gifts 
have passed away under a "different administration. " Tongues 
prophesyings, &c, have ceased, as Paul said they should (1 Cor. 
13:8), probably, because not now necessary. 

The church is, to our understanding, one body, from Jesus, the 
head, down to the last member bearing the same fruit of the 



vine. Its life lasts on earth during the gospel age and until every 
member is clothed with its heavenly body. While on earth, any 
two or three of the members may assemble themselves as the 
body-the church-and will be so recognized by the head, who 
says He will meet with them. 



R162 : page 8 

A STRANGE THOUGHT. 

A contemporary whose editor does not believe our Lord now 
present, says it believes that when Jesus comes he will spend 
some time washing his bride before the marriage. Truly, this is a 
peculiar thought, strangely out of harmony with earthly usages 
and customs. We suggest the thought that the Bible never uses 
an illustration which involves an absurdity. Let us glance at the 
Scriptural way of stating the matter. 

Jesus espoused to himself a virgin clad in filthy garments of her 
own unrighteousness; He left her robes of righteousness, of his 
own purchase, telling her that she must put on these robes (by 
faith) if she would be His. He did not put them on her. The robes 
he gave her were sages to her by the Apostles that she should 
abstain from all defiling things while she waited for him; that 
she should put away her former filthy habits and live henceforth 
according to the Spirit and not after the flesh, and keep herself 
"unspotted from the world. " He left his word as a purifier and 
cleanser if ever she got a soil upon her robes, that so he might 
though absent himself thus arrange for her readiness, and 
"sanctify and cleanse her with the washing of water by the word, 
that he might present her to himself a glorious church, not 
having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing. " And the Apostle 
exhorts us to make use of these agencies and be sanctified— 
holy-through the truth. 

"Wherefore, beloved, seeing ye look for such things, be diligent 
that 

R163 : page 8 

ye may be found of him in peace without spot and blameless." 
(2 Pet. 3:14.) Mark that he says not, that he shall wash you when 
he comes, but you shall be found of him so cleansed. Let us, 
dearly beloved, give diligence to this subject and see that our 
robe is spotless, remembering always that "without holiness 
(purity-separation) no man shall see the Lord. " Those whose 
robes need washing must do it for themselves, either now or 
during the time of trouble. (Rev. 7:14.) 



R163 : page 8 



OUR TRIP NORTHWARD. 

Friends at Danville, N.Y., may expect us Thursday evening, 
Nov. 4th; at Honeoye, N.Y., Sunday, Nov. 7th; and at 
Brockport, N.Y., Nov. 11th. We expect to make three other 
stops, but hold no public meetings except at the above named 
places. As per many requests, Sister Russell will accompany me. 

The following persons have full charge of all arrangements. 
They are expected, under the Lord's direction, to make the best 
arrangements possible or consistent. Brother B. W. 

Keith Danville, N.Y. Brother Ira Allen Honeoye, 

N.Y. Sister J. G. Heath Brockport, N.Y. 

Any friends in the vicinity of these places who desire to attend 
the meetings, are cordially invited to do so. Some arrangement 
for your entertainment will be made. 

We have read letters, etc., from parties in the East-New Jersey, 
Delaware, etc.— who supposed our journey would bring us near 
them; but it does not. To such we would say that we hope to 
have an Eastern trip about January, 1881. Would like to go 
sooner, but expect to see some of the dear ones West in 
December. C. T. RUSSELL, Editor. 



R163 : page 8 



WHAT TO DO. 



Several have written to us that they have carefully read article 
in September number, 1880, on "Importance of Baptism," and 
would like to fulfill the outward sign of the death of the fleshly 
nature, as symbolized by immersion into water, but are at a loss 
how to accomplish it. 

We would suggest that if you live near any of those whose 
names appear in first column of our paper, write to them; if not, 
if there are several of you, baptize one another; or if you live 
near any of the officiating brethren of the Christian Disciple 
church, they would doubtless serve you. (Ministers of the 
"Baptist Church" are not permitted by their creed to baptize any 
except those who join their church.) We only throw out these 
suggestions. If you earnestly desire it, you will find that God has 
some open door for you. 



R163 : page 1 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., DECEMBER, 1880. 

NO. 6. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 
L. A. ALLEN, .... HONEOYE, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R163 : page 1 



THE RESTORED DOMINION. 

When God created man, he endowed him with qualities of 
being like his own. Qualities of justice and judgment fitted him 
to be a ruler; qualities of mercy and love prepared him to be a 
reasonable, kind and wise ruler. Such is a brief description of 
earth's first king- Adam. An image of his creator, (not 
physically, but mentally and morally,) he is to be invested with 
authority over earth and its affairs, like as God is ruler over all, 
as we read: "In our likeness let him have dominion over the 
beast of the field, the fowl of heaven and the fish of the sea." 
[Gen. 1:26]. Thus was he installed lord of earth. He was but 
another form of creation, a step lower than angels, as lower and 
under him, came the brute creation; accordingly we read: "Thou 
hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned 
him with glory and honor. Thou madest him to have dominion 
over the works of Thy hands. Thou hast put all things under his 
feet." [Psa. 8:5-6.] 

All of this glory, honor, and rulership was invested in him, to be 
used in harmony with his nature, which being perfect, was at 
perfect harmony with the will of God. 

As God had foreseen, and arranged for, man disobeys his 
superior ruler the King of Kings and Lord of Lords. This cannot 
be allowed to go unpunished. He had been informed from the 
first that disobedience to God would be sin, and that its 
legitimate punishment and effect is death. While man always 
was mortal, and therefore liable to disease and death, yet the 
loving Creator had made every provision necessary to his 
welfare, in the garden prepared for his trial. And not only had 
He arranged that the soul (person) that sinned should die, but 
also that if obedient the person should continue to live. The 
means for life's continuance was in "every tree of the garden," 
i.e., the food provided for man's sustenance was amply sufficient 
to meet all the wastes of his system, and would have preserved 
the freshness and vigor of his perfect being forever. This would 
be everlasting life. 

When man became a sinner the penalty "death" must be 
executed. It mattered not so far as the penalty was concerned, 
whether Adam should die the same moment that he disobeyed, 
or the same year, or a thousand years after. He must die. The 
word "day" used in connection with the penalty, is the general 
term used now as well as in past times, for a period or epoch of 
time, as "The day of temptation in the wilderness -forty years;" 
the days of creation, etc. The marginal reading clears up the 
meaning: "In the day that thou eatest thereof, dying, thou shalt 
die." [Gen. 2:17] This was fulfilled not by God's striking Adam 
dead with a thunderbolt but simply by cutting off his access to 
the life-giving food supplied by the trees of the prepared garden. 
Accordingly an angel drove Adam from the garden and 



prevented with flaming sword, his access thereafter to the tree 
(trees or woods) of life. (Gen. 3:24). 

Thus was the lord of creation driven out into the world which 
God, foreknowing his fall, had left in an unprepared or "cursed" 
condition. The garden which we are told was "prepared" was 
doubtless an illustration of what the whole earth will be when 
man and his perfect conditions are restored- in "The times of 
restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth of 
all his holy prophets. " 

Thus thrown upon his own resources for obtaining by sweat of 
face, elements to sustain life, Adam found it a hard lot, and by 
its effects was enabled to know what evil is, and the exceeding 
bitterness of sin. And oft, no doubt, he desired, perhaps prayed, 
that he might be permitted again to dwell in Eden, and promised 
that with his present knowledge of sin and evil he would more 
highly prize the good things there enjoyed and more fervently 
love and obey Him "from whom cometh every good and perfect 
gift." But though God's plan was no less loving than this, it was 
broader, wiser and more comprehensive. God's plan being to let, 
not only Adam, but also the entire race, learn just this same 
lesson of the bitterness of sin and disobedience which each must 
individually learn to fully appreciate. Then bringing all back to 
the Eden condition, sin might be forever banished, and the entire 
race live in harmony with God. 

Toil and care told in time upon even the perfect physical form of 
a perfect man, resulting finally in his complete overthrow and 
wresting from his grasp the last shred or spark of life. He is 
dead. After nine hundred and thirty years of struggle with his 
foe-death-he is conquered. The penalty of sin was inflicted and 
continues, to this moment, since he still is one of the prisoners in 
the great charnel house of death, which has since swallowed up 
the race, and will hold them all until the second Adam, who 
ransomed the race, and who declares, "I have the keys of hell 
and death" [hades-the grave] (Rev. 1:18) shall take his great 
power and reign, releasing "the prisoners of the pit" [grave] "the 
captives" of sin and death. 

But not only did the casting out from the life-producing fruits of 
the garden tend to the impairing of Adam's physical powers, but 
of his mental qualities also. It was not possible that he should 
retain perfect mental vigor, when he became physically 
impaired, thought being the product of the mental organism 
made active by the physical vitality. An injury to either one or 
both of these producing qualities would of necessity impair their 
product. 

We see then that Adam's mental powers decreased with his 
physical deterioration and we claim that the moral qualities of 
his mind suffered the most. While the energy of body and mind 
were taxed to their utmost to take care of self, it is but 



reasonable to suppose that the quality of benevolence (love) 
which, being in God's image, must have been one of the ruling 
characteristics of his being, would be crowded out, and the 
quality of acquisitiveness 

R164 : page 1 

(selfishness) and combativeness developed instead. This same 
idea followed out would show us that all the higher, grander, 
nobler qualities were suffered measurably to decline, while all 
of the lower ones (common to the lower animals) were the more 
developed. 

As man lost the grandeur of his being, and its powers decreased, 
his rulership over the lower creation, as well as over self gave 
way, until today we find him afraid of all wild beasts, and that 
they no longer recognize the rulership of their fallen lord. And 
the influence once exercised by our father Adam is barely 
discernible in the occasional man who can master and tame 
(partially) the ferocious beasts. Here we have a brief glance at 
the first dynasty of earth and its overthrow. Now we pass 
onward to the second ruler. That we may more clearly recognize 
who this is, let us notice what power conquered the first ruler. 
Surely it was DEATH. "By sin came death. " In the expressive 
language of Paul, 

"DEATH REIGNED" 

King of Terrors under "him that has the power of death, that is, 
the devil"- "the prince of this world." All bow before him; all 
are under his control. From the cradle to the tomb, every ache 
and pain attests his power over us, and the same agency which 
first placed us under his rule (sin) conspires yet, to more quickly 
destroy the race. His rule or reign must continue so long as there 
is sin to be punished, or until the entire race is reduced to the 
condition of lifelessness, unless some power arise and redeem 
the race from his control. 

Such a ransom and deliverance was a part of God's plan from 
the first; and we read "for this purpose Christ was manifested, 
that He might destroy the works of the devil"— sin and death. 1 
John 3:8. And not only so, but also "him that hath the power of 
death, that is, the devil" (Heb. 2:14), and thus release from his 
grasp all of the race. But as Satan and death are acting in 
harmony with a law of the universe, viz. : that no sinner shall be 
permitted to live, and that every creature shall be perfect in its 
own plane of existence, the one who would deliver the race from 
his authority must satisfy these claims of the law of the universe. 
This the fallen race could not do for themselves, as God had 
from the first foreknown and arranged for in His plan. Carrying 
out this plan he had already condemned the entire race on 
account of one man's disobedience, His purpose from the first 
being that He would provide another man, who, being without 



sin, should give himself "a ransom for all" the race. That "as by 
one man's disobedience [the] many [all] were made sinners, so 
by the obedience of one shall [the] many [all] be made 
righteous" (justified from sin and death). Rom. 5:19. 

But who is the one righteous, pure, holy, sinless, one? How 
could there be such an one among a race all of whom were 
condemned. "There is none righteous, no not one," the scriptures 
answer. But when mankind had learned effectually his own 
weakness and inability to deliver himself from death, his 
extremity became God's opportunity, and "God's eye pitied, and 
His arm brought salvation. " The very chief of God's creation 
higher than angels and archangels [Heb. 1:5-8], 

R164 : page 2 

He who is called "the beginning of the creation of God" [Rev. 
3:14] is selected as the one who shall undergo the labors of 
redeeming humanity. We are not to suppose this was an irksome 
or unwilling work, for we cannot suppose a being in perfect 
harmony with Jehovah who would not take delight in doing His 
will. Nor would obedience be the only motive which would 
actuate, partaking as all perfect beings on whatever plane they 
exist must, of the divine quality— love— he would love to do the 
work for the sake of its benefits to mankind, releasing them 
from death. This no doubt was a part of "the joy set before him," 
for which he, "endured the cross despising the shame." Heb. 
12:2. 

Aside from this joy at the opportunity to release the human race 
from death, was that of "bringing many sons to glory," i.e., a 
part of the race "a little flock." "To these gave he power to 
become sons of God. " "For, as many as are led by the spirit of 
God, are the sons of God. " These, according to God's plan, may, 
by intimate association with him be reckoned as the bride of 
Christ and as such enter the heavenly family. To these sons this 
mighty one would be a leader or "captain of their salvation. " 
And yet another (though perhaps in his estimation less 
important) part of this 

"JOY SET BEFORE HIM, " 

was that He himself should, because of his obedience, labor, 
sacrifice, etc., be accounted worthy of still higher honor than he 
had ever yet possessed, as we read: "He became obedient unto 
death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore, God also hath 
highly exalted him and given him a name which is above every 
name." (Phil. 2:8-9.) "That all men should honor the Son even as 
they honor the Father. (John 5:23.) 

But how shall this redemptive work be accomplished? We have 
seen that God's plan was that, since by man came death, by man 
should also come the resurrection of the dead. (1 Cor. 15:21). 
Then to redeem man, this mighty one must become a man in 



every particular. He must partake of "flesh and blood," (Heb. 
2:14), and consequently must have all the qualities of the fleshly 
race, not the sinful and depraved qualities with which we now 
are burdened, but he must be a perfect man standing exactly 
where Adam stood, except that he would know that sin had 
brought the wretchedness and death which he saw everywhere 
about him, and also for what purpose he had come. He took not 
the nature and form of angels, for that would not have answered, 
but he took the nature and form of man. 

All things are now ready. "In the fullness of time, God sent forth 
his Son, born of a virgin. " "born not of the will of the flesh but 
of the will of God"— in a word as much of a specially creative 
act on God's part as was the creation of Adam; the difference 
being that the one could say, "The earth is my mother," the other 
was "born of a woman. " Had he in any way been a descendant 
of Adam he would have been under the curse of death, as are all 
other members of that race. He would have been as unable to 
keep the law as other men in whom sinful dispositions and 
depraved human nature are born. But while of the same (human) 
nature he is a new being, distinct from the race. He is born, 
grows in wisdom and in stature but manifests powers beyond 
others because he is perfect, they imperfect. Now he has reached 
maturity (according to the law) at thirty years of age. He knows 
as no one else does the great work for which during those thirty 
years he has been coming-a body preparing-it was "for the 
suffering of death'-fhat he "should taste death for every man"- 
"that through death he might destroy death," and liberate a dead 
race— "in due time. " Now he is come the second perfect sinless 
man, and offers this perfect life as a ransom for the race. "Lo, I 
come, (as) in the volume of the book it is written of me, to do 
thy will, O God." (Heb. 10:7). This was his covenant, to die, as 
he afterward expressed it, saying: "For this cause came I into the 
world. " And here in type he was buried in the water and rose 
again, thus making the picture of that which he covenanted to 
do. 

Now as the perfect one he has done all that he can do, given 
himself up to die as the Father may will, but though the death 
has not actually occurred (at baptism) it is so reckoned, (as with 
us when we covenant,) and the new nature's powers and will, 
which belong to the spiritual body, which he is to be when the 
work of death is complete; ("raised a spiritual body,") these 
powers and qualities were given him as soon as the human- 
earthly— body was consecrated. This was at his baptism when 
the spirit descended and a voice from heaven acknowledged His 
begetting again to the spiritual plane and to the Divine nature. 
"This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased." [Matt. 
3:17.] Henceforth the life of Jesus is that of a dual being, the 
outward form being the man Christ Jesus, whose life and being 
were daily spent for the good of others— a body already given 
up to death. 



The new being within-the Divine nature- was the spirit power 
of God. And in this he is the pattern and leader of "all who come 
unto God by Him," "who become partakers of the Divine 
nature"— the "little flock" called His bride-His body. We must 
surrender ourselves to God— be baptized into His death- in order 
to be begotten of the spirit and receive the earnest of our new 
spiritual being, the fullness of which will be received when we 
are completely delivered from this fleshly condition to our 
spiritual bodies. 

Thenceforth he "did not his own human will" but was "led of the 
Spirit," and the actions now were of God, as Jesus testified: 
"The word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's, which 
sent me." [John 14:24 and 17:8.] Of mine own self I can do 
nothing, the Father that dwelleth in me, He doeth the works. 
[John 14:10.] If we as our head "are led by the spirit of God"- 
evenunto death— we also become "the sons of God," [Rom. 
8:14,] who will also "work in us to will and to do of His good 
pleasure." Phil. 2:13. 

And we who are now "new creatures (in Christ Jesus") should 
take courage from the life of our beloved master; as Paul says: 

"CONSIDER HIM 

who endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest 
ye be weary and faint in your minds. " If you sometimes find it 
hard to endure the frowns of the world and to be thought of and 
treated as a deceiver by your friends, think of Him weeping in 
Gethsemane, condemned before Pilate, crucified as a 
malefactor, forsaken and denied by His loved ones, "yet He 
opened not His mouth. " And if your human nature sometimes 
shrinks, although reckoned dead, think again of Him. Remember 

R165 : page 2 

that He was tempted in all points like as we are, (yet without 
sin,) and can and does sympathize with us, and though you may 
sometimes cry out, as he did, "Father, if it be possible, let this 
cup [the ignominy] pass from me, " forget not to add, as he did, 
"yet not my will but thine be done." The human will of Jesus 
though given up at consecration— baptism— sometimes rose up 
so that He needed the heavenly "grace to help in time of need" 
to keep the human will perfectly obedient to the will of the new 
being-the divine. 

This dying process continued during the three and one-half years 
of His ministry, from the moment of His consecration and 
acceptance at baptism, until on the cross He cried: "It is 
finished. " But what was finished there-the work of atonement? 
No, the work of atonement signifies the making at one of two 
parties. In this case God was one and humanity the other party. 
Man's sin had brought upon him God's curse, death, instead of 
His blessing; and by its degrading influence (as we have seen) it 



had so marred the mental and moral likeness of man to his 
maker, that he no longer took "delight in the law of God," but in 
sin, and it will be readily seen by all that there was much work 
necessary to bring about full reconciliation between God and 
man. First— Justice must be met, a ransom must be given for the 
sinner, else God could never, to all eternity, recognize him as 
having a right to live. Secondly-Man must be brought to his 
original condition of perfection-in God's image— before he can 
be of himself perfectly in harmony with God's perfect will and 
law. Now, while this work, as a whole, was Jehovah's plan from 
"before the creation of the world," its accomplishment only 
began with Jesus, and will not be completed until the end of the 
millennial reign, when Jesus shall deliver up all things to the 
Father, having put down [destroyed] all opposition to God's laws 
[sin.] 1 Cor. 15. 

When Jesus cried "It is finished," he referred only to the first 
mentioned part of this work of atonement, viz: The giving of the 
ransom; this was now complete; the penalty of Adam's sin was 
now met for "Christ died for our sins according to the scripture"- 
-"gave himself a ransom for all to be testified in due time." 
"Who is a propitiation [satisfaction] for our sins, and not for 
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world." 1 John 2:2. 

Having thus "purchased us from death with his own precious 
blood, " all the race belong to him. A race of sinners they were 
having no right to life; a race of ransomed beings they are 
against whom justice has no claim, and who may be restored to 
perfect life at the pleasure or will of Jesus their redeemer, who 
proclaimed, that in due time "all that are in their graves shall 
hear the voice of the Son of Man and come forth. " And again: "I 
am he that liveth and was dead and behold I am alive 
forevermore, and have the keys of hell [hades— the grave] and of 
death." (Rev. 1:18.) Yes, says Paul: "For this purpose Christ was 
manifested, [in the flesh] that he might destroy death, and him 
that has the power of death, that is the devil. " 

But while we are thus informed of the plan of God to destroy 
"death" yet, nearly two thousand years have passed since the 
ransom was paid and still death reigns. Why does not the 
purchaser take possession of "the purchased possession?" Ah, he 
has a grand plan with regard to some of the race he has 
purchased-He will by trial of faith and patience develop and 
separate from the world "a little flock" whom he will associate 
with Himself as His bride. They will be a peculiar people, 
zealous of good works, and full of faith, who walk in his 
footsteps of self-sacrifice and entire giving up of their human 
nature -will and body-receiving instead the Divine nature-will 
and body. 

When the church— body— of Christ is made perfect through 
sufferings and trials, and united with Him [which event we 
believe to be so close at hand,] then the great work and reign of 



earth's new monarch- the second Adam-begins. Though 
possessing the power over evil ever since He rose from the 
grave its victor, yet he has not exercised that power up to the 
present time because evil is necessary to the development of his 
body. But when we are complete he shall take to himself his 
great power and reign. (Rev. 11:17.) This statement is applied as 
having its fulfillment at the end of the gospel age during the 
sounding of the seventh (symbolic) trumpet. 

Now let us inquire, how long will Christ reign-or exercise 
authority and rule? Answer. "He shall reign forever and ever," 
(Rev. 11:15,) that is, being associated with the Father, Christ 
(and we in him) shall always belong to the reigning and ruling 
power-Jesus at the Father's right hand (next in authority) and 
we at his right hand, consequently "above all principalities and 
powers." But in the especial sense of ruling over and subduing 
earth, the reign is limited to the period of time necessary to the 
restoring of all earth's people and affairs to a condition of at- 
one-ment or harmony with God, the Father, as Paul expresses it: 
"He must reign till he hath put all enemies under his feet. The 
last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. " For "He (the Father) 
hath put all things under his (Christ's) feet," but it is evident that 
the Father did not put himself under the control of Christ. "And 
when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son 
also, himself, be subject unto Him [the Father] that put all things 
under him, that God may be all in all." [or above all.] 1 Cor. 
15:25-28. 

Man having been restored to his original dominion every brute 
creature will recognize him as its Lord, and every human being 
will recognize "Christ as Lord to the glory of God the Father," 
(Phil. 2:1 1,) And thus will be completed the great work planned 
before our creation, commenced at the baptism of Jesus and 
ending with the close of the millennial reign, (Rev. 20:6,) viz: 
At-one-ment. 

Then "the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth," and 
His "will be done on earth as in heaven." 

That this is God's plan, is implied in the term "Restitution, " and 
is the 



(Continued on Seventh Page.) 

R165 : page 7 

(Continued from Second Page.) 



legitimate conclusion to be drawn from Paul's argument, 
Hebrews 2:6-9. He starts out with the original plan of God in 
creating man perfect -"Thou madest him a little lower than the 
angels; thou crownedst him with glory and honor and didst set 



him over the works of Thy hands. Thou hast put all [earthly] 
things in subjection under his feet. " But as we have seen, sin has 
marred all this glory and honor, and has degraded us far below 
angels; taking the dominion out of our hand and permitting 
"Death to reign," and if we look about us we will say with Paul 
that it seems as though God's plan was a failure, for though six 
thousand years have passed, "We see not yet all things put under 
him" [man]. But is there any hopeful sign to indicate that man 
may yet be restored to this honor and glory, and set over the 
earthly works of God's hand? Yes, we have the assurance that all 
God's purposes shall be accomplished, [Isa. 14:24,] and that a 
"seed of the woman" should yet destroy the serpent— evil-and 
"bless all the families of the earth. " And though this work is not 
yet accomplished yet we see a beginning of it. As Paul says, "we 
see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels," [the 
condition of a perfect man,] for the suffering of death... that "He, 
by the grace of God, should taste death for every man." Thus far 
had the plan progressed in Paul's day, and if he were living now, 
he would doubtless add, as we can, that the church, as his body, 
is about complete; that the gospel age of suffering with Him and 
"filling up the measure of the afflictions of Christ, which are 
behind" is ending and the millennial age in which we shall "live 
and reign with Christ a thousand years" is dawning. 

As those who expect to be of the bride— the body-of Christ and 
be glorified together with Him, we rejoice to think that the time 
is so near at hand when we shall be changed, leaving forever the 
human form and nature, and being made "like unto Christ's 
glorious body. " But one thing which adds much to our interest 
and rejoicing is the thought of the necessity of our development 
and change, as the body of the great deliverer, before the present 
ruler of earth-death-can be destroyed and the race liberated and 
brought to the liberty of the sons of God, as Adam and angels- 
free from the bondage of corruption -death. For we know that 
"they without us shall not be made perfect. " We must be 
perfected on the spiritual plane as divine beings before they can 
be perfected on the earthly plane as human beings. 

Seeing then what high honors and glory await us, and the 
blessings awaiting the world through us can any one wonder that 
we long for the happy moment of change? Surely not, and not 
only we, but the world, also, are waiting and hoping [though 
ignorantly] for a good time coming, for "The whole creation 
groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now waiting for the 
manifestation of [the Church] the sons of God. " (Rom. 
8:22,19.)- the sun of righteousness which "arises with healing 
in his wings" to heal, and perfect, and restore all things to the 
perfect will of God. 

Thus earth will have had, when man is restored, the following 
great 



OVERRULING POWERS: 

First-Man under God. Second -Death and evil under Satan. 
Third-Righteousness under Christ. Fourth-The first restored, 
i.e., man under God. 

In the second and third of these dynasties, viz.: The reigns of 
Satan and of Christ, the active rulers are invisible to humanity 
and their powers only recognizable by the effects and results. 
The devil is called "the prince [ruler] of this 

R166 : page 7 

world,"— "him that has the power of death, that is, the devil." 
The effects of His reign and rule have been, as we have seen, to 
degrade man in every way. How wonderfully successful he has 
been is evident as we look about us. Sin, misery and death are 
on every hand, and yet Satan, the ruler, is invisible, seen only 
through his agents, and he has plenty of them, for "his servants 
ye are to whom you render service. " We claim, then, that all 
persons or institutions or governments who aid in the work of 
death and degradation and oppression of right and truth, are 
Satan's agents. 

God classes all present governments of earth as Satan's. "The 
prince-ruler-of this world" would not permit any government 
which would not act in harmony with him, as long as he has the 
control, which will be until the end of this age, when the 
Redeemer takes his great power and reigns. Satan has ruled 
among the nations for ages, except the one nation, Israel, of 
which God says, "You only have I known of all the [nations] 
families of the earth. " (We have seen that they were used thus as 
a type of the higher spiritual Israel, the church, which was to be 
in the world, but not of it.) The time came, however, that God 
gave over even this nation as the others when they went into 
captivity to Babylon, and God's prophet said of the last reigning 
prince, "Take off the diadem, remove the crown; this shall not 
[continue to] be the same, I will overturn, overturn, overturn it 
[the kingdom] until He come whose right it is, and I will give it 
unto Him" [The Christ]. Ezek. 21:27. 

At the same time, God indicated that the government of earth 
was given over to depravity's rule, and pictures it to 
Nebuchadnezzar as 

A GREAT IMAGE 

illustrative of human power, divided into four parts, 
Nebuchadnezzar's government representing the head; the 
succeeding, Medo-Persian government represented by the breast 
and arms; and the belly and thighs representing the third or 
Grecian government; while the fourth and last part, the legs and 
feet represent the last phase of earthly government, the Roman 
Empire, which, in a divided form, still continues, and is to be 



followed by Messiah's Kingdom— the kingdom of heaven, 
"which shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms 
[not people], and it shall stand forever." Danl. 2:44. 

Thus, as a glorious image, did these earthly kingdoms appear to 
the natural man; and as glorious they still are regarded by the 
world. Extolled in prose and verse, through all generations, are 
their deeds of blood and violence, which shock the feelings of 
all possessed of the spirit of love. Their history is one successive 
record of crime and death, each of their heroes claiming higher 
honor than his predecessor because he had butchered greater 
numbers of his fellow-beings, and made more widows and 
orphans and more misery. No wonder that when God pictured 
the same four earthly governments to the holy prophet Daniel, 
he gave it as a beastly picture. (Dan. 7.) They are indeed beastly 
governments. How perfectly they represent, in their evil and 
death-dealing power, their master, the devil. The picture, or 
likeness of the fourth (Roman power) to Satan is so strong that 
Jesus, when presenting it in symbol in Revelation, almost 
invariably calls it "the dragon," "that old serpent, which is the 
devil and Satan," &c, thus using the names of its prince as a 
name for the kingdom. 

While God thus permits evil to triumph now, seemingly without 
restraint, and uses it as an agency for punishing sin, yet it is 
under an over-ruling guidance by which God "causes the wrath 
of man to praise Him, and the remainder He will restrain. " 

The inventions and arts of the last three centuries (machinery, 
printing, application of steam, electricity, &c.) have come about 
gradually, but we believe are none the less of God, and agencies 
now in preparation for the blessing of humanity during the 
coming reign of righteousness. These scientific attainments, 
which will so fully bless in the future, are even now exercising a 
powerful effect upon humanity, enlightening the understanding, 
and, by increasing the dependency of one upon another, it 
naturally tends to promote sympathy, affection and fraternity 
between the various members of the human family. 

But all of these blessings, while they serve to lift mankind in a 
measure out of evil, are only temporary helps. Satan is still equal 
to the occasion, and though he could not now induce millions of 
men to follow for years a leader for his glory's sake, he can 
foment angry strife between nations upon pretexts of honor, etc., 
and though men do not now fight as incessantly as of old, yet 
the "arts of war" more than keep pace with those of peace, so 
that to-day the standing armies of earth are far larger and far 
better prepared for mutual destruction than ever before. 

The progress of science and art fails to bring now the blessings 
which will result in the future, because avarice (selfishness) has 
crowded out love and benevolence. Capital and power combine 
to oppress the poor, and they in turn despise and envy the rich. 



Nor can we wonder if the masses of mankind notice this 
condition of affairs; and that as knowledge increases among 
them they should seek to band themselves together for self- 
protection, especially if they see, as in Europe, kings, emperors, 
nobles and landlords rolling in wealth and luxury, while some of 
them barely eke out an existence on the commonest necessaries 
of life, without luxury or comfort. All that they can earn more 
than will purchase meal, potatoes and salt, with coarse fabric for 
clothing, is required as tax to support these corrupt governments, 
which, like great boils, absorb the strength and vitality of 
humanity. So we see that Satan is still ruling over earth. Evil 
may change tactics according to the necessities of the hour, but 
it is evil still. 

God's word informs us that, by the general uprising of humanity 
and overthrow of governments, the new age will be introduced. 
In the coming struggle the two spiritual powers, Christ and his 
saints, and Satan and his angels, will each have earthly armies 
whose causes they will support and advance. Satan's will be the 
kings, chief captains, rich men and mighty men, [Rev. 19:19,] 
while Christ will espouse and bring to victory the cause of the 
oppressed, who, inspired by justice and right, will be used to 
some extent as agents to their own liberation from the thraldom 
of evil and oppression. 

How we see the preparation for this time of trouble in the world, 
going on all around us, and how unconsciously each one takes 
his place to play his part in the closing act of the reign of sin and 
death. In this country less oppressed and in every way more 
blessed than others, 

CAPITAL AND LABOR 

are arraying themselves against each other as if against enemies. 
Labor fearing that capital will grind the life out of it unless it 
organizes and protects itself; capital fearful of losing the upper 
hand of labor. Look abroad and see the Nihilists of Russia, the 
Land Leaguers and Liberals of Great Britain and Ireland, and the 
Socialists and Communists of Austria, Germany and France, and 
tell me do not all of these things, visible to our natural eye, 
corroborate what our spiritual eye of faith has seen by the light 
of the prophetic page, viz. : That "the day of the Lord is a day of 
trouble," and that we are now in the "harvest" of the gospel age, 
the chief reaper present, and the work of separation going on [in 
the church] between wheat and tares. Soon, probably by, 
possibly before, the fall of 1881, we shall be changed- born of 
the spirit [of which we are now begotten] into the glorious 
likeness of our Head. 

The third dynasty of earth, like the second, will be the ruling of 
an invisible power through seen agencies of earth. As now Satan 
reigns unseen, then "The Christ of God" will reign and rule 
unseen. As now sin abounds, so then the opposite, 



righteousness, will rule. As Satan now has agents in men and 
governments, so with Christ's reign, every man coming into 
harmony with truth and righteousness will be reckoned a servant 
of God. The kingdoms of this world being all overthrown, [Dan. 
2:44,] will be re-established on principles of justice and equity 
based upon the golden law of love to God and men. 

The chief nation of earth during that age, the word informs us, 
will be fleshly Israel, in glory and prominence exalted above all 
other nations -"The joy of the whole earth." And next in 
positions of favor and blessing will come other nations in 
proportion as they conform to the law of the Kingdom of God. 
Thus will the light of knowledge and truth emanating from the 
spiritual city-the church— the New Jerusalem, [Rev. 21.,] bless 
all nations and result in healing and blessing all mankind, until 
ultimately, having put down all opposition and brought all men 
to the condition of perfection and righteousness, the third empire 
will give place to the fourth, which is the first restored, viz: man 
over earth its lord and himself in perfect obedience to the King 
of Kings and Lord of Lords. Thus, "God [will be] all in all." 
Amen. "Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done, on earth as it is 
in heaven. " 



page 3 

TAKE HEART. 

Let me take heart! the present scene shall soon be o'er; 
The clustering clouds shall hide the sun at noon no more. 
The tears now dropping from my eyes shall be forgot; 
The joys undimmed by sin and misery, my lot. 

The storm now sweeping through the troubled sky be past; 
The longed-for morning without clouds arise at last. 
The hindmost shadow soon shall utterly depart; 
Then let me watch and wait, and hopefully take heart. 

-H. Grattan Guinness. 



R167 : page 3 



PLACE OF MEETING. 



To be "forever with the Lord" has ever been an important 
element of the Christian's hope. This hope has cheered and 
strengthened the true pilgrims in all generations. This has been 
the case even where a very imperfect understanding has 
obtained. Whatever has been believed among Christians as to 
how, when, or where they should meet the Lord, as to the fact of 
being with Him, they have often said, "That will be Heaven for 
me." 



We cannot think that only those who fully understand the 
subject beforehand will be accepted in His presence. In such a 
case, perhaps none would be accepted. But we believe it is both 
duty and privilege to search and learn more and more of this and 
all other Bible subjects. The beauty and harmony of the various 
parts of the word and plan is seen when each part receives due 
attention. 

Those who have believed that the spirits of just men could be 
made perfect and enter into the immediate presence of God, and 
there meet and dwell forever with the Lord, have in consequence 
regarded the coming of the Lord with indifference, so far at least 
as their own hope is concerned. On the other hand, those who 
have seen the import of Jesus' word, "If I go and prepare a place 
for you, I will come again and receive you to myself, that where 
I am there ye may be also," have necessarily made much of the 
return of Christ. 

While the latter class are doubtless correct as to the time of 
meeting the Lord, we think both may be holding extreme views 
as to the place of meeting. One class expects to meet Him in 
Heaven itself, the immediate presence of God, and the other 
class associate the meeting with earthly conditions, while we 
believe the meeting will be in a condition midway between the 
other two. The Lord shall descend, and we shall be caught up to 
meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. 
Comforting words! 1 Thess. 4:16-18. 

It may seem strange to some, in view of the simplicity of Paul's 
statement, that we should raise the question, "Where shall we 
meet the Lord?" Is it not plainly said we shall meet Him in the 
air, and is not this easily understood? But Peter says that he 
himself and "beloved brother Paul also," when speaking of these 
things, said things "hard to be understood." 2 Pet. 3:15,16. And 
we have seen that the truth concerning the trumpet's voices and 
fire associated with His coming does not lie on the surface. We 
need not be surprised, then, if the same be true of all the 
circumstances attending. 

By the study of the Bible we have been led to believe that as we 
advance from natural to spiritual things there is a corresponding 
advancement in the signification of words. Many examples of 
this are familiar to all careful readers. Take for example the 
terms bread, water, garment, light, heat, cold, hunger, thirst, 
nakedness, darkness. No one would think of giving these words 
the same signification, when applied to spiritual things, as when 
applied to natural things. A man might walk in the light of the 
brightest sun that ever shone, and yet be in the grossest spiritual 
darkness. All can apply this to the other terms. 

Air and spirit are primarily the same, yet who would think of 
reading "air" instead of "spirit" in the sublime statement of the 
word, "There is a spirit in man, and the inspiration [or in- 



breathing] of the Almighty giveth him understanding?" Or when 
it is declared "God is Spirit," who but the grossest materialist 
would read it, "God is air?" When Jesus breathed on His 
disciples, and said, "Receive ye the Holy Spirit," all Christians 
recognize the advancement in the use of words according to the 
relation between natural and spiritual things. 

A further application of the same principle is seen in the fact 
that Satan is called "the prince of the power of the air," and 
when his spiritual kingdom is overwhelmed by the incoming 
kingdom of Christ, it is said, "The powers of heaven shall be 
shaken. " In contrast with this shaking, Paul says we are to 
receive a kingdom which cannot be shaken or removed. Heb. 
12:27,28. 

Let this same principle be kept in mind, and our being caught up 
to meet the Lord in the air will have the deep significance of our 
being exalted to power with Christ in the Kingdom of Heaven. 
The kingdom of the air [firmament] and "the Kingdom of 
Heaven" are primarily the same. 

Place and distance in natural things are used to represent 
condition in the spiritual. No one would think of applying the 
expressions "coming to God," or "coming to Jesus," literally. 
When we sing "Nearer, my God, to Thee, " or when Paul says, 
"Let us draw near with a true heart," literal place or distance is 
not thought of, but to be more and more like our great Example 
is the burden of the heart of the true worshiper. "He that cometh 
to God must believe that He is, and that He is the re warder of 
them that diligently seek Him. " Heb. 1 1 :6. 

Translation (or change) is a term which we believe is subject to 
the same law of interpretation. As words are translated or 
changed from one language to another, and so changed in form, 
and as men or things may be translated or changed from one 
place to another, so spiritually men may be translated or 
changed from one condition to another. Thus, when men come 
over from the devil to the Lord's side, they are said to be 
delivered from the power of darkness and translated into the 
kingdom of God's dear Son. Col. 1:13. All will agree that this 
translation is a change not of place, but of condition. If this 
principle holds good as to the begetting of the Spirit, may it not 
also hold good as to the birth of the Spirit. 

In view of this so common principle of the word, we cannot 
regard with favor the idea that the saints are to be caught away 
in the flesh (however perfect that flesh may be) to meet Christ in 
any locality. The translation, in our mind, can mean no less than 
a change from the natural condition to the spiritual condition. 
The ascent of Aaron, the saint, to meet Moses in the Mount of 
God, is clearly a type of the saints going up to meet Christ. The 
mountain is a type of the mountain or Kingdom of God, in 
which we shall meet Christ. From that time forward, Moses and 



Aaron were manifested in power and great glory. So from the 
time the saints are exalted, they will be manifested or made to 
appear in power and great glory. 

That the saints are not to be in an earthly condition at that time 
seems clear from Paul's statement that we are not come (or 
coming) to Mount Sinai, a mount that could be touched, that 
burned with fire, &c, "but ye are come [or coming] to Mount 
Zion, the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem," &c. 
Heb. 12:18-22. 

If it were an earthly mountain, it could be touched. Paul says 
this one can not be touched; hence it is a heavenly or spiritual 
mountain— a very high spiritual condition. When the Deliverer 
comes out of Zion, we may safely conclude that it is not an 
earthly army with guns and broadswords, but a heavenly army, 
wielding the sword of the Spirit, which sword proceeds out of 
His mouth, i.e., "The Word of God." The victory of that army 
will surely be a blessing to the nations. Oh, that we may be 
prepared to meet Christ in His Kingdom! 

J. H. P. 



R167 : page 3 

AFTER CHANGE-BEFORE GLORY. 

"I tell you, in that night there shall be two men in one bed. The 
one shall be taken, and the other shall be left. Two women shall 
be grinding together. The one shall be taken, and the other left. 
And they (the disciples) answered and said unto Him, "When, 
Lord?" (that is, when will they be taken). And He said unto 
them, "Wheresoever the body is, thither will the eagles be 
gathered together." Luke 17:34-37. 

The above verses, in connection with others of a similar nature, 
have received special attention for several months. Believing, as 
we do, that we are drawing very near the time when this will be 
fulfilled, it is important that we try to arrive at a correct solution 
of the matter. Further, as the light shines more and more, we 
also believe that when due, this, like other things, will be 
understood by those in the shining way; hence, if we can now 
understand how or in what manner this will be fulfilled, it is 
evidence that we are near the event spoken of. Like other 
portions of God's word, this has to be taken in connection with 
other scriptures in order to arrive at the whole truth. So now, by 
comparing scripture with scripture, we shall endeavor to set 
forth the manner in which this will be fulfilled. First; we do not 
think that the scriptures teach that those who are taken will be 
taken to any locality (not Mt. Zion, or any definite point), 
neither do we think that those when taken, and for some time 
afterward, will be invisible to those around them. No, we 



believe, after they are taken, they will be visible and to all 
appearances just the same, but in reality, they will not be the 
same as before taken, for if they were, then to be taken would 
not mean anything. Some may ask, how can they appear the 
same, and yet not be. 

We find angels have appeared as men, yet they are not men, but 
are spiritual bodies. When Jesus was raised from the dead, He 
was born of the spirit, and hence a spiritual body, for that which 
is born of the spirit is spirit, and hence is not flesh. John 3:6. 
Though he was a spiritual body, yet he appeared (only appeared) 

R168 : page 3 

as a man. Now, could He not have remained under the vail of 
flesh all of those forty days after the time He rose? We think so, 
for if He could appear as a man (because of the vail) for a short 
time, He could have remained so all the time He was on earth 
after His resurrection. This being true then, one can be a 
spiritual body and yet appear as a natural fleshly body. Again, if 
Jesus did so, and we are to be made like Him, then we could be 
taken or changed to spiritual bodies, and yet remain under the 
vail and to all appearances the same, and yet not be the same in 
reality. The fact that when we are changed we will be seen, is 
proven by the taking of Elijah. 

If you will read (2 Kings 2:10), you will notice a conditional 
promise to Elisha. He had asked for a double portion of Elijah's 
spirit, and Elijah says, "Thou hast asked a hard thing, but if thou 
see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee, but if 
not [that is, if you do not see me], it shall not be so. " Verse 15 
informs us that the spirit of Elijah did rest on Elisha. Then we 
know he must have seen Elijah when taken, for this was the 
condition on which he would receive the spirit. In Verse 1 1 
there are two statements, viz.: Elijah and Elisha were parted 
asunder by a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and Elijah went 
up by a whirlwind into heaven. This last event was after they 
were parted, but how long after we are not informed. Elisha saw 
the first act, but not the latter. Now, what we want to consider, is 
the separation, or first act, for this, I believe, shows the change 
or taking of the saints, and what I now want to prove is that we 
will be taken (changed to spiritual bodies) and yet be seen, just 
as Elijah was seen, when he was taken from Elisha. Elijah has 
been a perfect type of the church, as all our readers know, from 
Pentecost down; hence, when he was taken, it must have been a 
type of our change, for the church is not complete until we, the 
living, are taken. Then the manner of Elijah's change, is 
important, if we would understand how we shall be changed. 
We now leave this type and look at another, which, seems to 
teach the same thing. I refer to Moses and Aaron. We 
understand Moses to be a type of Christ, and Aaron a type of the 
overcomers. Aaron is mentioned as going forth to meet Moses 
as we go forth to meet Jesus; "And when he (Aaron) seeth thee 



(Moses), he will be glad in his heart." So will we be glad when 
we "see (Jesus) as he is." Verse 27 informs us that Aaron met 
Moses in the Mount of God, and kissed him. This meeting of 
Moses and Aaron, as also the parting of Elijah and Elisha, we 
understand to typify our change. We think so, for this reason, 
viz. : It was after they (Moses and Aaron) met in the mount that 
Moses told Aaron all the words of the Lord, who had sent him, 
and all the signs which he had commanded him. Verse 28. This 
instruction, seems to show the increase of knowledge 

R168:page4 

that will be acquired by the change to the spiritual condition and 
yet that they will be seen afterward and remain, to all 
appearances, the same, is proven by the work of Aaron after he 
met Moses. Verse 16 reads, "He (Aaron) shall be thy spokesman 
unto the people,... and he shall be to thee (Moses) instead of a 
mouth, and thou shalt be to him instead of God. " This proves 
clearly that there is a difference between the condition of Moses 
and Aaron, at least so far as teaching the people is concerned, 
and if Aaron represents the church, and we were (when changed, 
or when meeting Jesus) to go into the invisible condition as He 
is, how then could we be the spokesman unto the people? Here 
is a point worthy of notice. The main difference between Moses 
and Aaron after they met seems to have been that Aaron was the 
active agent in communicating to Pharaoh (the world), so the 
only difference between us (when changed) and Jesus will be 
that we will be under the vail, and hence visible- the active 
agents or representatives of the unseen kingdom of God. "The 
Kingdom of God cometh not with observation" (outward show). 
Luke 17:20. 

After the meeting of Moses and Aaron in the Mount, they went 
and gathered together the elders of Israel, and Aaron spake all 
the words... and did the signs, and the people believed. Verses 
29-31. This would represent that Jesus and the saints were in a 
sense together, and yet the saints only would be seen by the 
world, for Aaron spake the words, did the signs, and the people 
believed. 

After the meeting of Moses and Aaron, there were ten plagues. 
During the first three, Moses does the work through Aaron. We 
read: "Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh,... and Aaron cast 
down his rod." Ex. 7:10. Again, "The Lord spake unto Moses, 
say unto Aaron, take they rod,... and Moses and Aaron did so, 
and he (that is, Aaron) lifted up the rod and smote the waters... in 
the sight of Pharaoh. "...Verses 19,20. Again, "The Lord spake 
unto Moses, say unto Aaron, stretch forth thine hand, and Aaron 
did so,... and the frogs came." Ex. 8:5,6. Verse 16 informs us 
that Aaron acted as prophet, and did the work connected with 
the third plague. We believe that those whom Aaron represents 
(the little flock) will be really spiritual bodies, but during the 
three first plagues will be under the vail, and hence appear as 



prophets (teachers) unto the people, and in this condition will be 
the prophet or mouth-piece of the Christ, as Aaron was of Moses 
after meeting him. 

This company of changed saints it appears are those brought to 
view in Rev. 15:1-4, standing on, as it were, a sea of glass; the 
sea mingled with fire (people in the midst of judgments); these 
have the harps of God; these are they who had gotten the victory 
over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and over 
the number of his name the overcomers. These sing the song of 
Moses, the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb. Not the 
song sung by Moses and the Children of Israel after the 
overthrow of the Egyptians, but the song of Moses, when the 
elders of the tribes were gathered together. See Deut. 31:28- 
32;l-4. Moses sang: Ascribe ye greatness unto our God,. ..for all 
His ways are judgment.... A God of truth,... just and right is He." 
The company on the sea of glass sing: "Great and marvelous are 
thy works,. ..just and true are thy ways, ...for all nations shall 
come and worship before thee, for thy judgments are made 
manifest. " We find the words are nearly identical, and hence the 
same song. This company on the sea of glass are before the 
throne (not on the throne). Rev. 4:6. 

This picture is given, however, after the throne was set, and one 
sat on the throne (verse 2), and out of the throne proceed 
lightnings and thunderings (judgments). So in Rev. 15 we have 
those on a sea of glass making a proclamation during troublous 
times, mingled with fire. It would also appear that this same 
company of changed ones are among the number mentioned in 
Rev. 14:1-5, viz.: "A Lamb stood on the Mount Zion, and with 
him are one hundred and forty- four thousand. These are in the 
Mount, as Moses and Aaron met in the Mount. These harp with 
their harps (like those on the sea of glass). These sing a new 
song "before the throne;" these are virgins; these follow the 
Lamb, and in their mouth was found no guile; "for they are 
without fault before the throne of God. Notice, these are before 
the throne-not on it. This is likely the position referred to in 
Luke 21:36, viz.: "that ye may be accounted worthy to escape,... 
and stand before the Son of Man. " But some one says, "When 
changed are we not exalted to the throne?" Not necessarily so. 
Jesus was a spiritual body, and at times appeared under the vail 
before He ascended to the Father's throne. (See Acts 2:22-36.) 

Then we might be changed to spiritual bodies, and remain under 
the vail of flesh for a time, before we are exalted to our Lord's 
throne. But some one says, "Is not a spiritual body a glorified 
body?" No. Jesus was a spiritual body before He was glorified 
(exalted to power). John 7:39. Then we might be spiritual bodies 
before we are glorified. We, the living ones, when changed to 
spiritual bodies, and while yet under the vail of flesh and before 
we are glorified, are probably those who are spoken of in Isa. 
52:7-8, viz.: "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of 



Him (The feet represent the taken ones under the vail and are 
said to be of Him because in the spiritual condition as He is) that 
bringeth good tidings, ...that publisheth salvation; that sayeth 
unto Zion, thy God reigneth; thy watchmen shall lift up the 
voice; with the voice together shall they sing, for they shall see 
eye to eye (Now they do not) when the Lord shall bring again 
Zion. The above description would seem to indicate a different 
condition of the watchmen than that now held; also the work 
here is for Israel, just as the first work of Aaron, after meeting 
Moses, was among the elders of Israel. Israel, or my people, in 
the type (Ex. 8:23), primarily refers to the servant company 
down here and are spoken of as my people in Rev. 18:4. The 
servant company here will be separated from Babylon by the 
three first plagues, or during the time that the proclamation of 
Rev. 14:6-10 is being made by the taken but vailed saints, just as 
Aaron was spokesman to the people during the three plagues 
that caused the division between Pharaoh's people and the 
people of God. 

We suppose that any who have a mind to apprehend spiritual 
things can see how, by the evidence already given, we could be 
changed to spiritual bodies, and yet remain under the vail of 
flesh and at the same time see Jesus without His coming in the 
flesh or appearing under that vail to us. Any one who will use 
Moses and Aaron as a type must give up the idea of Jesus 
appearing to us in the flesh. Notice, Aaron went up to meet 
Moses in the mount. Yes, the church goes up toward the 
condition of Jesus, but Jesus does not come 

R169:page4 

down to the condition of the church. If Jesus were to come in the 
flesh, as some teach, then He could be the prophet Himself, and 
the very fact that Aaron was still prophet after they met proves 
that we will be under the vail, and hence in a condition to speak 
to the people, while Jesus will not so appear, and hence could 
not be prophet (teacher) even as Moses was not. We being in the 
spiritual condition Jesus will be our God as Moses was to 
Aaron. The fact that Aaron met and saw Moses in the mount, 
indicates that we must go up, or into the spiritual condition 
before we can meet and see Jesus. When He shall appear we 
shall be like Him and see Him as He is?" [1 John 3:2.] The 
change comes to us not to Him, "we shall be like Him." "We 
shall see Him as He is," a spiritual body; not as he was, in flesh. 

The fact that we will see Jesus after our change, though still 
under the vail, is proven by another type, viz. : that of Isaac and 
Rebecca: "And Rebecca lifted up her eyes, and when she saw 
Isaac she lighted off the camel, therefore she took a vail and 
covered herself." (Gen. 24:64-65.) When she saw Isaac 
represents one change. Then the putting on of the vail would 
show that we will remain vailed for a time after our change. The 
reason she is said to put on the vail is because when she saw 



Isaac she was changed, and hence the vail is no longer her real 
condition, but the assumed. Just so when we see Jesus we will 
have been changed and though under the vail it will only be put 
on, so to speak, and only because of this vail (the flesh) will we 
appear the same to the world. We will have additional power of 
utterance and knowledge, and perhaps certain miraculous 
powers which will be demonstrated, as was the case with Aaron 
after meeting Moses. We believe that the change we have been 
considering is near, much nearer, perhaps, than many are aware 
of. Let us be careful for nothing. Let us be Holy, for without 
Holiness shall no man see the Lord. Let all strive to enter in, ere 
the Master shuts too the door, for then there will be no more 
admission to the little flock, who shall finally sit with Jesus on 
the throne. Yes we shall soon be in the Kingdom. 

Not many monfhs- 

Their course shall run, 

Not many mornings rise, 

Ere all its glories stand revealed 

To our transported eyes. 



A. D. J. 



R170:page4 

BEFORE THE THRONE. 

"For since we believe that Jesus died and rose, so also, we 
believe that God, through Jesus, will lead forth with him those 
who fell asleep. For this we affirm to you by the Lord's word, 
that we, the living, who are left over to the coming of the Lord, 
will by no means precede those who fell asleep." (1 Thess. 4:14- 
15. Diaglott.) In the article in 

page 4 

which we considered how we, the living would be changed to 
spiritual bodies and yet remain for a time under the vail, it will 
be noticed that there is no mention made of the dead in Christ. 
From the above text we find that our changes cannot come until 
the dead are raised, "for we shall not precede them. " In order to 
understand this, we must look at several scriptures. 

1st. We will notice our pattern, Jesus. We find that after He was 
raised from the dead, (a spiritual body, born of the spirit) He 
was not seen by any one except when He showed Himself. This 
being true then, He could have been present [as He was 40 days. 
Acts 1 :3], and not have been seen at all; just so we now think He 
is actually present, 

R170:page4 

but not seen. And if Jesus can be present, and not seen, the dead 
in Christ could be raised and not seen, because when raised they 



will be like Jesus. Our understanding of the matter is this, viz: 
that the dead in Christ, will be raised spiritual bodies; then we, 
the living, changed to spiritual bodies, the only difference being, 
that they will not be seen; that is, will not appear under the vail, 
[the flesh] while we remain for a time vailed, yet our real 
condition will be the same. The type of Moses and Aaron 
teaches the resurrection of the dead before we meet Jesus. 
Before they met [Ex. 4:27,] you will notice that the angel of the 
Lord appeared unto him [Moses] in a flame of fire out of the 
midst of a bush [Ex. 3:2-6]; here God seems to introduce the 
idea of the resurrection. We find that Jesus gives the key in Luke 
20:29-38. We know that it is the resurrection of the dead in 
Christ He is talking about, for He says: they which shall be 
accounted worthy to obtain that world and the resurrection from 
the dead... these cannot die any more... [because the first 
resurrection, the second death hath no power over them, they 
cannot die again. [Rev. 20:6.] Now that the dead [viz: this class 
of the dead] are raised, even Moses showed at the bush... that is, 
the dead in Christ are raised at this point of time, which we find 
is before Aaron went to meet Moses and hence, before any one 
of the ten plagues were poured out. Then if [as has been shown] 
the meeting of Aaron and Moses represents our change and the 
dead must first be raised, this transaction at the bush is in the 
right place and harmonizes with the statement by Paul. "The 
dead in Christ rise first." 

In Rev. 15 we find a company on the sea of glass, making a 
proclamation. This sea of glass condition is before the throne, 
[Rev. 4:6.] we notice in verse 5, that there are seven lamps of 
fire burning before the throne, (which are the seven 
congregations, Rev. 1:20, E.D.) these seven lamps bring to mind 
the complete gospel church. And as they are before the throne, 
and the sea of glass, is also before the throne and there is a 
company on the sea of glass, we conclude it must be the 
overcomers in that position. We then conclude as follows, viz: 
"that this scene is, after the dead in Christ are raised and we the 
living changed and though all can sing the same song, they 
could remain invisible and yet we under the vail, might be 
visible. The seven lamps of fire might be burning [the church 
complete] because we are all in the spiritual condition, they 
would be visible to us and we to them. They 

R170 : page 5 

will not be visible to the world, neither would we, were it not for 
the vail. With this understanding of the matter we will now look 
at another point, viz: (Rev. 14:1-5.) ...A lamb stood on the 
Mount Zion, and with Him are 144,000; this company represents 
to our mind the complete church, and hence, the resurrected 
saints as well as the changed living saints; these harp with their 
harps. ..[like those on the sea of glass] these sing as it were a new 
song... these are the first fruits [overcomers] unto God and the 



Lamb and these are without fault before the throne of God... just 
as the company on the sea of glass are before the throne. Now 
we think the evidence is conclusive, that these are the 
overcomers, for the following reasons: 1st. We know of no more 
exalted position before the throne than the sea of glass. 2d. We 
know not who else should be the first fruits unto God and stand 
on the Mount Zion with the Lamb [Moses and Aaron met in the 
Mount.] 3d. We know not who the seven burning lamps could 
represent, if not the little flock. 4th. Neither do we know who 
the 144,000 could be if not those. 

Both "the one hundred and forty-four thousand," and the ones 
"as it were, on the sea of glass," are said to be "before the 
throne," which is the location of the sea of glass. Should we not 
conclude, therefore, that they are the same— the bride— "before 
the throne" signifying before the exaltation to the glory of 
power? The song sung is after they are seen on the Mount Zion 
with the Lamb, and this is in harmony with the type. After 
Moses and Aaron met in the Mount, Aaron did his work. So 
these are represented making a proclamation after the meeting 
with the Lamb. Our position then would be this, viz.: All the 
dead in Christ raised; we, the living, changed. All these would 
be in the spiritual condition. All remain before the throne until 
the proclamation to be made is completed by us who remain 
under the vail. The fact that they are raised but not seen, while 
we are changed but seen, seems to be shown by Isa. 52:7-8, viz.: 
"How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of Him?" The 
thought is this: Jesus, the Head (of the body), is beyond the vail 
and is not seen; the dead in Christ are raised, and they are 
beyond the vail-not seen. We, the living (the feet), are changed, 
but we are seen for a time, while a work is being done. The feet 
(so to speak) walk the earth, and they publish peace,... bring 
good tidings, ...that saith unto Zion, "Thy God reigneth, and we 
shall see eye to eye (because we are changed), when the Lord 
shall bring again Zion. The types of Elijah and Rebecca, we 
know, have represented the living phase of the gospel church 
from Pentecost down, but when we come to the closing work, 
viz.: when Elijah was taken, and when Rebecca saw Isaac, it 
proves the previous resurrection of the dead in Christ, for in this 
matter we cannot precede those who sleep; hence, when we see 
Him, the dead must have been previously raised, and so those 
two are in harmony with that of Moses and Aaron and Paul's 
statement. While they meet Jesus beyond the vail, we can be 
changed and meet both them and Jesus and yet remain under the 
vail, and we can all [resurrected and changed] remain on the sea 
of glass position for a time before the throne and not interfere 
with our being finally exalted to the throne. We shall consider 
this again. The spiritual body condition of both dead and living 
will obtain before any are glorified [or sit on the throne]. Let us 
lay aside every weight that we, being in Him, may be accounted 



worthy to escape— be changed— and the glory will follow in 
God's due season. 



A. D. J. 



R169 : page 5 

THE MARRIAGE--IN GLORY. 

And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God 
and from His power, and no man was able to enter into the 
temple till the seven plagues of the seven angels were fulfilled. 
[Rev. 15:8.] In two articles preceding we have endeavored to set 
forth the manner in which we will be taken, or changed to 
spiritual bodies, and yet for a time remain under the vail, while 
the dead in Christ will at some time be spiritual bodies, and not 
under the vail. In this position we understand they are before the 
throne, but believing that we shall finally sit with Jesus on the 
throne, let us see if there is anything to throw light on this point, 
though the saints, after they are taken, will be seen for a time. It 
is also clear that we will finally pass beyond the vail and be seen 
no more. 

We found in looking at the taking of Elijah, who is one type, 
that there were two events. He was first parted from Elisha by a 
chariot of fire and horses of fire, but he went up into heaven by a 
whirlwind. The first we expressed as showing our change, and 
that we would then be seen as was Elijah, but the latter we 
understand to show, when we will leave the vail and be seen no 
more, and this is in harmony with the statement in 2 Kings 2:12. 
I also find there were two changes in the movements of Aaron, 
who is also a type. You will remember that during the three first 
plagues he was represented as the prophet of Moses and as 
spokesman unto the people. We explained this as teaching that 
we, after our change, would under the vail of flesh be as 
prophets (teachers) to the people here, but we find that after the 
third plague Aaron is never spoken of as the prophet of Moses 
or as spokesman unto the people. Notice Ex. 9:8. The Lord said 
unto Moses and unto Aaron, (Previous to this the Lord said unto 
Moses; Say unto Aaron), take to you handfuls of ashes of the 
furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it toward the heaven in the sight 
of Pharaoh, and they (Moses and Aaron) did so. At this point 
there seems to be some difference in Aaron. The Lord now 
speaks to him direct, as He had done to Moses. At this point, 
when Aaron is no longer the mouthpiece, his leaving the vailed 
condition seems to be typified. Now, at the same point, when 
Elijah went up into heaven and the Lord speaks face to face with 
him he is no longer seen. 

When we cease to appear under the vail is when the glorification 
of all takes place, and this is in harmony with Jesus, our 



forerunner. He was a spiritual body, and for forty days appeared 
at times under the vail, but when He ascended into heaven, (Acts 
1:11), and was seen no more, then He was glorified. In our text 
we come to a time when the temple is to be filled with smoke 
from the glory of God. We find this takes place just before the 
pouring out of the seven plagues, and is a parallel to the time 
when Aaron changes his position. After that he was no longer 
prophet. Neither will we be after our glorification. This 
glorification of all, I understand to be, the marriage of the Lamb. 
We are to be changed, that we may be fashioned like unto His 
glorious body, (Phil. 3:21), and if so be that we suffer with Him, 
then we may also be glorified together with Him. (Rom. 8:17.) 

This glorifying together we believe is the making one with Him 
in the fullest sense, and this follows the spiritual body condition. 
This will be when we shall be exalted to His throne and sit with 
Him. Jesus cannot appear with us in glory until we are glorified 
with Him. We find in Matt. 25:31-40 that when the Son of Man 
shall come in His glory, and all the holy angels with Him, then 
shall He sit upon the throne of His glory. We are with Him on 
the throne, hence the glory and our being on the throne are 
associated, but we can be spiritual bodies without the glory, and 
be before the throne. This same thought, viz. : first the change 
and then the glorification, or marriage, is also shown in the type 
of Isaac and Rebecca. When she lifted up her eyes and saw Isaac 
seems to show our change. We see Him when like him, but 
when he took her into his mother Sarah's tent, and she became 
his wife, [Gen. 24:67], which was after they met, seems to bring 
us to the point when the temple would be glorified and we 
become His wife. 

The thought that the glorification is the marriage and not the 
change to spiritual bodies is further proven by the following: 
Jesus ascended unglorified. [John 7:39]. He was to come in like 
manner, [Acts 1:11], then when we see Him it will be when He 
is unglorified, represented by Rebecca's seeing Isaac, but when 
we are glorified together with Him, would be shown by Isaac's 
taking Rebecca and making her his wife. Hence we go in with 
Him to the marriage. This is progressive: first, into a condition 
for the change; second, from that into glory with Him. 

We find in our text that just when the temple is filled with glory, 
is just before the pouring out of the seven plagues, and that is 
when the church is called the bride, viz. : when glorified. [See 
Rev. 21:9-1 1]. Then came unto me one of the seven angels 
which had the seven vials full of the seven last plagues, [Full? 
yes,] saying, come hither, I will show thee the bride, the Lamb's 
wife. He showed me the Holy Jerusalem. Having the glory of 
God, etc., here when glorified the church is called the bride. 
Hence this must be at or after the temple is filled with glory. The 
glorification and exaltation of the bride to the throne seems to be 
the main difference between the little flock and the great 



multitude, [the servants]. They certainly get spiritual life but 
apparently do not have the glory of the bride. The city was 
lighted by the temple for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb 
are the temple of it, and the glory of those [the temple] did 
lighten it [the city]. [Rev. 21:22-23]. Then the city is the light of 
the nation. [Verse 24]. In order to fully understand this matter 
and harmonize the various scriptures, it seems necessary to 
recognize the difference between one change [when we are 
made spiritual bodies] and the glorification of those spiritual 
bodies. This thought seems suggested by the building of the 
temple by Solomon. The getting out of the stones and timbers 
seems to be the work done during the gospel age, from 
Pentecost down. [1 Kings 3:18]. The building of the temple we 
apprehend is something different. It was built of stone made 
ready before brought thither to place of building, so that there 
was neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of iron heard in the 
house while it was in building. [1 Kings 6:7]. This shows the 
noiseless resurrection of the dead in Christ and change of the 
living, both classes changed to spiritual bodies. It was, however, 
after the temple was built that the glory of the Lord filled the 
House of the Lord. [1 Kings, 8:11]. Hence, if the building shows 
the change of dead and living to spiritual bodies, then the 
glorification must be something different from the change. 
Again, the fact that the temple was built and then glorified rather 
proves that all, dead and 

R170 : page 5 

living, will be made spiritual bodies before any are glorified. 
This would be in harmony with [Rev. 15:1-8]. The seven angels, 
clothed in pure and white linen [righteousness of the saints, Rev. 
19:8] and having their breasts girded with golden girdles, [verse 
6], seem to represent the overcoming church complete, dead 
raised, and living changed. If so, we find these on the sea of 
glass condition, [before the throne], singing a song [making a 
proclamation] before they are glorified-exalted to the throne. 
When on the sea of glass they are spiritual bodies, hence the 
temple is built before it is filled with glory. This sea of glass or 
spiritual body condition, we believe, will obtain before long, 
while the glorification or final exaltation of the saints will not 
take place for some time afterwards. Let us watch and be sober. 
Let us assemble ourselves together, and so much the more, as 
we see the day [time] approaching. The time seems short. 

A. D. J. 



R170 : page 5 



"FALSE CHRISTS." 

"Then if any man shall say unto you; lo, here is Christ, or there; 
believe it not. For there shall arise false Christs and false 
prophets and shall show great signs and wonders; insomuch that 
if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect. Behold I 
have told you before. Wherefore, if they shall say unto you; 
behold He is in the desert; go not forth: behold He is in the 
secret chambers; believe it not." Matt. 24:23-26. 

We have reason for believing that after 1881, there will be 
wonderful spiritual manifestations. The prince of the power of 
the air... [Devil and his angels, Eph 2:2.]-The rulers of the 
darkness of this world [wicked spirits-6:12 margin] will now 
make a last great effort previous to their binding, at which time 
these powers will be subdued. [Rev. 20:2.] Those angels which 
kept not their first estate God hath reserved in everlasting [age- 
lasting] chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great 
day. Jude 6. They were cast down to hell. ("Tartarus" lower 
atmosphere— our air.) 2 Pet. 2:4. For 6000 years these spiritual 
powers have been deceiving and misleading 

R170 : page 6 

mankind. These like the good angels, have also had power to 
appear as men, but they must always appear in the dark, for God 
had placed them under darkness. This fact recognized would 
explain many of the spiritualistic manifestations of to-day, 
which otherwise cannot be accounted for. Of late years many 
have been deceived into believing that they saw some of their 
dead friends. 

Which will you believe, God or the Devil? Notice: "Ye shall not 

R171 : page 6 

surely die." Gen. 3:4. Now in his various manifestations and in 
personating dead people and appearing to their friends, is not the 
Devil carrying out and trying to corroborate the lie he started in 
Eden? Surely he is. Jesus well said of him: He is a liar and the 
father of it. John 8:44. If the Devil has succeeded in keeping up 
this lie for so long a time, and to-day has nearly all the world 
believing what he said; if he has done so much, and by 
manifestations in darkness has caused many to fall, what will be 
the result when he thus carries on in the light? For remember, 
that he was only to be confined in darkness unto the judgment of 
the great day, and as we have now entered upon that time or day, 
we expect much of his work to be carried on in the light. And 
spiritualists now claim that they can materialize in broad 
daylight. We would advise that all believe what God said, viz.: 
"Ye shall die, hence, ye can not see dead friends until raised 
from the dead. " And the Devil does not do that work. 

Paul says: "Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light." 
2 Cor. 1 1 : 14. If so, and if he has the power to appear as an angel 



of light is he not liable to deceive? How significant then is our 
text, viz. : "There shall arise false Christs and shall show signs 
and wonders. ..and if any shall say to you.. .he (Jesus) is in the 
desert or secret chambers... believe it not." Notice that this takes 
place during the presence of Jesus. Vs. 27, E.D. It would seem 
then from our text that there will false Christs arise and show 
themselves as Jesus did after his resurrection, and many will be 
saying, lo, here or there. If Satan is transformed into an angel of 
light and is to appear thus, and if we look for Jesus to appear to 
us or come to us in the flesh, would it not be an easy matter for 
us to be deceived? We think so. We think that this warning of 
our Savior is absolute proof that neither he nor any of the 
resurrected saints will so appear; hence, of any manifestations 
there may be, we will conclude that it is neither Jesus nor 
resurrected saints. Let no man deceive you; remember Jesus has 
foretold you, that it will not be so. The Devil will certainly try to 
take advantage of those who are so looking for Jesus, for he 
could not deceive those who believe in his presence as the 
lightning-invisible, who do not believe that He will appear in 
the flesh. The danger lies in our being led away from the truth so 
as to look for Jesus in that way, for we feel sure that those who 
still retain the truth, will, at the time the appearances take place, 
be in a safe condition. Our text says: "that if possible they shall 
deceive the very elect. Notice, it is not possible. We understand 
that the elect are at the time referred to in the spiritual body 
condition, though under the vail. 

For this there is proof. We find Paul speaking in this way (1 
Tim. 4:1): "Now the spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter 
times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing 
spirits and doctrines [teachings] of devils. Also (2 Tim. 3:1-9), 
"This know also, that in the last days, perilous times shall 
come.... Men shall be lovers of pleasure more than lovers of 
God; having a form of godliness ...[must be professed 
Christians] ever learning, and never able to come to the 
knowledge of the truth. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood 
Moses, so also do these resist the truth." Here is the key. If we 
will now go back and look at the time referred to, we will get 
some light. (See Ex. 7:10-12). Aaron cast down his rod before 
Pharaoh and his servants and it [the rod] became a 
serpent.... Now the magicians of Egypt,... they did in like manner 
with their enchantments, ...and their rods became serpents, ...but 
Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods. When Aaron smote the 
waters of the river with his rod, they became blood [verse 20], 
but also did the magicians of Egypt [verse 22]. Also, when 
Aaron stretched forth his rod, frogs came upon the land of 
Egypt, and likewise did the magicians. Ex. 8:5-7. Now you will 
notice that all this opposition took place after Moses and Aaron 
met in the Mount (Ex. 4:27), and yet it was while Aaron was 
spokesman unto the people and acted as prophet of Moses to 
Pharaoh. Verse 16. 



As the meeting of Moses and Aaron represents the change of the 
saints, then we know that the resistance spoken of by Paul (2 
Tim. 3:8) is due after our change, and while we are yet here 
under the vail. These did deceive Pharaoh, but not Aaron, for 
Aaron had greater power than they. So, now, these false Christs 
(magicians of Egypt— the world) will deceive many, but they 
cannot possibly deceive us, for we (as represented by Aaron) 
will have been previously changed. The next plague following 
that of the frogs, was Aaron's bringing up lice on the land of 
Egypt. Ex. 8:16. But when the magicians tried, they could not do 
this,. ..and they say to Pharaoh, this is the finger of God. Verses 
18-19. Yes, there will be a time, and not far distant, when the 
world shall realize that there is a higher power, and though 
Satan and his angels will in the next few years do wonders, yet 
they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be made 
manifest to all as was the folly of Jannes and Jambres. It will be 
noticed that it was only during two plagues that the magicians 
could stand before and do as Aaron did. They were not able to 
stand quite all the time that Aaron was spokesman unto the 
people. God says unto Moses and unto Aaron, take to you 
handfuls of ashes, ...and they did so, and it became a boil upon 
the Egyptians and magicians. Ex. 9:8-10. This we understand to 
be where Aaron enters into the glory of Moses, and God says 
unto Aaron as unto Moses. This apparent change in the 
condition of Aaron is just the time that the seven plagues 
commenced, and there we believe the power of Satan will begin 
to be curtailed. We believe the same order will obtain here, viz.: 
while the saints are under the vail and acting as teachers unto the 
people, and during the three plagues, Satan will manifest great 
power, but when the church is glorified (Rev. 15:8,) which is 
just before the seven plagues, Satan cannot longer stand, and by 
the time all the plagues are poured out He will be completely 
bound and deceive the nations no more for a thousand years. 
Rev. 20:2,3. We find this event takes place when the saints are 
represented as seated on thrones. Verse 4. We found that the 
position on the throne and the glory were associated (Matt. 
25:31-40), hence this takes place when the temple is glorified. 
Rev. 15:8. This harmonizes with the point where Aaron changes 
his position in the type. 

But before this, we believe, the saints will have been changed, 
and though here under the vail, while there are great signs and 
wonders wrought by these false Christs, it will not be possible to 
deceive us. We, in this condition, will be in the secret place of 
the Most High and shall abide under the shadow of the 
Almighty. [Psalm 91:1]. This is the position before the throne. 
But while we are safe, as was Aaron, there will be those who are 
mentioned in the type as "my people." [Ex. 8:23], and who 
evidently represent the "great company" upon whom the first 
three plagues come, effecting their deliverance from Babylon. 
[Rev. 18:4.] As the people of Israel were separated from the 



people of Pharaoh by the three first plagues, while Aaron was 
prophet, and they believed his words and signs, so here God's 
people will come out of Babylon [a worldly church] by the 
proclamation- "Fear God and give glory to Him, the hour of His 
judgment is come," [Rev. 14:6-9], made manifest by the vailed 
saints. And because they heed and believe the truth, they will be 
protected during the seven last plagues. God says to them; come 
my people, enter thou into thy chambers and shut thy doors. 
Hide thyself, as it were, for a little moment, until the indignation 
be over-past, for behold the Lord cometh out of his place to 
punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity. [Isa. 26:20- 
21]. These [the great company] will doubtless be severely tried 
during the first three plagues. "Delivered over to Satan 
[opponents] for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may 
be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus." They evidently get free 
from Babylon because of the judgments which cause her fall, 
and therefore escape the seven last plagues and cease to partake 
of her sins and receive not further of her plagues, [Rev. 18:4], 
for "my people shall be willing in the day of my power." The 
above language seems due just prior to the pouring out of the 
seven plagues; and here commences the binding of Satan. So we 
read, [Isa. 27:1], "In that day the Lord with his sore and great 
and strong sword shall punish Leviathan, the piercing serpent, 
even Leviathan, that crooked serpent, and he shall slay the 
dragon, [that old serpent, the Devil and Satan, Rev. 12:9], that is 
in the midst of the sea [people]." 

We have reasons for believing that those who are represented by 
Aaron will soon be changed, and soon now, we say, "Come out 
of Babylon, my people." Fear God and give glory to Him, for 
the hour of his judgment is come. [Rev. 14:7.] We trust that all 
who have ears to hear will obey the call. Those who will still 
continue to worship the beast and his image and will still 
support a worldly church [Babylon], [now being spewed out of 
God's mouth, Rev. 3:16], upon these shall not only come the 
first three plagues but also the seven— hence separate 
yourselves, for if any man worship the beast and his image, the 
same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is 
poured out without mixture, into the cup of his indignation. 
[Rev. 14:9-10.] Let us who are already separated quietly wait for 
our change and gathering together unto Jesus. Be holy, for 
without holiness none shall see the Lord. 

A. D. J. 



R174 : page 6 



"BABYLON THE GREAT." 

D. W. McLaughlin in "Free Methodist" says: "The Babylonish 
church has the outward body, or form of religion, but not the 



inward spirit of vital piety; consequently the Babylonish church 
is spiritually dead. 

All fallen sects, from which the inward spirit of vital religion 
has departed (or is departing), bear upon their foreheads the 
likeness or semblance of the "mother of harlots," and of all 
abominations. It is admitted that the Papal church is the first in 
the transgression, consequently the designation, "mother of 
harlots," applies only to her. Hence, the symbolic description of 
the great harlot will apply to every apostate sect that bears her 
likeness, or semblance. Let us note carefully the marks of 
apostasy in the Babylonish church. She is proud, haughty, high- 
minded, seeks worldly power and greatness; says in her heart, I 
sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. She is 
artificially and gaudily attired, arrayed in gold and pearls. She is 
rich, lives deliciously, and makes rich the merchants because of 
her costliness. She despises and persecutes the true saints of 
God. She seeks the friendship of the world, and is guilty of 
spiritual fornication. She fellowships the world, provides carnal 
entertainments for them, invites them to God's holy temple to 
engage in festivals, lotteries, fairs, and carnal devices, thus 
making of God's house a den of thieves. These are the marks of 
apostasy, and wherever they bear away and predominate, be it in 
Roman or Protestant countries, there is the mark of the "beast," 
and the spirit of mystic Babylon; and the command of God is, 
"Come out of her my people, &c." Rev. 18:4. 



R173 : page 6 

SOME one has beautifully said: "You have noticed that all 
evening shadows point to the East, where the dawn will appear. 
So every shadow made by the descending sun of earthly 
prosperity, points with sure prophecy to the better hopes which 
are kindled by the glowing promises of God." 

ACCUSTOM yourself to think vigorously. Mental capital, like 
pecuniary, to be worth anything, must be well invested— must be 
rightly adjusted and applied, and to this end, careful, deep and 
intense thought is necessary if great results are looked for. 

R285 : page 6 

THE moment we try to peep beyond revelation, and to fathom 
the mysteries of nature, we lose our real enjoyment of both. 



R172 : page 8 



THE TEMPLE-BUILDING TYPE. 

As the Tabernacle of the wilderness, a moveable tent, 
represented God's dwelling -place-the church— in its present 
imperfect state, the fleshly condition, so the Temple built by 



Solomon is, we believe, also a type of the dwelling-place of 
God. A permanent structure, it is a fit illustration of the church 
when it shall reach the perfect spiritual condition. 

The tabernacle was pitched hither and thither in the "wilderness 
of sin" (Ex. 16.) and had no continuing place, while the temple 
was permanently established not only in Canaan, the land of 
promise, in Jerusalem, the holy city, but in the top of the 
mountain. So Paul says of us, "Here we have no continuing city 
[we journey through the wilderness of sin], but we seek one to 
come" (Heb. 13:14)-the New Jerusalem —and "the Lord God 
and the Lamb are the Temple of it" (Rev. 21:22), and it shall be 
established in the tops of the mountains also. Isa. 2:2. 

In a certain sense, we may be spoken of even now as God's 
temple. "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the 
spirit of God dwelleth in you?" 1 Cor. 3:16. But this is only in a 
limited sense that we are now said to be the temple. In the spirit 
of our minds we are "risen with Christ and seated with him in 
heavenly places," speaking of things future as though they now 
existed, because now commenced. 

Really, we, as living stones, are now being taken out of the 
quarry of humanity, fitted, shaped, trimmed and polished for our 
positions in the glorious temple of God, and this is the work of 
this gospel age. Ye are "built upon the foundations of the 
apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief 
corner stone, in whom all the building fitly framed together 
groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord: in whom ye also are 
builded together for an habitation of God through the spirit. " 
Eph. 2:20-22. Solomon, the peaceful and wise king, built the 
pattern, so a wiser and "a greater than Solomon," called "the 
Prince of Peace," is to build the antitypical temple. As the 
building of the temple required seven years (1 Kings 6:38), and 
much or nearly all of the materials used were made ready before 
the work of construction began, so with the building of this 
antitypical temple. We believe that the seven years ("harvest") 
from the autumn of 1874 to 1881, is the time for the 
construction of this temple, i.e., the bringing of all the members- 
-fruit-bearing branches of the Vine-into the perfect spiritual 
condition. And the living stones for this temple selected and 
prepared during this gospel age, were nearly all ready before the 
construction commenced (1874), and must all be ready before 
the temple is completed, and it must be completed before "the 
glory of the Lord" fills it. 2 Chron. 5:1-13, and Rev. 15:8. 

The ending of the 1 ,335 symbolic days of Daniel, just at the 
beginning of this seven years (1874), seems to corroborate this, 
since Daniel was to stand in his lot at the end of the days. (He 
belongs to the order of prophets who are first mentioned in the 
order of giving rewards. Rev. 11:18.) And we believe that this 
constructing of the temple began by bringing into the spiritual 
condition (like unto Christ's glorious body) the prophets. If we 



are correct in this matter, it proves, in harmony with the 
parallelism of the Jewish and Gospel ages, not only that the door 
of favor to the "high calling" -to be the bride-the temple, will 
end in the autumn of 1881, but it also proves, as that parallelism 
does, the presence of Christ. The first proves his presence as the 
reaper in this harvest, gathering dead and living "into his barn," 
away from the tares, &c, and this last proves his presence as the 
constructor of the temple, typified by Solomon. Jesus indicates 
that he is not only the overseer and director in our quarrying and 
preparation, but also that He will be the "master builder" in 
constructing the temple. He has promised "him that overcometh 
will I make a pillar in the temple of my God." Rev. 3:12. 

Our change from natural to spiritual bodies we at one time 
supposed to be the marriage, but we now see that the change 
precedes, as making us ready for the marriage. We still believe 
that the change is our full deliverance from fleshly conditions 
and frailties into the perfections of our new being, from 
weakness to power; from corruption to incorruption; from 
dishonor to glory; from a natural to a spiritual body; from the 
image of the earthly to the image of the heavenly (1 Cor. 15:42- 
48); "made like unto Christ's glorious body." But we are thus 
changed to His glorious likeness in order that our installment in 
official power with Him may follow (symbolically called 
marriage). This was true of Jesus, our pattern and forerunner: He 
was quickened of the Spirit- "raised a spiritual body"-("that 
which is born [quickened] of the Spirit is Spirit." John 3:6), 
though like all spiritual bodies, He must have been "a glorious 
body" (vailed under flesh forty days), yet the glorifying, in the 
sense of exalting to official dignity, did not occur until He had 
ascended up on high and become associated with the Father — 
"set down with [His] Father in His throne." So we must be 
changed before we sit with Christ "on His throne, " or are united 
(married) with Him in the glory of power. 

When "the body," "the bride," "the temple," is completed, all 
will have been thus changed, yet there are scriptures which seem 
to teach that we that are alive (the feet of the body), will, for a 
time after our change, appear under the vail of flesh [as Jesus 
did after his change] before the temple is glorified, and that the 
work to be done then is much the same as that we are now 
doing, though doubtless more ably done and more successful in 
results, viz.: Proclaiming to all Christians- the second "great 
company" (Rev. 7:9-15) -and to the world, during the three 
plagues which precede the "seven last:" "Fear God and give 
glory to Him, for the hour of His judgment is come. " Rev. 14:7. 
"Babylon is fallen; come out of her my people, that ye be not 
partakers of her sins and receive not of her plagues" [the seven 
last]. Rev. 18:1-4. 

Though now we "sing the song of Moses and the Lamb," 
proclaiming restitution-using "the harps [the word] of God. " 



[See article "Having the Harps of God," in August number], yet 
doubtless all of these proclamations will be emphasized under 
our new conditions. Then many-"a great company"-will hear 
and heed— come into harmony with our proclamation. 

This work of proclaiming, &c, is shown in the type when the 
priests took their trumpets and sounded the notes, the Levites 
took their position as singers to sing in harmony with the 
trumpets of the priests. We have already seen that the priests 
represent the "little flock" and the Levites the "great company." 
The practicing continued, doubtless, for some time before 
perfect harmony was obtained. So in the future, when these 
proclamations are made, it will be some time before the second 
company— Elisha class— come into full harmony —apparently 
not until the end of the first three plagues. We read, "It came to 
pass, when the trumpeters and singers were as one to make one 
sound to be heard in praising and thanking the Lord,... For He is 
good, for his mercy endureth forever, that then the house 
(temple) was filled with a cloud,... for the glory of the Lord had 
filled the house." 2 Chron. 5:13. This glorifying shows the 
marriage; after which fleshly priests could no longer remain in 
the temple— representing the fact that we will no longer be even 
under the vail of flesh. 

That the "great company" learn the song, is shown also by Rev. 
19, when they say, verses 1 and 2, "True and righteous are His 
judgments, &c." Then the enthroned company say: "Praise our 
God, all ye his servants, and ye that fear Him, both small and 
great. " The answer shows that they have reached the condition 
of complete harmony with God-they can sing in harmony in 
every note— "I heard, as it were, the voice of a great multitude... 
saying, 'Alleluia, for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth, let us 
be glad and rejoice and give honor to Him, for the marriage of 
the Lamb is come." (Verse 5-7.) They will realize that the 
"body" or "bride" is complete, and that they can have no share in 
that high calling, as the door to that position will then be closed; 
yet they rejoice to see [as we do] God's great loving plan as it 
embraces the sin destroyed race, and they are filled with God's 
praise. Verse 9 contains a promise written specially for this 
"great multitude," viz.: "Write, 'Blessed are they which are 
called to the marriage supper of the Lamb.'" It is then too late for 
them to share the honors of the bride— the marriage being over, 
but the supper, or feast of rejoicings is postponed until this 
"great company" shall have "washed their robes and made them 
white"-coming through great tribulation." Rev. 7:14. 

Dearly beloved, if we believe these things, our works will attest 
our faith. If you and I believe that the door to the "high calling" 
closes in less than a year, should we not increase our efforts to 
bring all Christians into the light of present truth-the knowledge 
of the bridegroom's presence— that they and we may be more 
fully separated from the world. 



Does some one say: Ah, you make a test then of knowing of the 
bridegroom's presence! We reply, that we understand the 
necessary conditions upon which any one may become a part of 
the bride of Christ are first that they accept of forgiveness of 
their sins and justification in God's sight as accomplished not by 
any works of their own but by the death of Christ Jesus our Lord 
—our ransom. Second, that they become his followers— walking 
"in his footsteps" to the crucifying of the fleshly will. These are 
the only conditions. But we might not be able to discern who are 
of this company as we know not men's hearts, but are especially 
instructed of the spirit through the word that He will lead all 
who will follow, into any and all needed light on the way. And 
we are further told that in this time of His presence, all whose 
hearts the Lord sees to be in a right condition will come to a 
knowledge of His presence. Some of the virgins [Christians] 
will be away seeking oil [light] in other directions when He is 
present, and the wise are going "in with Him," (Matt. 25,) 
others, whom the Lord calls servants, (but unfaithful, hence 
evil,) will in the days of His presence smite their fellow servants 
who are proclaiming the presence as "meat in due season to the 
household" of faith. (Matt. 24:45-51) "Saying, my Lord delayeth 
his coming"— these servants shall have their portion in the time 
of trouble with the hypocrites and doubtless constitute a part of 
the great multitude referred to above. 

But of those who will constitute part of the bride it is said: "Ye 
brethren are not in darkness that that day (the day of the Lord) 
should come upon you as a thief. Ye are all children of the 
light;.... Therefore let us not sleep as do others." (1 Thes. 5:4-6.) 
We cannot be too much awake on this subject, and if we see 
fellow Christians whose lives seem to mark them as ones who 
have taken Christ for their leader and example, let us spare 
ourselves neither pain nor trouble in calling to their attention 
these wonderful things which have so refreshed and 
strengthened our hearts -the center of all which is that the 
Bridegroom has come, and they that are ready are going in to the 
marriage. (Matt. 25:10.) If you cannot tell the story well tell it 
the best you can. To him that made use of his talents more were 
given. You can at least interest some and lend them reading 
matter. Be awake, and keep active, lest you become drowsy with 
the lethargy which pervades all around you. 



page 8 



NOTICE, FRIENDS EAST. 



Bro. A. D. Jones purposes another eastern trip to New York 
city. Any friends en route who would like to have him stop and 
meet with them should address him at once. He will be glad to 
meet with either the few or many, and hold either public or 



private meetings, as you may deem advisable. Those within 
seventy-five miles of the main line may address him— Pittsburgh, 
Pa. 



R173 : page 8 



THE NEW TRACTS. 



We have been somewhat disappointed with regard to the tracts 
but hope to be able to send you samples of several within a 
month. They will be free to all who agree to use them wisely. 
We advise that you make a list of all Christian people whom you 
may have any hope of interesting, and send them the tracts in 
rotation, as numbered, so that they will get hold of the subjects 
in a connected manner. Make out your lists at once. 



R166 : page 8 

OUR trip northward was a very pleasant one. In four places we 
held meetings, and stopped to visit a few here and there en 
route. The dear ones expressed themselves as strengthened and 
encouraged. -EDITOR. 



