Willows—A Versatile Family of Trees
BY AWAKE! WRITER IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC
ONE is slender and upright, with a lofty bearing. The other slouches, with its head drooping. In spite of their contrasting posture, however, they are actually closely related. What are they? Trees—the poplar and the weeping willow. Both are members of the willow family.
Willow trees are often found along the banks of rivers and shallow streams. Here in the Czech Republic, they thrive in marshlands, where they quickly sprout from tiny sprigs. Willows can reach a height of over 100 feet [30 m]. Their leaves may be slender and hang gracefully from long, lean branches. Or, as in the case of shining willows and pussy willows, they may have rather broad leaves.
Although there are over 350 species of willows and poplars, one in particular often captures the imagination—the weeping willow. Another species, called the goat willow, is known for its woolly flower clusters, or catkins, which sprout before the leaves are formed. It is said that when these little clusters emerge, spring will soon follow.
An Extended Family
Poplar trees are a familiar sight in Bohemia, the region where Prague, the Czech capital, is located. There are at least 35 species of poplars, all of which belong to the willow family. The black poplar is perhaps the most common, and it is often found along the streams and in the damp woods of Bohemia. One variety of black poplar known as the Lombardy, or Italian, poplar has a slender trunk with upward-pointing branches that grow close to the tree’s main body. This beautiful tree can reach a height of 115 feet [35 m], the equivalent of an 11-story building! Italian poplars can also be found along many roadways, brightening the rural landscape, especially in the autumn when the leaves turn a brilliant yellow.
Aspens are also a type of poplar. They are not as tall, and their treetops are somewhat thinner. Aspens have another distinguishing characteristic—the slightest touch of a gentle breeze causes their leaves to quiver.
Willows in the Bible?
You may not think that the poplar tree grows as far south as the Middle East. Yet, the Bible describes the Israelites’ hanging their harps on poplar trees when they were exiles in Babylon. (Psalm 137:2) Why did they do that? Although the harp was an instrument used in praising God, the saddened Israelites were not inclined to play their harps during this period of adversity. (Isaiah 24:8, 9) God’s Word also identifies the poplar as one of the trees whose boughs were approved for use when booths were built during the Festival of Ingathering. (Leviticus 23:40) The Bible book of Job describes the fearless hippopotamus as dwelling in streams and says that “the willows [or poplars, according to other translations] by the stream shelter him.”—Job 40:22, The Jerusalem Bible.
Today, both poplar and willow trees are used for a variety of commercial products. Poplars are commonly used in the production of veneer, plywood, crates, cardboard boxes, and various other paper products. The willow tree is also prized for its usefulness. Craftsmen fashion wicker baskets and furniture out of its pliable twigs. The willow is truly a versatile family of trees!
[Picture on page 10]
Aspen leaves
[Picture on page 10]
Weeping willow
[Picture on page 10]
Lombardy poplar
[Picture on page 10]
Goat willow
[Picture on page 10]
Black poplar

