Changes Come to the Islands of Yap
The rugged, mountainous islands of Yap have seen many changes since their discovery by Portuguese explorer Diego DeRocha in 1526. Situated in the Caroline Islands of the western Pacific 4,400 miles (7,080 km) west of Hawaii, they are surrounded by coral reefs and peaceful, blue waters.
Yap’s four major islands and several smaller ones have a land area of 39 square miles (101 sq. km) and a population somewhat under 3,000. Yapese, the official language, is spoken nowhere else in the world. Evidently, the islands originally were settled by immigrants from Indonesia.
Basically, the populace of Yap has the ingenuity ‘to live off the land,’ with such foods as coconuts, taro, breadfruit, papaya, bananas, yams and other vegetables in abundant supply. Fish, lobsters and crabs are plentiful, and some persons hunt pigeons and large fruit bats. But the Yapese diet is changing to include many canned foods imported from the United States and Japan.
CHANGES THROUGH THE YEARS
In the past 105 years, Yap has had four major political changes. The Spanish ruled from 1874 until they sold Yap to the Germans in 1899. When World War I began in 1914, the Japanese navy occupied Yap. After that war, the League of Nations mandated the rule of these islands to the Japanese civilian administration. Since 1947, the Yap District has been administered by the United States under a trusteeship agreement with the United Nations.
The traditional dress for Yapese women is simply one or more long grass skirts. While going topless is acceptable, short skirts or shorts are considered improper attire. Men generally wear loin cloths called thu’s. But there have been changes. Although traditional dress is worn on the outer islands, among the younger generation on the main island of Yap it is rapidly being replaced by Western styles.
There have also been changes in the use of money. While United States currency now is primarily used in trade, the Yapese invented and still occasionally utilize stone money. This money is cut to resemble the shape of the full moon. It has a center hole through which a pole can be passed so that the money can be carried on men’s shoulders. Some stone money is 12 feet (3.7 m) in diameter, and in 1929 there were said to be 13,281 pieces of it in Yap.
THE “GOOD NEWS” REACHES YAP
Yap was first visited by Jehovah’s Witnesses in 1964, when some Bible literature was placed in the main district center. Then, in August 1968, Jack Watson and his wife arrived as missionaries from Hawaii. Real obstacles confronted them, since none of the Bible had yet been translated into Yapese and practically no language instruction material was available. So they had to learn Yapese through listening, observation and trial and error.
After staying in the hotel for many weeks, the Watsons rented a home in the main district center. As some interest developed, meetings were held next door, in a park-pavilion-type facility. It had no walls, a sharply pitched thatched roof and a dirt “floor”​—all quite appropriate for the tropical heat and humidity. In February 1969, another couple joined them in the missionary work.
Soon intense opposition arose from the local Catholic priest and the German Lutheran minister. They circulated a brochure against Jehovah’s Witnesses, warning their members not to listen to them. The clergy were even successful in getting the missionaries evicted from their home, and in intimidating other homeowners so they would not rent to them.
Literally having been put out into the streets, the missionaries contacted the island’s highest chief, who originally had befriended them. He offered the missionaries a one-room shack. But when their kerosene icebox and beds were moved in, the floor collapsed. Undaunted, the two Witnesses propped it up and lived there, putting their wives in the hotel.
Meetings were held under a big tree where much stone money was kept. These huge pieces of money served as backrests during the meetings. After several months, the missionaries rented a large concrete house that, in addition to providing accommodations for them, furnished a place for meetings.
Bible studies were conducted by using the English edition of The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life and explaining its contents in Yapese. Soon many began to progress spiritually. However, quite a number had moral and marital entanglements to correct before they could participate in house-to-house witnessing or be baptized.
Zakarias Sulog, a public works supervisor, was among the first to have Bible studies with one of the missionaries. Courageously, he and his wife and two daughters withstood religious opposition and community ridicule. Since his baptism in 1973, Brother Sulog has seen his daughters enter the pioneer service as full-time Kingdom proclaimers. His wife also shares in the pioneer work from time to time. He serves as an elder in the Yap Congregation.
Another early Bible study was conducted with John Ralad, the owner of a construction company. Besides religious opposition, he faced pressures from relatives and village chiefs. However, as Ralad continued learning Bible truths, he shared these with his friends and neighbors. Due to his Bible-trained conscience, prior to baptism he refused to complete the building of a certain church. Now he also serves as an elder in the congregation.
ADOPTING SCRIPTURAL VIEWS
Traces of the traditional seven-level Yapese caste system remain today. Traditionally, persons of low and high castes could not eat the same food. Also, lowcaste individuals were not allowed to go to certain places, and women were regarded as being lower than men. But among Jehovah’s Witnesses, Bible teachings have resulted in real changes.​—Matt. 23:8; Acts 10:34, 35.
Interested persons coming to the meetings admire the courage of supposedly “lower-caste” individuals who give Biblical instruction from the platform while “highcaste” chiefs sit in the audience and listen with humility. Many people are amazed that Jehovah’s servants enjoy picnics at which those of all different former castes have fellowship and meals together. The Witnesses here speak of “having one pot,” thus alluding to their unity and brotherhood on such occasions.​—Ps. 133:1; John 13:34, 35.
Another adjustment in behavior that individuals have made on becoming Witnesses is in connection with the Yapese custom of chewing betel nut, which produces a narcotic effect. They shun this unclean habit, in obedience to the principle of 2 Corinthians 7:1, which urges Christians to cleanse themselves “of every defilement of flesh and spirit.” Noticing that the teeth of Jehovah’s people are white in contrast with the reddish-orange tooth coloration of the majority who chew betel nuts, people often reproach the Witnesses for having white teeth. But the Witnesses have found joy in the strength Jehovah has given them to overcome unclean habits.
Naturally, many customs are Scripturally acceptable, and so are practiced by Witnesses as well. For example, customarily a marriage is culminated when the families of the bride and groom discuss it, give their approval and exchange stone and shell money as well as food. Both the community and the government recognize this as a legal marriage contract and so does the Christian congregation.
JEHOVAH’S NAME MADE KNOWN
Though poor materially, in 1975 Jehovah’s people in Yap built a fine Kingdom Hall with a seating capacity of up to 200 persons. They have a thriving congregation with a peak of 40 Kingdom publishers. Seven Witnesses are regular pioneers and the congregation has a strong evangelizing spirit.
Thus the name of Jehovah has become well known in Yap. And our prayer is that many more inhabitants of Yap will yet respond to God’s Word and make necessary spiritual changes in their lives.

