Announcements
● Literature offer for January and February: Any 192-page book published prior to 1980 that the congregation has in stock. If the congregation has no stock of such books to be offered, the book “Let Your Kingdom Come” should be used. The “Kingdom Come” book may be requested from Brooklyn. March: Revelation Climax book. April and May: Watchtower subscription.
● Starting in February, and no later than March 3, the new public talk for circuit overseers will be “Godly Wisdom in a Scientific World.”
● The Society is now accepting requests for reprinted Watchtower bound volumes in SPANISH for the years 1970 through 1974. If any are interested in obtaining the reprinted Spanish Watchtower bound volumes, such should be requested through the congregation on the next Literature Request Form. Since the volumes are being reprinted one time only, we urge all to consider their needs carefully. Please bear in mind that these bound volumes are special request items.
● During the visit of the circuit overseer, only one Theocratic Ministry School will be conducted. Everyone should remain in the main auditorium for the entire program that evening.
● During the five-week period from February 11 through the week of March 11, 1991, the brochure How Can Blood Save Your Life? will be considered in the Congregation Book Study. Prepared questions for the brochure will appear as an insert in the February 1991 Our Kingdom Ministry. Beginning with the week of March 18, 1991, the book Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand! will be considered in the Congregation Book Study.
● The special public talk for the 1991 Memorial season will be given worldwide on Sunday, April 7. The subject of the talk will be “The Messiah’s Coming and His Rule.” An outline will be provided. Those congregations having the visit of the circuit overseer, a circuit assembly, or a special assembly day that weekend will have the special talk the following week. No congregation should have the special talk before April 7.
● On some 1991 calendars, the Bible reading schedule is different from what appears in the Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1991. In this case, congregations should follow the Bible reading in the Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1991 rather than that on the calendar.

