Do Not Tire Out
1 The 1991 Yearbook tells of thrilling expansion taking place earth wide. There are new peaks of publishers in one land after another.
2 But what is it like in your territory? Do you encounter indifference? Are the people apathetic to the Kingdom message? Are few people at home? Do few respond favorably? If so, you may be encouraged by Paul’s counsel at Galatians 6:9: “Let us not give up in doing what is fine, for in due season we shall reap if we do not tire out.” Even in difficult territories, sheeplike ones are still being found.
3 What can we do so as not to tire out in the ministry? Changing our approach or our introductions could help. Excellent suggestions are found in the Reasoning book. Have you tried them? A very brief but direct approach may capture the attention of more householders. Let people know you are personally interested in their welfare.
PRESENT THE “KINGDOM COME” BOOK
4 During January we can show our concern for others by offering the book “Let Your Kingdom Come.” It is an excellent tool to help others learn more about the Kingdom they so often mention in prayer, yet know so little about.
5 Every chapter of this book has excellent talking points. You may find chapter 1 and the picture on pages 4 and 5 helpful in your presentation. Who would not want to live in the Paradise conditions depicted there? Also, the box entitled “What God’s Kingdom Will Do” on page 25 ties in well with our current Topic for Conversation. Of course, you may find other points fitting for your presentation.
6 Surely we can be personally encouraged and strengthened by our participation in the Kingdom-preaching work on a weekly basis. In addition, our spirituality can be kept high by consistent study of God’s Word and regular participation in congregation meetings.​—Heb. 10:23-25.
7 All of us need to endure in Jehovah’s service and not tire out in these difficult last days. Pray to Jehovah for strength. (Isa. 40:29-31) Ask him to help you endure, and keep a positive mental attitude. Remember, we are doing God’s work. He sees what we do in his service, and he does not forget. (Heb. 6:10) So let us not tire out! Rather, let us be “always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord,” relying on Jehovah to strengthen us for his ‘fine work.’​—1 Cor. 15:58; Gal. 6:9.

