Fulfilling Our Kingdom Ministry With Help From the Index
1 As dedicated Christians, we earnestly endeavor to fulfill our ministry. To help us do this, Jehovah has provided a wealth of guidance and encouragement in an extensive library of valuable publications. Can we make better use of them? A primary aid for doing so is the Watch Tower Publications Index, published continuously in various languages since 1961.
2 How can the Index help you fulfill your ministry? It does so by pointing the way to the excellent counsel and explanations already provided. The Index has been prepared with the worldwide brotherhood in mind. From children to grandparents, new Bible students to elders, all can find references they need for any beneficial purpose.
HOW TO FIND WHAT YOU NEED
3 If your interest is in the meaning of a particular verse or series of verses, you will find it best to turn first to the scripture index in the back. Has someone cited John 10:30 in an attempt to prove the Trinity doctrine? The scripture index will direct you to material that clarifies why Jesus stated those words. The scripture index will enrich our personal Bible reading as we seek explanation of verses that seem puzzling or vague.
4 The subject index provides different paths to the same useful information. For example, you may need information on what to do if an unbelieving mate objects to your taking your children to meetings. To find the answer, you may turn to the headings “Husbands,” “Wives,” “Children,” “Opposition,” or “Meetings.” Regarding any subject, if what you are seeking is not found under the first heading you turn to, try another. Ask yourself: ‘Who is involved? Is a specific place important? A particular quality or skill? A dominant emotion? A goal?’ If you find a main heading that seems right, first scan the cross-references directly beneath it. These often save time by identifying another heading that is more to the point.
5 Skill in using the Index can contribute much to success in fulfilling our sacred responsibilities. Our families, our Bible students, and our congregations will be benefited as we become more skillful in using this tool. Coming issues of Our Kingdom Ministry will explore specific areas where the Watch Tower Publications Index can be an invaluable aid in fulfilling our Kingdom ministry.

