Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 31
Song 18
 9 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Highlight January offer. Provide names of older publications in stock locally. Consider introductions that might be used with current Topic for Conversation. If designated older books are not available, highlight use of “Kingdom Come” book.
18 min: “1991 ‘Lovers of Freedom’ District Convention”​—Part 1. Read December 15, 1990, convention assignment letter. Question-and-answer consideration of paragraphs 1-12 of insert by congregation secretary. Read paragraphs 4-6 and 8-11. Read scriptures as time allows.
18 min: “1991 ‘Lovers of Freedom’ District Convention”​—Part 2. Presiding overseer or other qualified elder discusses with audience paragraphs 13-16 of insert. Read scriptures and paragraphs that apply locally as time allows. Highlight thrust of letters in box on page 6. Stress need to select accommodations from Recommended Lodging Locations list, and commend those cooperating with the rooming arrangement.
Song 147 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 7
Song 30
10 min: Local announcements. Briefly mention talking points from magazines that may be used in witnessing this week.
15 min: “Do Not Tire Out.” Discussion of main points in article. Ask for suggestions from audience when discussing paragraph 3. Have a qualified publisher demonstrate offer, using suggestion in paragraph 5. Encourage congregation to keep busy in field ministry and not tire out or become discouraged by apathy or opposition encountered.
20 min: How Can We Keep Strong? Series of interviews to highlight need to keep strong and not tire out. (1) Interview two or three who have been serving for many years and are good examples. What pressures to stop preaching have they experienced and overcome? What helped them to keep going and not tire out? (Could mention prayer, regular meeting attendance, personal study, encouragement from others, and so forth.) What did they do to guard against slowing down or quitting? (Could mention importance of regular association at meetings, keeping up personal study, appreciation of relationship with Jehovah, and so forth.) How have they retained spiritual balance? (Could mention help of elders or others, putting spiritual interests first in life, prayer to Jehovah, and so forth.) (2) Interview some children who are regular publishers and good examples. What has helped them to be regular in service? How have parents helped them? Do other publishers encourage and help them in field service? What are their goals in Jehovah’s service? Conclude with brief review of points made in interviews.
Song 10 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 14
Song 121
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Commend congregation for support of worldwide work and the Society Kingdom Hall Fund. Call attention to information in “Be Prepared for Watchtower Subscription Campaign,” and encourage publishers to request needed extra magazines. Publishers may wish to bring their Watch Tower Publications Index 1986-1989 to the Service Meeting next week.
20 min: Medical Document and Identity Card. Secretary has cards distributed and considers paragraphs 1, 2, 4-7, 9, and 10 of the Society’s letter of January 1, 1990, on this matter. Reason with audience on why instructions should be followed carefully in order to make cards serve most effectively for our protection. Elders can follow through after the meeting as they did last year. Do not delay filling out the cards and having them properly signed.
15 min: “Starting Studies Using Mankind’s Search for God.” Questions and answers. When discussing paragraph 6, have qualified publishers in audience prepared to offer specific suggestions and comments on starting a study in either chapter 11 or chapter 13.
Song 108 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 21
Song 111
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Include arrangements for weekend field service. Offer suggestions as to which articles in the current magazines may particularly appeal to people in the local territory. Everyone should bring a copy of tract Life in a Peaceful New World for Service Meeting next week.
15 min: “Fulfilling Our Kingdom Ministry With Help From the Index.” Talk by elder with audience participation. Demonstrate how an elder and a ministerial servant can use the Index in preparing for a shepherding call. Discuss how to teach the publishers to use the Index to enrich weekly Bible reading.
10 min: Territory Seldom Worked. Review January 1, 1991, letter. Encourage publishers to apply early for an assignment. If there are publishers who wish to assist in territory of nearby congregations, the circuit overseer should be contacted through the Congregation Service Committee.
10 min: Duties of the Literature Servant. Service overseer interviews literature servant, reviewing responsibilities involved. It would be good to highlight local needs that would help improve literature distribution before and after meetings.
Song 203 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 28
Song 192
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Tracts and Handbills.” Question-and-answer discussion. Have scriptures read. After discussing paragraph 5, have pioneer or other capable publisher demonstrate starting study on return visit using tract Life in a Peaceful New World. Encourage publishers to use this approach on return visits, especially when it has been difficult to find householders at home after the initial call. Invite prepared publishers to comment on success they have had using this approach.
10 min: “New Video!​—How to Use It.” Talk outlining key points in article. Refer to letter of October 15, 1990, announcing release of this new provision for acquainting people with Jehovah’s organization.
15 min: Can You Auxiliary Pioneer This Spring? Warm discussion by brother with experience as regular or auxiliary pioneer. Interview several who auxiliary pioneered previously. What adjustments did they make to meet their goal? Highlight practical plans they made. With Memorial season nearing, encourage interested publishers to discuss their plans with an elder. By being positive now, many will enjoy this service. For some this may be a stepping-stone to regular pioneer service. (km 2/90 p. 3) Applications may be obtained from presiding overseer or secretary.
Song 151 and concluding prayer.

