Starting Studies Using Mankind’s Search for God
1 Jesus said, “In all the nations the good news has to be preached first.” (Mark 13:10) This meant that his disciples would come in contact with people of many different languages, cultures, and religious backgrounds. It also meant that his modern disciples, Jehovah’s Witnesses, would have the assignment of teaching all kinds of people.
2 Our new book Mankind’s Search for God undoubtedly will help many more honesthearted people to find the true God, Jehovah, and embrace his way of truth. (John 4:21-24) How can we start Bible studies using this publication?
HOW TO START A STUDY
3 The foundation for a Bible study may have been laid during the first visit when you learned the person’s religious affiliation. On that initial call, you probably turned the householder’s attention to a certain chapter or paragraph. Then, or on a later visit, that same point can be used as a springboard to a conversation leading to a study. By using the questions at the bottom of the page, you have a basis for stirring thought and discussion. Of course, we are interested not in provoking controversy but, rather, in a reasoned consideration of the material. Whether we start at the beginning of the book or in any other chapter, our aim should be eventually to direct the person to chapters 10, 15, and 16. Why is that?
4 The search for the true God inevitably has to be through Christ. Jesus said, “I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me.” (John 14:6) Chapter 10 clearly answers the question, “Was Jesus the Way to God?” It explains Jesus’ credentials, how we know that he was not a mythical character, how he was foretold in prophecy, why his early disciples believed in him as the way to God, and how we know he had God’s approval. (John 6:44, 65) Chapters 15 and 16 deal with “A Return to the True God” and “The True God and Your Future.”
DISCERN INDIVIDUAL NEEDS
5 After several studies we might deem it wise to move into a more basic Bible publication, such as the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. Since the book Mankind’s Search for God is designed initially to draw people of many diverse backgrounds to the true God, not every chapter will appeal to every person. We need to know how to adapt our presentation and study arrangement to the individual needs of each one.​—1 Cor. 9:19-22.
6 For example, we might have placed the book with a person who professes to be Christian. Now the question for the return visit could be, “Why are there so many religions that claim to be Christian?” Thus, chapter 11 on the apostasy and chapter 13 on the Reformation could be the basis for starting a study. As the person discovers how Christendom took shape, we will help him to reason on the Bible’s teachings as opposed to Christendom’s apostate doctrines. The truth, we hope, will free that person’s mind so that he or she can develop a relationship with Jehovah God. (John 8:31, 32) Then the study can be continued in chapters 15 and 16 or in the Live Forever book.
REACHING PEOPLE OF NON-CHRISTIAN RELIGIONS
7 In studying with people of other faiths, Christian love and tact should always be demonstrated. Paul emphasized that when he wrote: “Let your utterance be always with graciousness, seasoned with salt, so as to know how you ought to give an answer to each one.” (Col. 4:6) For Hindus we might try to start the study on page 372 under the subheading “A Promised New World.” Then continue in chapter 5 on Hinduism. The key to success is knowing the needs of the individual.​—Compare Acts 17:22, 23.
8 Tact is especially needed when dealing with Muslims. They will no doubt be attracted to chapter 12 on Islam. As that subject is developed, Bible texts for comparison and contrast are introduced in the questions, principally from paragraph 23 onward. We are appealing to reason as the Bible invites: “‘Come, now, you people, and let us set matters straight between us,’ says Jehovah.”​—Isa. 1:18; 1 Pet. 3:15.
9 Try to help people of different religions to search for the true God. Remember that while we may plant and water, in the final analysis, it is God ‘who can keep making the seed of truth grow’ when the soil is right.​—1 Cor. 3:6, 7; Matt. 13:18-23.

