R175 : page 1 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JANUARY, 1881. 

NO. 7. 



pagel 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H. PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 

L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN, . FT. EDWARD, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



PITTSBURGH CHURCH MEETING. 

Services held in "Curry Institute Hall," corner Penn avenue and 
Sixth street, Pittsburgh, at 2.30 o'clock, P.M. Every Wednesday 
evening, at No. 80 Cedar avenue, Allegheny, at 7:30 o'clock, 
P.M. All are cordially invited. 



R175 : page 1 

"A STONE OF STUMBLING." 

"He (Jesus) shall be... for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of 
offence to both the houses of Israel." Isa. 8:14. 

The Bible speaks of the several tribes of Israel as houses-viz.: 
House of Judah, Levi, Benjamin, etc., but the expression, House 
of Israel, was used as belonging to the twelve tribes collectively. 
(Jacob, after his wrestle with the angel, was called Israel, which 
signifies "a Prince with God," and all of his descendants are 
called the children or House of Israel.) And the nominal Gospel 
church, entire, containing both wheat and tares (Matt. 13) is 
recognized as the House of Christ who is the true Israel-a 
Prince with God. 

It is these two houses that we understand as referred to in the 
scripture above cited-the fleshly house of servants and the 
spiritual house of sons—as we read: "Moses verily was faithful 
in all his house [of servants-fleshly Israel], but Christ as a Son 
over his own house [of sons-spiritual Israel] whose house are 
we [to be] if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of our 
hope firm unto the end. [Heb. 3:5,6.] We see then that none are 
of the Gospel House of Sons, except those who "hold fast to the 
end." But during this age of trial and development, all professors 
are reckoned as part of the nominal house of sons, and the 
distinction between the true and false are not to be manifested 
until the end of this age- "The harvest" -when wheat and tares 
are separated. 

This fact, that both of the nominal houses— fleshly and spiritual 
Israel-stumble over Christ, may have escaped the notice of 
many, and the bare suggestion that the Gospel Church is to 
stumble will doubtless be repelled by many with alarm. But, 
beloved, be not alarmed; remember that "the Lord knoweth them 
that are his," and not one grain of wheat will be mistaken for a 
tare; nor will one tare be gathered into the barn of safety with 
the wheat. Were we to do the separating, very many tares who 
have been our neighbors and church members might be classed 
as wheat that will be known in their true character by the angels 
who are the reapers. 

The Jewish church claimed that they were servants of God, and 
so they had been reckoned a house of servants for eighteen 



hundred years, up to the time when Jesus came in the end of 
their age as the reaper, and the work of separating between true 
grain and empty chaff commenced. The work of reaping was 
done by Jesus' personal preaching, and also through his 
disciples, as John had declared. "His" winnowing fan is in his 
hand, and he will thoroughly purge [cleanse] his floor, and 
gather his wheat into the garner [the gospel age,] but burn up the 
chaff with unquenchable fire," [Matt. 3:12] the fire of tribulation 
and national destruction on fleshly Israel, ending with 
Jerusalem's destruction~A.D. 70. 

The work of Jesus in the end or harvest of the Jewish age, was, 
not to make Israelites of the Gentiles, but to prove who were 
really servants of God. The results prove that few of the nominal 
fleshly Israel were "Israelites indeed, in whom was no guile." 
"He came to [nominally] His own, and as a people or house they 
received him not." The nominal house stumbled over him, and 
did not recognize him. "But to as many as received him, to them 
gave he power [liberty] to become sons of God" -but the rest 
were blinded. 

We have heretofore seen that the Jewish or servant house was in 
many respects a pattern or shadow of the higher gospel house. 
Especially in the closing work of the two ages is this parallelism 
striking. Their age ended with a harvest, in which Jesus in the 
flesh was the reaper and winnower and gatherer into the barn, 
the disciples being the assistant reapers, working under his 
directions. [Luke 10:1.] Our age is also to end with the harvest 
of the spiritual or gospel house -a separating of wheat and tares, 
in which again, Jesus a spiritual body ["We know him no more 
after the flesh"] is the reaper, [Rev. 14:14-16, Matt. 13:41] while 
the angels, also invisible spiritual bodies, are the assistants. 

We see too that not only are the harvests of Jewish and gospel 
ages parallel in point of beginning, but also in length of 
duration; theirs being in all 40 years from the time of Jesus 
anointing [at beginning of their harvest, A.D. 30,] to destruction 
of Jerusalem, A.D. 70. So, ours, beginning in 1874 closes with 
the end of the "day of wrath" and end of the "times of the 
Gentiles," 1914~a similar and parallel period of 40 years. The 
first seven years of the Jewish harvest was especially devoted to 
the gathering of ripe wheat from that church; three and one-half 
of it was while he was present as the Bridegroom and three and 
a half of it after he had come to them as king and had entered 
into glory, but it was all under his supervision and direction. 

As John had said, he purged his floor, gathered his wheat and 
burned the chaff. So here the parallel is being fulfilled: We find, 
[as heretofore shown-see "Day Dawn"] the law and the 
prophets declaring him present at the culmination of the "Jubilee 
cycles" in 1874. And the parallels show us that then the harvest 
began, and that the gathering of the Bride into the place of 
safety, will occupy a parallel seven years of time, ending in 



1881. But how, when, and why did the "house of servants" 
stumble over Christ? If we can ascertain this it should give us a 
clue to how, when, and why, the Gospel house stumbles, 
especially in view of the fact that in so many particulars the 
closing work of that age is the exact pattern of this. 

We suggest that the fleshly house could not stumble over Christ 
until he had come and was present among them. They stumbled 
because of the manner of Christ's coming. They had expected 
Him to manifest himself in such a manner as would be 
convincing to their natural eye and senses, and not require the 
exercise of faith. He came in such an obscure and humble 
manner as to appeal only to the eye of faith, and taught in such a 
manner that only those who had the hearing of faith received his 
witness. "Who hath ears to hear let him hear." Matt. 13:9. 

The object of his so appealing to the eye and ear of faith was, 
that none but such as had these should receive Him, and that the 
others "who sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of 
the law," (professedly Israelites, but not Israelites indeed) should 
stumble, not recognize him as the Son of God, but fulfill what 
had been prophesied of them, and crucify him. We thus see how, 
when and why the fleshly house stumbled. (Rom. 9:32-33.) 

R176 : page 1 

Now, let us look with even deeper interest to the stumbling of 
the nominal Gospel house-spiritual Israel. We suggest that as 
the fleshly house could not stumble over Him until he came at 
the first advent, so the spiritual house cannot stumble over 
Christ until His second advent. The causes of stumbling too are 
the same; those of the Gospel church who expect the second 
coming of Christ and establishment of his kingdom are 
expecting (just as the fleshly house did) an outward display, 
which will appeal to the natural eye, ear, and human senses 
generally. 

Some know not, and others who ought to know experimentally, 
seem to forget, that if we are in Christ Jesus we are new 
creatures. "Ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit (condition) if 
so be that the spirit of Christ dwell in you." (Rom. 8:9.) All of 
this class of persons have given up-reckoned dead, (and are 
daily dying to) the fleshly human nature, and are daily partaking 
more and more of the spiritual or divine nature, into the 
perfection of which we are expecting soon to be changed, when 
the separating of "the harvest" is complete. These should all 
remember the rule which we apply to other things, viz. "We 
look not at the things which are seen (of the natural eye), but at 
the things which are not seen, for the things which are seen are 
temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal." (2 Cor. 
4:18.) Which of the things which we as new creatures prize so 
highly are visible to the natural eye? None; it was by the eye of 
faith that we realized our heavenly Father's smile, saw Jesus as 



our Leader, saw the "crown of life," and "prize of our high 
calling." Our spiritual eye of faith has seen, and our circumcised 
ears heard of the glorious things "God hath in reservation for 
them that love Him," which the natural man cannot see and hear, 
because they are spiritually discerned." (1 Cor. 2:14.) We see 
and hear, because led by the Spirit (through the word.) "We 
walk by faith, and not by [natural] sight." 

Would that all could realize that this class described [dead to the 
natural, but alive spiritually] are the only ones who will 
constitute the body or bride of Christ. These have fulfilled their 
covenant by sacrificing the human nature. "They shall be 
mine.. .in that day when I make up my jewels." [Mai. 3:17.] It is 
to this class only that Jesus comes as Head and Bridegroom, and 
only they are to 

R176:page2 

recognize His presence during the harvest of this age, as only 
those with the eye and ear of faith recognized Jesus in the 
harvest of the fleshly house. [True, there will be in due time 
outward manifestations of "Power and great glory," which will 
convince all mankind of the reality of the new kingdom; but this 
comes after the bride has recognized his presence, been 
separated from the tares, and "made like unto Christ's glorious 
body," for "when he shall appear [to the world] we also shall 
appear with him in glory." We will not be revealed in flesh, but 
in glory. "We shall be revealed [made known] in flaming fire," 
[judgments] inflicting righteous punishment upon wrong doers, 
and lifting up the poor and oppressed. 

We believe that Christ is now present, in the sense of having 
commenced the work of taking to himself His great power and 
reigning. The work begins with the separating of tares from 
wheat in the living church and the association of the wheat of all 
ages with Himself in the authority of His kingdom. "To him that 
overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in My throne, " and "to 
him will I give power over the nations," to continue until all 
things are subdued under Him. It seems proper, too, that the 
work should begin thus, by taking his bride and the twain 
becoming one. 

It must be painfully evident to all true Christians that the 
nominal church which calls herself the spouse of Christ, is far 
from being the "little flock" who walk the narrow way~"the way 
their Leader trod." Many are Christians in name and form only, 
"having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof," by 
living contrary to their professions. Many are moralists only, 
who recognize and use the church only as a social and moral 
club. Many are hypocrites, who use the church as a stepping- 
stone to wealth and social standing. Some are true children of 
God and feel that the church is too empty and formal and 
worldly, yet are carried on with the others by the thought that 



they may be too timid. Mr. A. and Mrs. C. are very intelligent 
and wealthy and moral people and they approve of such things, 
and who am I that I should object? They would think me weak 
and fanatical--! will continue with them; certainly much good is 
being done. 

A few— a little flock— while still using their influence and 
example as "living epistles" for their Master, feel themselves 
almost, or entirely, separated from the nominal church. The 
church's union with the world in worldly plans, ways, customs 
and dress are out of harmony with their new nature, and their 
seeking to be "not conformed to the world, but transformed by 
the renewing of their minds" to harmony with the will of God; 
they cannot feel at home with the carnally minded. Their eye 
delights not so much in beauty of form, as in the perfection of 
the new nature, begotten of God through the word of truth; not 
so much in the beauty of dress as in the beauty of character and 
its Christ-like-ness; not so much in the grandeur of the house as 
in the greatness and loveliness of Him whom they "worship in 
spirit and in truth;" not so much at the language and eloquence 
of the preacher as in the understanding of the word of God. 

These go sometimes to meet with the nominal church, but are 
always separate in spirit and usually seek and enjoy more the 
society of others like-minded. These are obliged to study the 
word privately, for if they do attend preaching they hear a 
sermon on some topic of morality directed to the world of 
unbelievers. Nor can the pastor be blamed entirely for so doing, 
the policy of the church having supplied him a congregation, 
nine-tenths of which are worldly and cannot understand spiritual 
things, he feels it to be his duty to preach to the majority; 
consequently the sheep of the flock receive little or none of the 
"strong meat" of the word. Will these starve, think you? I tell 
you, nay; the great Shepherd will provide "meat in due season" 
to all who really hunger and thirst after it, He will lead them to 
green pastures. 

This last class is to be the bride. Careless of the opinions, smiles 
or frowns of the world, she cares only to be in favor with her 
beloved— the heavenly bridegroom. And these are to recognize 
him now, the others are to stumble and not recognize Him until 
these have all gone in to the marriage and the door to that high 
position is closed. Our understanding is that the Bridegroom 
came in 1874; and this little company is being brought to a 
knowledge of his presence, and in that sense, being separated 
from other true Christians who either are overcharged with the 
affairs of this world or bound by chains of denominationalism, 
are making void the word of God through their traditions, etc., 
and still others, who, not being in condition of heart to receive 
Him on the evidence of His word, but who turn to seek light on 
His presence in other directions and find it not until the door to 
that high calling is shut. Matt. 25:10. 



We trust, then, that all readers may see that the reason why the 
Church in general stumbles here, (as the fleshly house did,) is 
because only a "little flock" in it is the bride. The two houses of 
Israel each in turn were called to be Christ's bride. Both fail to 
attain the position, but as God had foreseen and arranged, a little 
company from each do receive Him, and "As many as receive 
Him" are acceptable. The election hath obtained it, and the rest 
were blinded" (by their own condition). Rom. 11:7. 

The pathway in which the little flock walk, though rugged and 
difficult, is filled with light- "Thy word is a lamp to my feet and 
a lantern to my footsteps." And it is this light which prevents us 
from stumbling over this stone of stumbling. The prophetic 
word shows us that we are in "the day of the Lord, " and enables 
us to receive Him, not by the sight of the natural eye, but by the 
eye of faith, for "we walk by faith, not by sight." This is just as 
Peter advised us: We have a sure word of prophecy, unto which 
ye do well to take heed as unto a light shining in a dark place. [2 
Pet. 1:19.] The day of the Lord is called a day of darkness, and 
we, unless enlightened by the word of prophecy, would stumble 
as the others of the Church are doing over the stone of stumbling 
in this dark place. But enlightened by our lamp, how our hearts 
have been rejoiced since we found him present, and though a 
stone of stumbling to others, "To you, who believe, He is 
precious." 1 Pet. 2:7. 

THE DA Y OF VISIT A TION. 

When Jesus had finished His ministry He rode to Jerusalem on 
the ass, assuming [typically] to the fleshly house the office of 
king, and in the exercise of that office he declared: "Your house 
is left unto you desolate "--here giving up the fleshly house. We 
repeat that they were given up because, not being Israelites 
indeed, they did not receive Him-stumbled— and so we read that 
when He had told them of their overthrow and destruction He 
assigns as the cause~"Because thou knewest not the time of thy 
visitation." [Luke 19:41-44.] Their time of visitation was, in a 
sense, the whole forty years to the destruction of the nation; but 
there had been the time of trial first; if during that first three and 
a-half years they had been in a condition to receive Jesus, the 
visitation following would have been of blessing, but unready 
and rejecting him, it became a visitation of wrath. 

R177 : page 2 

So also here, during the first three and a-half years, from 1874 
to 1878, the opportunity was given to the general Gospel Church 
to receive Christ the present one, but they stumbled similarly to 
the fleshly house. Because they knew not the time of their 
visitation-being unready-and are similarly cast off -given over 
to destruction (as an institution)-a visitation of wrath. 



After the giving up of the fleshly house, especially during the 
three and a half years following, or the last half of their covenant 
week [the 70th, Dan. 9:24], favor was still shown to all who left 
it and accepted of the fact that Jesus Christ had come, etc. ; so 
here there will be special favor shown to all who separate in 
heart from the cast-off Church, and receive the presence of the 
Lord during the three and a half years from 1878 to 1881, and 
after that to those who become part of "the great company," for 
some shall glorify God in this "day of visitation and wrath." [1 
Pet. 2:12.] 

The number of Scriptures which speak of the Gospel Church 
after being cast off from God's favor, and of her rapid decline 
and fall are somewhat wonderful. In Rev. 3:14 to 21, the whole 
picture is vividly presented. The Lord is addressing the last 
phase of the Church, the seventh. [We in common, with nearly 
all expositors of the Apocalypse, understand the seven Churches 
here addressed to represent seven phases or conditions of the 
entire nominal Church, from the days of the apostles to the end 
of the Gospel age, in the order mentioned.] To this seventh 
Church, Jesus says: "I know thy works," [the works are greater 
far than the faith] "that thou art neither cold nor hot; so, then, 
because thou art lukewarm I will spew thee out of My mouth." 
What a description this is of the present condition of her, whom 
God calls "Babylon" -confusion-mixture- lukewarm. 

Babylon says she is "rich, increased in goods and has need of 
nothing;" that she is in a more prosperous condition than ever 
before, and she boasts of fine churches, high steeples, eloquent 
preachers, wealthy members, splendid music, large salaries and 
worldly popularity, and knows not that she is "poor and 
miserable and blind, " (stumbling over present truths) and 
remembers not that her worldly popularity is an evidence of her 
disfavor with the Bridegroom. "For the friendship of the world 
is enmity against God." She is therefore given up, as was the 
fleshly house— she is "spewed out of His mouth." She has been 
His mouthpiece, and through her He has spoken to the world, 
but it shall be so no longer. "The voice of the Bridegroom and 
the Bride shall be heard no more at all in thee." Rev. 18:23. 

To our understanding this "spewing" and "falling" dates from 
1878, the exact parallel of time to the giving and "leaving 
desolate" of the fleshly house. And now the call is "Come out of 
her, my people! that ye be not partakers of her sins and receive 
not of her plagues," and while we expect that most of the second 
company will not be freed from her bondage until afterward, we 
do expect that all who constitute part of the bride will be 
separated before the Autumn of 1881, then "the voice of the 
Bride will no more be heard in her." 

The fall of Babylon is not only the subject of a large portion of 
the book of Revelation, but also of many of the prophecies. As 
fleshly Israel went into captivity to literal Babylon, so did the 



Gospel house go into captivity to "Babylon, the great mother of 
harlots," and is still bound by many of her chains of darkness 
and error. In prophecy when depicting the desolations, etc., 
coming upon Babylon, we understand it to refer to both the type 
and the antitype, and especially to the latter, and they harmonize 
wonderfully with the account given of the same event in Rev. 
12:13,16-19. 

While there are many such prophecies, we merely refer to one; 
Jer. 50 and 51. "How is the hammer of the whole earth cut 
asunder and broken? How is Babylon become a desolation 
among the nations?... Woe unto them, for their day is come and 
the time of their visitation. The voice of them that flee and 
escape out of the land of Babylon to declare in Zion the 
vengeance of the Lord our God, the vengeance of His 
temple... and the most proud shall stumble and fall and none 
shall raise Him up.... At the noise of the taking of Babylon the 
earth is moved and the cry is heard among the nations.... Flee out 
of the midst of Babylon and deliver every man his soul (life); be 
not cut off in her iniquity, for this is the time of the Lord's 
vengeance; He will render unto her a recompense. Babylon hath 
been a golden cup in the Lord's hand that made all the earth 
drunken.... We would have healed Babylon, but she is not 
healed; forsake her and let us go, every man, into his own 
country.... The Lord hath brought forth our righteousness; come, 
let us declare in Zion the work of the Lord our God." (51:10.) 
"In those days and at that time," saith the Lord, "the iniquity of 
Israel shall be sought for and there shall be none, and the sins of 
Judah, and they shall not be found." (50:20.) This last text shows 
us that the time really meant by the prophesy was not at the 
deliverance of Israel from literal Babylon (though type and 
antitype are closely interwoven), but at the end of this age, 
when, says Paul: God shall "take away their sins." (Read Rom. 
11:25-27.) 

After telling the nominal church that she is no longer his 
mouthpiece, Jesus says: "Be zealous therefore and repent." This 
is his message to the nominal church as a whole; but now he 
recognizes some who are in, but not of Babylon- 



(Continued on Seventh page.) 

R177 : page 7 

(Continued from Second page.) 

individuals, and to these he says: "Behold, I stand at the door 
and knock; if any man hear my voice and open the door I will 
come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me." It is not 
at the door of the sinner's heart the Lord stands thus knocking, 
as some have supposed, but at the hearts of the true Israelites, in 
this seventh or closing stage of the Gospel church. And what a 



wonderfully clear picture this affords us~the two things occur at 
the same time, i.e., while the one party is "stumbling" and being 
"spewed out," the other party, the "little flock," "the 
overcomers," are being made aware of his presence. These hear 
his knock—the prophecies which announce him as present, not 
as coming in the future, but present now. 

When any one knocks at your door, it is an indication, not that 
they will come, but that they have come. So the Lord has given 
us a striking picture, illustrative of His presence at the time 
Babylon is given up. Since we each individually heard the knock 
of the Prophecies, opened our heart and realized his presence, 
how fully his promise has been fulfilled, "I will come in... and 
sup with him, and he with me. " What a blessed feasting on the 
truth we have enjoyed. Ah, yes, when our Lord girds Himself 
and comes forth to serve us, as he has done during these years, 
we get food indeed. We have meat to eat that the world knoweth 
not of, a parallel again to those true Israelites who received him 
at his first advent. "The disciples came unto him privately, 
saying, explain unto us," and Jesus answers: "To you it is given 
to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to all them 
that are without (unbelievers) all these things are done in 
parables" (figures of speech which they cannot understand.) 
"Blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they 
hear; for verily I say unto you, that many prophets and righteous 
men have desired to see the things which ye see, and have not 
seen them." (Matt. 13:17.) And the same is true of those who see 
him 

R177 : page 8 

present now by the eye of faith-by the light of the sure word of 
prophecy- "blessed are your eyes." 

While all overcomers-the Bride -are to get the victory, etc., 
and not fall with Babylon, yet from other scriptures we find that 
some who are really children of God, will fall with her. "Many 
among them shall stumble and fall, and be broken." (Isa. 8:15.) 
But (Psa. 37:24) "though he fall yet shall he 

NOT BE UTTERL Y CAST DOWN. " 

The stumbling and fall of both the houses of Israel should be 
regarded rather as a blessing than otherwise, as the prophet has 
said: "This child (Jesus) is set for the fall and rising again of 
many in Israel" —both houses. The rejection of the nominal 
house was necessary before the call could go "to the Gentiles to 
take out a people (Bride) for his name." For, "through their fall 
salvation is come to the Gentiles." (Rom. 11:11.) And though 
the fleshly house fell, they are to rise again to all that was 
promised them as a fleshly seed of Abraham, (in the Millennial 
age.) Then, why should any complain? "If the fall of them be the 
riches of the world," or resulted in throwing open to the world in 



general the opportunity of running the race for "the prize of high 
calling" -to be the "Bride, the Lamb's wife?" And "what shall 
the receiving of them [back to favor as God's people] be but life 
from the dead" —resurrection.-- [Rom. 11:12.] 

So with the stumbling and fall of the second house. It is 
necessary that the nominal church should fall in order that the 
true might be manifested-separated and "enter into the joys of 
her Lord." But while the fleshly house shall be restored, the 
Babylon church will never be restored. As a great millstone cast 
into the sea, so shall Babylon fall, and be found no more. [Rev. 
18:21.] While this is true especially of the mother of harlots; it is 
true also of all her daughters who partake of her nature, and only 
individuals out of Babylon shall arise from among her ashes, 
saying: "True and righteous are His judgments for he hath 
judged the great harlot." "Alleluia, for the Lord God omnipotent 
reigneth." And they will thus "glorify God in the day of 
visitation." [1 Pet. 12:12.] 

But let us "walk in his footsteps" --"the path of the just" 
[righteous] and, enlightened and illumined by the word, 
realizing the presence of 

R178 : page 8 

our Lord, glorify God without having to go into the wrath. 
"Watch ye that ye may be accounted worthy," [clothed with his 
righteousness, "unspotted from the world"] to escape all those 
things coming upon the world, and stand before the Son of 
Man." Let us remember that the 'little flock' have always been- 
the church "whose names are written in heaven," though during 
the gospel age the number has seemed much larger, by reason of 
tares. And though you may have little of earthly communion 
with saints, remember to keep up your relationship and union 
with the head of the church— Christ. 

As at the first advent some of the people would have believed if 
the Pharisees had received Him, and it was asked, "Have any of 
the Scribes or Pharisees believed on him?" So now many say if 
the Lord is present why do not the leading preachers of the 
churches believe it? We cannot risk our judgment as to the 
meaning of the word as against theirs. Of the leaders of that 
church Jesus said: "Can the blind lead the blind; shall they not 
both fall?" (Luke 6:39.) They did; both leaders and masses 
stumbled and fell. So too Jesus says of the nominal church here, 
Thou knowest not that thou art poor and blind. And again, for 
the same reasons, many stumble and fall. 

Let us remember, dear friends, that the great Teacher and Leader 
of the flock is Christ. The guide unto truth is the Spirit of truth 
through the word, and if any man teach, you are required to 
square and measure his teachings, by going "to the law and to 
the testimony, If they speak not according to these it is because 
there is no light in them." (Isa. 8:20.) As children of the light, let 



us walk in the light, and be sanctified and separated from both 
the world and a worldly church. 



R178:page3 



CONSECRATION PRAYER. 

Take my life, and let it be 
Consecrated, Lord, to Thee. 
Take my hands, and let them move 
At the impulse of thy love. 

Take my feet, and let them be 
Swift and beautiful for Thee. 
Take my voice, and let me sing 
Always, only, for my King. 

Take my lips, and let them be 
Filled with messages from Thee. 
Take my silver and my gold, 
Not a mite will I withhold. 

Take my moments and my days, 
Let them flow in ceaseless praise. 
Take my intellect, and use 
Every power as Thou shalt choose. 

Take my will, and make it thine; 
It shall be no longer mine. 
Take my heart, it is thine own! 
Fit it for Thy royal throne. 

Take my love; my Lord, I pour 
At Thy feet its treasure store! 
Take myself, and I will be, 
Ever, only, all, for Thee! 



R178:page3 



-Selected. 



HOLY PLACE. 



It will be admitted by all Bible students, that a correct 
understanding of terms used, is necessary, in order to a clear 
comprehension of any subject. Now that the tabernacle of the 
wilderness is unfolding so grandly, as a type, or shadow of the 
true tabernacle, and giving us a better knowledge of God and 
Christ, and the way to God, it becomes important to understand 
the terms used in connection with it. 

For various reasons, it seems especially important to know the 
scripture names of the three places in the tabernacle. It is evident 



that in some passages, the term holy is used for most holy, or 
referring to both, so that it is necessary to determine the place 
referred to by the connections; but we think it can be clearly 
shown that the names are not all used interchangeably. 

It seems that there has been a general misunderstanding in 
regard to the term holy place. It needs only to be stated that 
words in italics in the scriptures, have been supplied by the 
translators, and were not in the original. If that is invariably the 
case, then we think that it can be shown that wherever place is 
not in italics, the term "holy place" has reference to the court of 
the tabernacle; and consequently the other two places are called 
the holy and most holy, or holiest of all; place being in italics, in 
both old and new testament. So we have "the holy place;" (the 
court) "the holy," (beyond the first vail) and "the most holy," or 
holiest of all (beyond the second vail). Notice in Exodus, Lev. 
and Heb. As has been shown, the alter of burnt offering; and the 
laver for washing, were in the court or holy place. The animals 
for sacrifice were killed there. And he shall slay the lamb in the 
place where he shall kill the sin offering in the holy place. Lev. 
14:13. And the remainder thereof shall Aaron and his sons eat; 
with unleavened bread shall it be eaten in the holy place; in the 
court of the tabernacle of the congregation they shall eat it. Lev. 
6:16-26. 

It will be noticed that place is in the original in these passages, 
not being in italics; and that the holy place and court are 
identical. And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying: Thou shalt 
make a laver of brass, and his foot of brass to wash; and thou 
shalt put it between the tabernacle of the congregation and the 
alter, and thou shalt put water therein, for Aaron and his sons 
shall wash their hands and their feet thereat; when they go into 
the tabernacle of the congregation, they shall wash, that they die 
not; or when they come near to the alter to minister, to burn 
offering made by fire unto the Lord. Ex. 30:17-20. Whatsoever 
shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy; and when there is 
sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any garment thou shalt wash 
that whereon it was sprinkled, in the holy place (the court). Lev. 
6:27. 

These passages make it certain that whoever or whatever was 
washed in connection with the tabernacle, was washed at the 
laver, in the holy place; and we have seen that the holy place is 
the court of the tabernacle; and we found also, in Ex. 30:20, that 
whoever would enter the holy, must first wash at the laver, that 
he die not. Now coming to Lev. 16 which gives us a picture of 
the day of atonement, we find that if the high priest would enter 
holy or most holy, he must first wash his flesh in water and put 
on the holy linen garments; then kill the bullock to make 
atonement for himself and his house; and take his blood in and 
sprinkle upon and before the mercy seat; then come out and kill 
the goat, which was to make atonement for the people, and do 



with his blood as he did with the blood of the bullock; then after 
making atonement for the holy, and the tabernacle, and the alter; 
and sending away the scapegoat; Aaron shall come into the 
tabernacle of the congregation, (evidently in this passage as in 
some others~the court) and shall put off the linen garments, 
which he put on when he went into the holy, and leave them 
there, and shall wash his flesh with water in the holy place (the 
court). Lev. 16:23-24. 

In the face of all these facts, it is persistently claimed by some 
that Aaron killed the bullock, then stopped on his way to the 
most holy, and washed his flesh in the holy, and put on the holy 
garments, and also stopped on his way out to wash etc., in the 
holy; claiming that the beauty of the type consisted in the 
washing where no place was provided for that purpose; and 
notwithstanding it was death to enter the holy before washing. 
We think the beauty of any explanation of God's word should 
consist in adhering to the general teaching of the word. 

B. W. K. 



R179:page3 

HID TREASURES. 

"If thou seekest her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid 
treasures, then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord and 
find the knowledge of God." Prov. 2:4,5. 

If we go back to the second verse we shall find the thing spoken 
of is wisdom. 

Webster says that, "in Scripture, theology wisdom is true 
religion." What does religion mean? The word is taken from 
Religo, to bind anew, or to rebind. It is used in a general sense to 
signify "any system of faith and worship." Notice it is a system. 
This brings us to the conclusion (if we take Webster for the 
standard of words, and we have no reason to differ) that wisdom 
is the true system of faith and worship. Then it follows that we 
are to seek for the true system of faith and worship as men seek 
for silver. But, says one, silver is out of sight in the earth, and is 
hard to be found, but what is necessary to be known of the true 
system of religion is revealed so plainly that the wayfaring man, 
though a fool, need not err therein. I know the Prophet speaks of 
a good time coming, when it shall be so revealed that "the 
wayfaring man, though a fool, (like the rich man who had to pull 
down his barns and build larger) shall not err therein. " Now, we 
think there is a strong analogy between seeking for a knowledge 
of the true system of faith and seeking for silver. Paul says, Heb. 
5:11, there are many things... hard (difficult) to be uttered," and 
Peter, 2 Peter 3:16, speaks of "things hard to be understood, 



which they that are unlearned (in the word) and unstable, wrest, 
as they do also the other Scripture, to their own destruction." 

Experience, as well as the word, teaches us that as there is much 
and persistent search and pains-taking required to find the "vein" 
or "lead" of precious metal concealed in the earth, so there is to 
find the vein or lead of precious truth hidden away in the mine 
of God's word. 

We think it a duty to find out all we possibly can of God's 
"system of faith," and what we cannot find out will be only that 
which he has so completely hidden. But some one may ask, why 
has He hidden it? If it is right for us to know it? We answer, that 
it may not be found until it is needed. God's wisdom has hidden 
it just far enough away to be found by our finite minds, after 
diligent search, just at the right time, or, as the Spirit says, due 
time; and it is those who are interested and earnest enough to 
search and find the jewels, who are to be vested with regal 
authority. 

One might just as well say that the silver and gold, the coal and 
the oil were hidden away in the earth because it was not right for 
us to have them, as that it is not right to search for the true 
system of faith. 

But, says one, we have had the true system of faith all along 
through the past-what more can we have? Did not our fathers 
understand it? Yes, they understood (those who searched) what 
was necessary for them to know, but that was not enough for us 
to know, any more than the supply of silver and gold which was 
in the world at the time of the discovery of America was 
sufficient for the world without any addition up to the present 
time. Our fathers worked the same mine, but did not exhaust it, 
thank God. There are nuggets of gold coming to the light all the 
time. 

But let us see what Scripture evidence we have that these things 
are so. Jesus said, when weeping over Jerusalem, "if thou hadst 
known at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy 
peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes;" but were they to 
remain hidden? No! Isaiah, looking down through the ages (the 
remainder of the Jewish age, and through the Gospel age to the 
coming age~in the restitution age), says, then the eyes of the 
blind shall see. Jesus before had called them blind, and that was 
how these things were "hid from their eyes." 

Paul, in Col. 1 :26, says, "the mystery" of the word of God "hath 
been hid from ages and from generations, but now (in this good- 
news age) is made manifest to his saints. 

Again, in Eph. 3:4,5,6, he says "the mystery of Christ... in other 
ages was not made known unto the sons of men, as it is now 
revealed unto the Holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit, that 
the Gentiles should be fellow heirs and of the same body," and 



he tells us that he was made a minister to make all men see what 
is the fellowship of the mystery which, from the beginning of 
the world, hath been hid in God." 

O, how glorious are these things to those who search for them as 
for hid treasure. Truly, here is the knowledge of (about) God. 

Men in mining have lights fixed upon their heads, and they bend 
low, sometimes prostrate in search. We need to be humble and 
have our minds illuminated with the Spirit. When men have 
found silver in the mine it has to be separated from materials 
which are useful in themselves, but detract from the value of the 
precious metal unless separated. So the child of God, like 
Timothy, needs to "rightly divide the word of truth." Let us, dear 
brethren, continue our search after wisdom, which shall result in 
finding "the knowledge of God," for "it cannot be valued with 
the gold of Ophir, with the precious Onyx or the Sapphire." 

The gold and the crystal cannot equal it, and the exchange of it 
shall not be for jewels of fine gold. And when we have found it 
let us not waste nor hoard it, but "put it to the exchangers, that at 
His coming He may receive His own with usury." 

J. C. S. 



R179:page3 



'OUR HOUSE." 



"For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were 
dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made with 
hands eternal in the heavens," 2 Cor. 5:1-2. 

From a not hasty but careful perusal of the Scriptures, we are 
satisfied that the view generally taken of this passage, (with the 
context) by the nominal church, hitherto, is erroneous. 

This may seem somewhat immodest; we do not so intend. If we 
have any light it is received, not inherent in us, "that is in our 
flesh dwelleth no good thing. " If we have apprehended the truth, 
it is because "He, the spirit of truth," leads us, for "the natural 
man receiveth not the things of the spirit, for they are 
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they 
are spiritually discerned." 1 Cor. 2:14. The Church is not to 
blame for not seeing before; how can one be expected to see in 
the night anything more than the outlines of the landscape; but 
now the day dawns, "let us not sleep, as do others," 1 Thes. 5:6. 

The prophets uttered some things which they did not fully 
understand and which it was not necessary they should fully 
understand, because they were for us; 1 Peter 1:10-12. 

But about this matter, Paul says (as mouth-piece for the 
Church), "we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle 



were dissolved we have a (singular number) building of God, a 
house not made with hands, etc. 

Paul was writing to the Corinthians here, but he was also writing 
"to all that in every place call on the name of Jesus Christ our 
Lord, both theirs and ours." 1 Cor. 1:2. The word "theirs" refers 
evidently to Jews. Paul was a Jew, Acts 21:39, but he styles 
himself "the Apostle of the Gentiles," Rom. 11:13; so in 
harmony with the latter he could in this dedication of his epistle 
say, "both theirs and ours" to the new Church, which was made 
up of both Jews and Gentiles. They (the Jews) stood aloof from 
the Gospel and were enemies of the cross of Christ; thus 
standing at a distance, the term "theirs," although Paul was a 
Jew, was appropriate to them, and converts 

R179 : page 4 

from both could be very appropriately called "theirs and ours." 
Now, to such he says, "We know that if our earthly house of this 
tabernacle (to which so many precious promises have been 
made) were dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not 
made with hands." It may seem strange to us that the old house 
of Israel should not be able to see the typical nature of their 
ceremonies, and that "whatever is to be on the higher or spiritual 
plane, is brought to view first on the plane of the flesh," but 
though God had been speaking "by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets since the world began," of a restitution, they did not 
see that there was to be, in its application to them, a time of 
dissolution, before the time of restitution; and it seems that the 
Gospel Church in Paul's time, needed to be admonished of the 
danger of looking at that which is seen, forgetting that "that 
which is seen (by mortal eye) is temporal." 

He had to combat that tendency, as in Galations 3:3. "Are ye so 
foolish? having began in the spirit, are ye now made perfect by 
the flesh?" "If our earthly house of this tabernacle were 
dissolved, we have a building of God. " 

The "tabernacle of David is fallen down," but God in his good 
time will rebuild it; but those who are "begotten again unto a 
lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead," 
have the power or privilege of becoming sons of God, and 
together will constitute the house of God; not the house of 
Moses nor the house of David (after the flesh) nor any other 
house but the house of God eternal. 

"Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, 
consider 

R180:page4 

the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus, who 
was faithful to Him that appointed Him, as also Moses was 
faithful in all His house, for this Man was counted worthy of 



more glory than Moses, inasmuch as He who hath builded the 
house, hath more honor than the house."... 

And Moses verily was faithful in all his house, as a servant; 
what for? "for a testimony of those things which were to come 
after. "But Christ as a son over his own house, whose house are 
we, if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope 
firm unto the end." Heb. 3:1-6. 

Now, no matter if the earthly house of our tabernacle, "whether 
of David or the Gospel, be dissolved, we have a building of 
God, a house not made with hands eternal in the heavens. 

We have here a thought suggested by the word dissolve, which 
is in harmony with the prophecy of Malachi 3:3. "And He shall 
sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and He shall purify the sons 
of Levi and purge them as gold and silver." We have often heard 
this referred to and the manner of the refiner watching the 
melting of the precious metal until he can see his own image 
reflected, as an illustration of God's dealing with each of His 
children, all of which is very beautiful and truthful, but there is 
in this expression "dissolved," and yet existing after a still 
deeper thought that impresses us. 

The refiner of silver often finds impurities clinging to his silver 
after it has passed through the hottest fire; then he dissolves it: 
after the application of certain chemicals, silver and gold will 
dissolve in water. A person unacquainted with the process 
would say there was no silver in the water, though the water 
were full of it; the water appears as before~a little discolored if 
the silver was impure— otherwise as clear as if it were not there, 
and the refiner can cause a restitution of that silver to a pure and 
permanent form and more beautiful than before; he puts into that 
water an agent, (an influence) that causes the water to let go of 
it, and the silver in fine particles goes together by itself, no 
longer "dissolved" or "suspended." Then the refiner, to complete 
the work of restitution, puts it in the fire again; thus it "receives 
from his hand double" for all its impurity. 

Now, in prophetic language, waters represent sometimes people 
and sometimes afflictions. Has not the earthly house, "both 
theirs and ours," passed, and are they not passing through such 
waters? Have "they" not been dissolved and "ours" (the nominal 
Church) being dissolved? No matter; "we know that if our 
earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a 
building of God." So Paul could say to the Corinthians and the 
Galations, who were fearing lest they should not be connected in 
some way with the earthly house, that it was a matter of minor 
importance— all it was for was a type and stepping-stone to 
something higher and better. 

Some may say, this is "far fetched," but we have fetched it only 
from the prophet Malachi, and made what seems to us the only 
true application, and it seems to make perfect harmony with all 



other Scripture. We have been held entranced hour after hour as 
we have compared Scripture with Scripture and found beautiful 
harmony with this view all through the word, and thank the Lord 
for it. 

We would not be understood as saying that the word, body and 
house, are never applied to our physical bodies, for it not 
unfrequently is, and we think it is so used in the 10th verse of 
this chapter, though we do not feel over-positive about it lest it 
might refer to the different organizations, that shall finally be 
"gathered together in one," for we hope that the Methodist body, 
the Baptist body and the Presbyterian body (all of which are 
called bodies by their own authorities) will form, if not the body 
of Christ, yet the "household of God;" and we know that "we 
must all (all these different bodies) stand before the judgment 
seat of Christ (when and where?); that every one may "give an 
account of the things done in his body" -no, "that every one may 
receive the things done in his body." [His, is in italics in our 
Bibles.] 

Perhaps some one is ready to ask, "How do you harmonize it 
with the 8th verse?" We would say, that the apostle (Col. 3:3), 
though speaking of our death to sin, tells us where our life is 
(whether our physical bodies are dead or alive, makes no 
difference,) from the time of begetting onward, our "life is hid 
with Christ in God" until "He, who is our Life, shall appear," 
then the earnest expectation of the creature [who is the creature 
but the one who has no spiritual life, the outside world], 
"waiting for the manifestation of the sons of God" will be 
realized and the "sons of God" will be recognized. Till then we 
shall not be able to find out what God has hidden. 

Then, when we are born again, 

"BORN BY A NEW CELESTIAL BIRTH," 

we shall have life in ourselves and together constitute the 
"building of God," the "house not made with hands." Dear 
brethren, how near and dear the relation we sustain to each 
other-"Builded together for the habitation of God." J. C. S. 



R180:page4 

"HOW LONG, O LORD?" 

This is a question doubtless that many ask themselves, viz: 
"How soon will our change come?" This change many of us 
have looked forward to for years, and we yet with much 
pleasure, think of the time when we shall be gathered unto Jesus 
and see Him as he is. In the article concerning our change, in 
December paper, we expressed the opinion that it was nearer 
than many supposed, and while we would not attempt to prove 



our change at any particular time, yet we propose looking at 
some of the evidences which seem to show the translation or 
change from the natural to the spiritual condition, due this side 
or by the fall of our year 1881. The evidence that our change 
will be by that time, increases since we have seen that the 
change to spiritual bodies is not the marriage. While we thought 
the marriage to be the change, and knowing there was three and 
a half years of special favor to the Nominal Church (now left 
desolate) from 1878, we could not expect any translation this 
side of 1881, or during this three and a half years. But since we 
recognize that going into the marriage is not only being made 
ready (by recognizing His presence) for the change, but also, 
that going in includes the change itself, then the evidences that 
we go in (or will be changed) inside of the time mentioned are 
strong, and commend themselves to all interested as worthy of 
investigation. Aside from any direct proof that our change is 
near, the fact that the manner of the change can now be 
understood, is evidence that we are near the time of the change, 
for truth is "meat in due season," and understood only as due. It 
will be remembered that after the spring of 1878, (when we 
understand Jesus was due as King) that the subject of holiness or 
the wedding garment, was very much agitated. And aside from 
the parallel to the end of the Jewish age, and favor at that time 
being shown to the Jewish nation, which implied the presence of 
the King, the consideration of the wedding garment, was also 
proof of the correctness of the application, for "the King had 
come in to see the guests," [Matt. 22:11] and hence all were 
interested in knowing how they stood before Him. Now as the 
inspection of guests is the last thing prior to our change, which 
precedes the marriage and we are all now considering the 
change. It would seem that the time for it, is nigh. 

We shall now present what we adduce from the types and 
prophetic points as seeming to indicate the translation of the 
saints and closing of the door to the high calling by 1881. We 
first notice the building of the Temple, by Solomon which seems 
to be a type of the spiritual as indicated in Acts 7:4-7. The time 
occupied in building is found by comparing 1 Kings 6:1,37 and 
38, which was seven years and six months, yet called seven 
years. Verse 38. "The house when it was in building, was built 
of stone made ready before it was brought thither: so that there 
was neither hammer, nor ax, nor any tool of iron heard in the 
house while it was in building." Verse 7. The quiet manner of 
building suggests to our mind the noiseless resurrection of the 
dead in Christ and change of the living, and if so the resurrection 
and change would cover a period of seven years, thus bringing 
to our mind, order. First the foundation laid and so on until 
completion, and this would be in harmony with statement in 
Rev. 1 1:18, viz: "Give reward unto thy servants, the prophets, 
and to the saints," that is, "Every man in his own order." In 1 
Kings 5:17, we read, "The king commanded and they brought 



great stones, costly stones, and hewed stones to lay the 
foundation of the house." Those we would understand to 
represent the "Apostles and Prophets, which are the foundation, 
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner-stone, in whom all 
the building fitly framed together," groweth unto an holy temple 
in the Lord (Eph. 2:20-21). 

The laying of the foundation-stone, we think, would fitly 
represent the resurrection of the prophets, which resurrection 
would seem to be indicated by God's statement to Daniel, viz: 
"Go thou thy way till the end be, for thou shalt rest, and stand in 
thy lot at the end of the days." (Dan. 12:13.) The days here 
referred to are mentioned in the 12th verse as "The thousand, 
three hundred 

R181 : page 4 

and five and thirty days," and from 538 when the abomination 
was set up, (so mentioned in verse 11,) 1335 years, if prolonged 
to their utmost, would reach to the year 1 874. [For argument, 
see "Day Dawn."] This is one of the arguments which prove the 
presence of Christ at that time for Daniel could not stand in his 
lot or be resurrected, until Christ came. Besides it is also a 
parallel to the baptism of Jesus in the Jewish age, at which time 
the harvest of that age begun and he was recognized as Lord of 
the harvest and bridegroom. So we understand the bridegroom 
came at a parallel point in this age and those that were ready 
went in. (Matt. 25:10.) Since we find that going in includes the 
change to spiritual bodies, it is significant that the days of 
Daniel and the presence of the bridegroom occur at the same 
time, viz: autumn of 1874, and if Daniel stood in his lot at that 
time, he was raised a spiritual body, and as he represents the 
order of prophets and their resurrection is shown by the laying 
of the foundation-stones of the temple, then it would seem that 
the temple began to be built at that time. If this be a correct 
application (and it seems harmonious) and the time of building 
is seven years, then we would expect our change by or before 
the fall of 1881, as from 1874 to then would be the time given 
for building. It is true that the parable of Matt. 25 is only in 
reference to the living phase of the Church. Yet we believe that 
while those living "virgins" go into the wedding by coming into 
a knowledge of the Bridegroom's presence, etc., during the 
seven years harvest [from 1874 to 1881] yet the parable is 
having as it were a fulfillment on a still higher plane during the 
same seven years, viz.: The going into the condition of readiness 
for marriage 

R181 : page 5 

of all the chaste virgins, the dead (by resurrection) and living 
(by translation or change.) In going into the spiritual condition 
"We cannot precede them." (E. Diaglott, 1 Thess. 4:15.) As 
Daniel's time was up in 1874 it is reasonable to suppose that the 



order he represented went in at that time, since which the "dead 
in Christ" are being raised; and as the seven years are about 
complete, that we will soon follow by being changed. Matt. 25 
and the parallelism of the Jewish and Gospel ages, seem to teach 
that the wise of the virgins "who are alive and remain" must all 
come in, to a knowledge of the bridegroom's presence, by the 
fall of 1881, when the door-opportunity to become a member of 
the bride-will close. 

But it is possible that the change to the spiritual condition-the 
"going in to the marriage on the higher plane-may not occur at 
the same moment to each individual. We suggest as quite 
possible, that the change may come to some prepared before that 
time. 

If the dead are to be raised before we are changed it can as well 
take place some time before as a moment, and if the temple is 
any type it is evident that some will be raised at least seven 
years before the last are changed. The fact that the body or mass 
of the saints are assembled together when we are gathered, is 
intimated by Luke 17:34-37, and Paul in Heb. 12:22-23, says: 
"Ye are come [coming] unto Mount Zion, the heavenly 
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels. To the 
general assembly and church of the first born, and to the spirits 
of just men made perfect." We come to these. 

The next point we will consider is that of Noah entering the Ark. 
It seems that the flood of forty days in the destruction of the old 
world is a type of the forty years' trouble here at the end of this 
world, (age) and as Noah entered there and escaped, so some 
shall enter here and escape. 

"The Lord said unto Noah, Come thou, and all thy house, into 
the Ark. For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the 
earth forty days and forty nights." And Noah did according unto 
all that the Lord commanded him; and it came to pass after 
seven days, that the waters of the flood were upon the earth. 
(Gen. 7:1-10.) The language in connection with this 
circumstance seems to suggest the idea that Noah and those with 
him were seven days going in, and if so, then, this would 
harmonize with the seven years [a day for a year] building of the 
temple or time of going in, commencing with 1874. There is one 
point, however, we will notice, viz: It rained forty days after 
Noah entered, which would represent forty years' trouble after 
we enter. From 1881 to 1914 inclusive, is only about thirty-three 
years, hence in this respect the time differs. This is not when 
considered an objection to the position, for though the time of 
harvest and end of this age commenced Chronologically in 
1874, yet the trouble cannot break, in the full sense, until the 
saints have been taken. "Yet seven days [years] and I will cause 
it to rain upon the earth," should be significant, because we have 
expected trouble, in a special sense, about 1881, and, according 
to the type, we must enter in by that time. Not only has that time 



been looked forward to by many as a point when there would be 
some great change, but the parallel to the end of the Jewish age 
demands that there be a change for the worse, in reference to the 
nominal Christian Church, it being a parallel to when favor 
ended with the Jews in a marked manner, shown by the seventy 
weeks of years mentioned by Daniel 9:24, which time ended 
three and a-half years after they were left desolate. Just as 1881 
is three and a-half years from the point when the Jews began to 
receive favor. While this trouble is due, in the actual sense, from 
1881 on, and is due chronologically to end in 1914, leaving only 
a space of thirty-three years; yet the trouble cannot end actually 
at that time, for there would be a gradual decrease "while the 
nations were beating their swords into plowshares and their 
spears into pruning hooks." (Isa. 2:4.) Hence there could be 
forty years of trouble even after 1881 and not interfere with our 
general position, for this would only carry us seven years 
beyond 1914, as this now does seven years beyond 1874. We 
used to think it would be in the midst of a great trouble that we 
would be changed, but now we do not. Noah went in before it 
rained, and "the Lord shut him in." (Gen. 7:16.) So now, while 
all things remain as in "the days of Noah," we will be changed 
and then the flood—trouble will break on those who know not 
and are in darkness. [1 Thess. 5:1-5.] 

This is shown also in the type of Moses and Aaron, for not one 
of the ten plagues came until after they met in the Mount. And 
as that meeting shows our change, then in order here, there 
would be none of the plagues come till after we are gathered 
unto Jesus, by which we would "escape all these things that shall 
come to pass and stand before the Son of man." [Luke 21 :36.] It 
is in connection with this last type that we find additional proof 
of our speedy change. 

Stephen says: "When he [Moses] was full forty years old it came 
into his heart to visit his brethren, the children of Israel." Moses 
at this time came to deliver his brethren, but they rejected him, 
saying: "Who made thee a ruler and judge over us?" After his 
rejection, "he fled and was a stranger in the land of Midian," 
when he took the daughter of Jethro, priest of Midian, to wife. 
(Exo. 3:1.) And when forty years were expired there appeared to 
him "an angel of the Lord," at which time he was informed of 
God's intention to "send him into Egypt," and "this Moses, 
whom they refused did God send to be a ruler and deliverer." 
(Acts 7:23-36.) Moses seems clearly in this case to be a type of 
Christ. Jesus came to deliver his brethren (according to the 
flesh) and was rejected, after which he takes a Gentile wife and 
returns, showing favor to natural Israel. (Acts 15:14-16.) As 
Moses, in the first instance, Jesus came as a man, but the second 
time as a God, at which time He effects their deliverance. While 
there is a similarity in these general features, it is the time we 
would look at, more particularly now. The two periods in the life 
of Moses, at the end of which he came each time, seem to 



foreshadow the Jewish and Gospel ages, (each represented by 
forty years of Moses' life) at the end of which Jesus comes, first 
at the end of the Jewish as a man; now, in the end of the Gospel 
as a God. 

This being true, one forty would end in A.D. 33, when he was 
rejected as king and left their house desolate. (Luke 19:30-44.) 
Then the parallel to the end of the second forty would be 1878, 
when he came as king and the work of restoring them to favor 
began. Now, with this thought, let us turn to Ex. 7:7. "And 
Moses was fourscore years old and Aaron fourscore and three 
years old when they spake unto Pharaoh." The fourscore, or 
twice forty, would bring us to 1878, in the antitype when Christ 
spake to Pharaoh (the world) by an act, in restoring Israel to 
favor. But it says: "Aaron was fourscore and three years old." As 
Aaron represents us, the living saints, it would seem to indicate 
that we come into a position of power three years after the time, 
represented by the fourscore of Moses. Aaron did not speak until 
after he met Moses, so we would not in the sense here referred 
to until after our change. If the three years mentioned in 
connection with Aaron has any bearing, then it would teach our 
change as coming this side of 1881, as three years from 1878 
would bring us inside of that time. We do not think it well to 
base too much on types or allegories, but when we find them in 
harmony with prophetic points they add additional evidence, and 
while we would not present any of these things as absolute, yet 
there is a harmony which commends them to an intelligent 
mind. They call for the exercise of faith on our part, especially 
when we remember that in reference to the coming of Jesus and 
our change, the apostles, "Say some things hard to be 
understood." (2 Pet. 3:14-16.) We now have taken prophetic 
measurements and allegories together, 

R182:page5 

five different points seeming to teach the resurrection of the 
dead in Christ and change of the living between the fall of 1 874 
and 1881. Two or more witnesses are enough to prove any case, 
as a rule, and certainly God has given us abundant evidence. We 
are also glad to notice that all these things only corroborate 
previous truths, thus proving to a certainty each application as 
correct and causing the old jewels to shine brighter. The five 
lines of argument briefly stated are these: 

1st. The days of Daniel ending in 1874, at which time the 
resurrection commenced, and since which, the dead have been 
going in to the marriage. 

2d. The end of the seven years from that time, as marked by the 
parallel, of the end of the "seventy weeks" in the Jewish age 
ending in our year 1881, at which time we all should be in and 
the door closed, being the end of time of special favor to the 



nominal church before commencement of trouble which follows 
our change. 

3d. The building of temple, covering seven years time, and 
hence in harmony with the above arguments. 

4th. Entering of Ark by Noah and his house, occupying seven 
days (typical of years.) 

5th. The last mentioned allegory in the life of Moses and Aaron. 

Thus we find the types of days and years are in harmony. In 
view of these things let us watch and be sober, for "It is good 
that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of 
the Lord." Lam. 3:26. 

A. D. J. 



R182:page5 

Baptism of the Holy Ghost. 

This subject is so little understood that some have confounded it 
with the baptism of death, referred to in first article of 
September number. And some of our readers have expressed 
themselves as being pleased with the article on Baptism of the 
Spirit. This is quite a mistake, as the two baptisms are entirely 
different. Notice that while all are exhorted to be baptized into 
Christ's death, (willingly submitting to death) none are ever told 
to be baptized with the Holy Ghost. 

Some will inquire, should we not assemble ourselves as Bro. 
Moody and others of our dear brethren and sisters have recently 
done in Massachusetts, and earnestly pray to our Father for the 
baptism of the Holy Ghost? We answer, no, because there is 
only one baptism of the Spirit promised or necessary to the 
church. This one baptism was at Pentecost. We are told that it 
came as a rushing, mighty wind and "filled all the house where 
they were sitting. " 

Now, notice the idea of immersion. The house being filled, they 
were completely surrounded by, or immersed in Holy Spirit. We 
are members of the same church and family, and that was our 
baptism— one for all, and no other baptism of the Spirit is ever 
taught anywhere in the Bible. Remember, that up to the time of 
Jesus' baptism by John, when coming up out of the water, the 
Holy Ghost descended upon him, the Holy Ghost had not yet 
been given to any one in the way now imparted to the church, 
viz.: as a comforter, guide and leader into the understanding of 
truth, etc. 

True, the Spirit had been in the world, and was exercised upon 
and in certain prophets, but it was given for special occasions, 
and was not an abiding presence. It gave them miraculous 



utterance, but did not guide into the understanding of God's 
word; for, "not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister 
the things which are now reported unto you by them that have 
preached the Gospel unto you, with the Holy Spirit sent down 
from Heaven. 1 Pet. 1:12. 

The Spirit given to Jesus without measure, (John 3:34,) and 
given by measure to all his disciples and members, (John 1:16) 
is the spirit of adoption (into the divine family and nature), 
whereby we cry, "Father, Father," i.e., we recognize God as our 
Father in two senses- first, as our creator as natural men, even 
as Adam was called the Son of God, (Luke 3:38), and now by 
our adoption into the divine family he becomes our Father in 
that divine sense. Until Jesus, no man could enter into the 
relation to God of adopted sons, partakers of the divine nature, 
because all were sinners, and God could not receive sinners as 
sons. When "the man Christ Jesus presented himself as a being, 
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, in whom was 
no sin," he was acceptable with the Father, and when he offered 
his perfect natural life for ours, according to the will of God, it 
was acceptable. The Father accepted of his sacrifice-the natural, 
and as a gift, gave to him the spiritual, divine nature- life and 
body, which he had laid aside when he took the human nature- 
life and body. Now, when Jesus made the covenant 

R182:page6 

to lay down his humanity as our ransom, he received the divine 
adoption and the spirit without measure, and the witness of his 
relationship came at once, (Luke 3:22), for a voice from heaven 
said: "Thou art my beloved Son; in Thee I am well pleased." 
(Luke 3:22.) 

Thus was our head anointed with the oil of gladness. Now, were 
the disciples also so anointed and given the comfort and 
guidance of the Spirit? No; not while Jesus lived. Why? We 
answer, for the same reason that the prophets could not receive 
it thus. They were sinners in God's sight, part of the fallen 
human family, and the ransom for their forfeited life was not 
paid until "Jesus Christ by the grace of God tasted death (on the 
cross) for every man." 

Were the disciples, believers, then received as justified, pure, 
sinless in God's sight the moment Jesus died? We answer that 
the price of our ransom was then paid, but that in God's plan, 
Jesus must first present in the Father's presence the evidence of 
His death-our redemption. "Him therefore hath God highly 
exalted and given a name above every name, " that the gift of the 
divine nature should come through him to his body (the church), 
for God hath committed all judgment unto the Son," and "hath 
given him power over all flesh that He should give eternal life to 
as many as thou hast given him." He must first receive again 
from the Father, the fullness of the divine nature before He 



could bestow the spirit, the seal of sonship. Remember, the head 
only, had so far, received the comforter, or evidence of 
adoption, for the Holy Spirit was not yet given, because that 
Jesus was not yet glorified. (John 7:39.) 

Thus the church, as instructed, were waiting to be imbued with 
the spirit which should guide them in understanding the 
scriptures (Old Testament) and the words of Jesus. When the 
spirit did come, it immersed them all by filling the house. This 
spiritual baptism came to the church directly from her head, as 
Peter testified. "Jesus, therefore, being by the right hand of God 
exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the 
Holy Ghost, (having come fully into possession of spiritual 
power, as promised.) He hath shed forth this which ye now see 
and hear." Acts 2:33. 

The Holy Spirit- "Spirit of truth" -thus given as the church's 
teacher, begins the work by distributing certain gifts to certain 
members of the church. All (the church) received of the spirit of 
adoption, but some received of the gifts of the spirit. These gifts 
varied, according to the character and natural ability, etc., of the 
person; the object of the Lord in bestowing these gifts being, 
that every one who received them should profit withal (use them 
profitably for the good of the church and the advancement of 
truth.) 1 Cor. 12:7. 

Paul explains the matter, saying, "Wherefore it is said, having 
ascended on high, He led a multitude of captives, and gave gifts 
to men." "He gave indeed the apostles, and the prophets, and the 
evangelists, and shepherds, and teachers." Why did Jesus give 
these gifts? For the complete qualification of the saints for the 
work of service, in order to the building up of the body of the 
anointed one." Eph. 4:12. Diaglott. 

Here only the chief gifts are mentioned, but in 1 Cor. 12 we 
have these and other graded "diversities of gifts." And those 
whom God hath placed in the congregation are: first, apostles; 
second, prophets; third, teachers; next, powers; then gifts of 
cures, assistants, directors, different languages. All are not 
apostles; all are not prophets; all are not teachers, etc... .But you 
earnestly desire the more eminent gifts, and yet a more excellent 
way I point out unto you. "--Love: "If I have prophecy, and know 
all secrets and all knowledge, and if I have all faith so as to 
remove mountains and have not LOVE, I am nothing." (Diag.) 

Now, we inquire, has this spirit ever been withdrawn from the 
church? If through the various gifts and channels then arranged 
of God it was sufficient in quantity and quality to do the work 
assigned, viz.: to guide the church into truth, then has it lost any 
of its power and efficiency now, that we should ask for a 
baptism again? No beloved, the comforter abides with us in full 
measure; Jesus, our head, poured it out abundantly and 
sufficiently once, and it remains for us. 



True, some of the gifts are departed, but the chief ones remain. 
We still have the apostles and prophets. These being dead, yet 
speak to us, and that more clearly and forcibly than to our 
brethren who saw them face to face. The word declares that 
"there are differences of administration, but the same Lord." Our 
Lord has, to some extent, changed His administration, but he, as 
head, is still ruling over his body. The same spirit continues, but 
with diversities of operations. It does not now operate (usually) 
by the lower gifts of 

R183 : page 6 

tongues, cures, etc., probably because the ignorance which made 
it expedient then, has now given place to knowledge, so that 
instead of coming together and speaking or praying ignorantly, 
in an unknown tongue, we can now, when we assemble 
ourselves, speak to one another of the teachings of the Lord and 
His apostles. God still continues, to some extent, the gifts of 
teachers (called prophets 1 Cor. 14:3-5) evangelists, shepherds. 
The manner of imparting the Holy Ghost used to be by the 
laying on of hands of the apostles, or sometimes, of others 
designated. (Acts 9:1-17.) Here again we see a "difference of 
administration," [but the same Lord and same spirit] for now, 
without laying on of hands [even as Cornelius] we, when we 
consecrate ourselves, fully receive the spirit of adoption, 
whereby we can recognize God as our Divine Father as well as 
creator. We find ourselves "Led of the Spirit" and guided into 
the truth day by day, and we know that "as many as are led by 
the spirit of God, these are the sons of God." And wherever we 
find the fruits of the spirit we may be sure that the spirit dwells 
there, else the fruits could not exist. We should be more anxious 
to possess the fruits, than the gifts, of the spirit. Paul exalts one 
of the fruits, LOVE, as being more desirable than any or all the 
gifts without it. 

Let us for a moment look at the type which seems given to 
illustrate our anointing of the spirit, viz.: The anointing of 
Aaron. (Lev. 8.) The holy oil type of the spirit was poured upon 
his head in profusion. So the spirit was given to our head, Jesus, 
without measure. As the oil ran down all over Aaron, "even to 
the skirts of his garments," so in due time- Pentecost~the (oil) 
spirit descended from our exalted head upon us, his body, and 
all through this age, it has flowed down, down, touching every 
child of God. Now, to ask God for a fresh baptism would be to 
ask amiss, for if His word abide in us, we should remember that 
he said: "The Father shall give you another comforter, that he 
may abide with you forever (aion the age), even the spirit of 
truth." John 14:16. 

Now, while it would be no more proper for us to pray for 
another baptism of the spirit than it would have been for Moses 
to have anointed Aaron twice, still as individuals, you and I may 
not have our hearts as full of the spirit of truth as it is our 



privilege to be. As God's children, we are entitled to "be filled 
with the spirit," and we cannot ask for this filling too earnestly, 
nor too frequently go to the fountain of truth-the word of God, 
at which we may copiously drink into His spirit. The more of the 
spirit we receive the more we will have room for. The new spirit 
of the new nature displaces and removes the old, carnal or 
fleshly spirit, and gives us room for more. And we repeat, there 
is abundant measure to fill full as they will hold, all of our 
"earthly vessels." 



R183 : page 6 



ZION'S TRAVAIL. 



Zion is a general name for the entire nominal church. At present 
in the mortal, flesh and blood condition, she cannot enter into 
the kingdom of God; the spiritual condition must first be 
reached. At present God holds out to her "exceeding great and 
precious promises" by which (promises) some children are 
begotten in her to spiritual life. 

We have already noticed that under various figures, as Babylon's 
fall—Israel's stumbling— coming through great tribulation-saved 
so as by fire, etc., the word of God pictures severe anguish and 
trials coming upon the church during "the harvest" or end of the 
Gospel age; and the text to which our subject refers describes it 
as travail. Travail is deathly anguish, and like the other figures 
used, is powerfully illustrative of the severity of Zion's trouble. 
The illustration shows too, the necessity of the trouble; without 
the travail Zion's children cannot all be born— delivered. 

We have seen that the trouble upon the world begins by the 
overthrow of the nominal church, and indeed every day since 
1878 where we believe the nominal church was given up to her 
travail [It, however, will not fully commence until the "first 
born"-"little flock" are born, an event expected during 1881.] 
seems to witness the uprising of new elements for her 
overthrow. Spiritualism is misleading thousands and infidelity 
tens of thousands. Col. Ingersol alone is doing a wonderful work 
in the way of sowing seeds of contempt for Zion, which already 
are taking root and must soon bud and blossom into open 
opposition to her. We believe that there is not a single person 
who hears his anti-religious lectures with candid and unbiased 
mind, who has not had his faith in the teachings of the (so 
called) orthodox churches unsettled forever. Those only who 
have seen to some extent the inconsistencies of the churches, the 
errors of their teachings, and have caught a glimpse (at least) of 
the great loving plan of God relative to the blessing of the world 
in the ages to come, can come away unshaken. 



The nominal church of the third century began to leave the word 
of God for the traditions of men, and abandoned the narrow way 
for the easier road of harmony with the world. This resulted in 
Papacy's exaltation to power, and the substituting of the 
churches fiat instead of the Bible as the only law of Christians, 
and the destruction of all Bibles known to exist~it being 
claimed that they were no longer necessary, but actually 
pernicious, as the voice of the church was the law of God. 

We would not be understood as intimating that all the children 
of Zion have been engulfed in Papacy. No, we believe that all 
through those dark ages there were members of the little flock 
who maintained their walk in the narrow way. Some of them 
were known as Waldenses, Huguenots, etc. This reign of Papacy 
led to a sad condition of ignorance, superstition and blindness to 
truth, which was only partially relieved by the great work known 
as the Reformation. We would not be misunderstood as 
intimating that the work of the Reformers was little or valueless; 
on the contrary, we believe theirs was a grand work. Taking the 
Bible, neglected and prohibited for years, they boldly preached 
the necessity of taking it as the only rule of faith and practice, 
and not the creeds of the church, and the result of their 
preaching was evidently, the development of many noble 
Christians as well as a general arousing of nominal Zion. And 
had the work there begun, been continued, Zion would not now 
be in her present deplorable condition, saying: I am rich and 
increased in goods, knowing not that she is really wretched, and 
miserable, and poor, and blind. [Rev. 3:17.] But, elated with the 
victories over some of the Romish darkness and error, the 
Church of the Reformation soon sat down self-complacently and 
at ease, evidently forgetting that though then in the light, she 
should walk (advance) in the light, and that if she sat down at 
ease the "light which shines more and more" would go far 
beyond her, and she would soon "sit in darkness." 

Again, Zion follows Papacy's rule of putting her creeds instead 
of the word of God, so that all offenders at her bar are tried by 
the "authorities" or "standards" of the church; by which is 
meant, not God's word -the Bible, but the word of the founders 
and lights of their church; forgetting that the one church or body 
of Christ which admits of no seism, has but one authority or 
head—the Lord Jesus— by whose written word every member's 
faith and practice must be judged- "To the law and to the 
testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because 
there is no light in them. " Nominal Zion recognizes no increase 
of light shining more and more (Prov. 4:18.) No, she is perfectly 
satisfied with the light of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. 
But there are some who cannot 

R183 : page 7 

be bound to the dim light of by-gone days, understanding that 
the same Bible which accomplished the Reformation work is 



necessary to the Christian's growth in grace and knowledge to- 
day. 

Because the Protestant Churches have adopted methods like that 
of Papacy, avoiding many of the grosser sins, but, nevertheless, 
like her being joined to the world and seeking its favor, 
establishing church authorities instead of God's word, etc. ; 
because of this likeness to her they are Scripturally reckoned as 
her daughters, and she is called the "Mother of harlots." These 
all, Protestant daughters and Papal mother, as well as the few 
who walk in the light, and recognize the authority and control of 
neither, but of God's word only-called "they that have not 
worshiped the beast (Papacy) nor its image" (Protestantism) -all 
of these are Zion, in the general sense, and include both wheat 
and tares. (Matt. 13.) Because she loves this present world and 
will not walk in the narrow way, in which the light shines, she 
has never been fully freed from Papal error and darkness, and 
the truth she holds is so mixed with error that she is unable to 
defend it against the attacks of infidelity and other devices of the 
enemy, to accomplish her final overthrow. 

We have already seen that the trouble upon the world is spoken 
of as the seven last plagues, which intimates that some preceded 
these last. We saw by looking at the types -the plagues upon 
Egypt, that there were three first and seven last, which first three 
we understand to be the trouble or travail of Zion, during which 
three plagues or travail, all of the wheat will be separated from 
the tares-all of God's real children will be separated from the 
nominal Church in obedience to 

R184:page7 

the call. "Come out of her, my people, etc.;" and consequently 
these will be protected during the seven last plagues. 

We have learned that two classes of Children of God are to be 
born of Zion. We understand that our present condition is that of 
begotten, embryo children, and that our resurrection or change 
to spiritual conditions will be the birth into the perfection of our 
new nature, to which we are now begotten. The first-born of 
Zion's children is, the Christ- Jesus and "the church (ecclesia- 
body) of the first-born"— these, with Him, constituting the "little 
flock," to whom "it is the Father's good pleasure to give the 
kingdom." The after-born children of Zion constitute the "great 
multitude that no man can number," who "wash their robes" and 
"come up out of great tribulation," who with palms stand "before 
the throne," in which the first-born, overcomers sit crowned. 
Christ (head and body), the first fruits, (first-born,) afterwards 
they that are Christ's at His [parousia] presence (1 Cor. 15:23)— 
the day of wrath. Those gathered during that day are the "many 
brethren" of the "household of faith. " 

If, now, we have Zion, her children and her travail before our 
minds, let us notice some scriptures which bear directly on the 



birth of Zion's children. Isaiah, (66:7-8,) referring to the matter, 
says: "Before she travailed she brought forth; before her pain 
came she was delivered of a man child. Who hath heard such a 
thing? Who hath seen such things?" 

Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? Shall a nation 
be born at once? For, as soon as Zion travailed, she brought 
forth her children. 

What a clear picture is this: The "great multitude" of Zion's 
children will be born after her travail- come up to glory through 
great tribulation. But her first born is an exception to this rule; 
it-Christ Jesus the head, and the members of the body- will be 
born, come into the perfect spiritual condition "like unto Christ's 
glorious body" before the travail. Yes, before she travailed she 
brought forth, before her pain came she was delivered of a man 
child. How much this is in harmony with Jesus' instructions; 
while intimating that the time of trouble would come upon 
nearly all, he says: "Watch ye that ye may be accounted worthy 
to escape all those things coming upon the world." The 
overcomers escape all the travail of Zion and the wrath on the 
world, share the kingdom with their Lord, and as members of 
His body, are "joint heirs" with him and "inherit all things." This 
is the seed of the woman that shall crush the serpent's head. This 
is "the seed of Abraham" (Gal. 3:29) that shall bless all the 
families of the earth. 

This is the one body whose head Jesus was "The first born from 
the dead" eighteen centuries ago, whose body will also be born 
before Zion's travail. These are the "Kings and priests unto 
God," who, during the present age have at the same time been, 
both the household of Priests typified by Aaron's sons, and also 
the members of the High Priest's body. These during the 
millennial age will be, with their head "a priest upon his 
throne."— Thou "hast made us (the body) unto our God kings and 
priests, and we shall reign on the earth." (Rev. 5:10.) -their 
reign in the exercise of this double office, being typified by 
Melchisadec -"King of Salem (peace) and priest of the most 
high God." This is the company that follow the Lamb here, and 
will do so hereafter, to whom he said, "Fear not little flock, it is 
your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom. " 

These two companies, the few before, and the many after travail, 
are the only children ever born to Zion. (The type shows that she 
dies in travail) i.e., the gospel age here ending, the gospel church 
will no longer exist as an earthly institution, and thereafter exist 
only as the glorified, spiritual city or church. These two 
companies, as heretofore shown, are the only ones to whom the 
high calling of becoming sons of God on the spiritual plane is 
offered; the only ones begotten of the Spirit, consequently, the 
only ones who could be born of the Spirit. 



The blessing which comes to the world is never called a 
begetting to newness of life-or a new kind of life, but a 
restitution (restoring) of the old life, which is forfeited by reason 
of disobedience and sin. For there shall be a restitution of all 
things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets since the world began. (Acts 3:21.) The church, on the 
contrary, are begotten to a new nature, which implies new 
powers, and a new form, for "as we have borne the image of the 
earthly (natural) we shall also bear the image heavenly" 
(spiritual.) 

The grandeur of our high calling, is but imperfectly seen until 
we realize that it shall be our pleasurable work during the 
Millennial age when joined with our head to restore the human 
family to all the perfections of mind and body, lost through 
Adam, brought back by Christ's death. Beloved, let us more 
highly appreciate "our high calling, which is of God, in Christ 
Jesus." 



R184:page7 

Rachel a Type of Zion. 

Many types are furnished us illustrative of the two houses of 
Israel (natural and spiritual), and their relationship to each other; 
yet no two of these illustrate exactly the same features. Among 
the more prominent we might mention Ishmael and Isaac, who 
represented the natural and spiritual seeds of Abraham, both of 
whom were blessed, but not to the same degree. Their mothers, 
Hagar and Sarah, we have seen to be types of the Law and 
Gospel covenants, under which the two seeds are developed. 
Isaac and Rebecca, another beautiful type, shows us the 
relationship to which the "little flock" shall come as the Bride of 
Christ, when she becomes joint heir with Him. Jacob and Esau 
typically show how the natural seed, though first developed, 
failed to receive the choicest blessing. As "Esau sold his 
birthright for a mess of pottage," so natural Israel, when they 
might have inherited the (spiritual) promises, chose instead 
natural things. The Gospel church, represented by Jacob- 
though developed later, gets the choicest blessing-the spiritual. 
"What shall we say then? That the Gentiles, which followed not 
after righteousness, have attained to righteousness, even the 
righteousness which is of faith; but Israel, which followed after 
the law of righteous, hath not attained." [Rom. 9:1 1,30.] 

But now another type not before noticed by us, presents itself, 
and is fully as clear, when seen, as the others, and illustrates 
particular features of truth not pictured in the others. Rachel, 
seems to be a type of the Gospel church in many particulars; and 
her sister Leah would correspondingly represent the fleshly 
Israel. Jacob served seven years for each of these, which might 



be understood as typifying the equality of the two ages- Jewish 
and Gospel-which we have already found to be of equal 
measure. 

Again, as Rachel was the one chiefly loved and first promised, 
so the Gospel covenant, the most desirable, was made before 
"the Law" covenant [Gal. 3:8,17] though the latter was first 
recognized, and the children of the flesh born first, (Rom. 9:8) 
called "Israel after the flesh." (1 Cor. 10:18.) 

But our chief interest centers in Rachel. Her first born was 
Joseph, who seems to be a type of "the Christ." He was exalted 
next to Pharaoh (type of God.)-- "Only in the throne shall I be 
greater than thou." So it is true now of our head (Jesus) and will 
soon be true of the whole body. "Him hath God highly exalted, 
and given him a name that is above every name. " We understand 
then that Rachel's first born typified the little flock, to whom it 
is the Father's good pleasure to give the kingdom— whose head 
is Jesus. 

Her second child, in the travail of whose birth she died, was 
Benjamin, who we believe typifies the "great company" who are 
born after the "great tribulation." 

How this type harmonizes with the foregoing article. How 
perfectly does Rachel typify Zion, having two offsprings -the 
first to rule; the second also beloved born after travail-death 
anguish. How the death of Rachel shows the end of Zion's career 
as an earthly church when the "great company" are born after 
the trouble. 

Joseph, when in power, blessed his brethren, and ultimately 
made himself known to them. So we expect that when the 
kingdom is given to the "little flock" in the very beginning of 
the reign, the time of trouble will be so ordered as to bring our 
brethren (the second company still in the flesh and "Israel after 
the flesh"— Benjamin and the brethren) into such a position as 
will result in their blessing. The distinction made between 
Benjamin and the other brethren is shown in Joseph's blessing 
him with five times as much as they received, (Gen. 43:34; 
45:22) which shows the greater blessing of the spiritual brethren 
typified by Benjamin over that of the natural brethren- fleshly 
Israel, typified by the sons of Leah. 



R202 : page 8 



TWIG TO BRANCHES. 



Brother Sunderlin, in closing a letter, recently received, said: 
"This twig sends love to all the branches of the vine." We take 
this opportunity of sending it to such branches as are readers of 
the WATCH TOWER. It expresses a very beautiful sentiment, 



and shows the modesty of the "twig." This, as has previously 
been shown in the WATCH TOWER, is the right understanding 
of the word "branch," as used by our Lord. It is common to hear 
people speak of belonging to the Methodist branch of the 
church, or the Baptist, or other branches, thus recognizing the 
fact that THE CHURCH is not a branch, but a vine, composed 
of all truly united to Christ. A careful reading will convince 
anyone that Jesus recognizes no denomination as a branch. Jesus 
deals with us as individuals; each Christian who consecrates 
himself to Christ is a branch of the vine. "I am the vine, ye are 
the branches." 

If all could know and appreciate this, it would make them less 
particular about having their names enrolled on earth, and more 
particular about having their "names written in heaven;" less 
careful about the "voice" and "authorities" of an earthly 
institution, and more careful about the authority and voice of the 
Master and Head, Christ. --"The head of every man (believer) is 
Christ, and the head of Christ is God." [1 Cor. 1 1:3.] 

Well, we thought that most of the branches would appreciate 
Bro. S.'s sentiment, for Love is the essence of the branch as well 
as of the vine, and in answering him, we suggested that he write 
some for our paper, which would be one means by which he 
might add to the spiritual health, comfort and fruitfulness of 
some of the "branches." He has concluded to do so, and we have 
added his name to the list of contributors on first page. This 
number contains two articles from his pen. 



page 8 



QUESTION. 



Do you, Brother Russell, fully agree with the articles from Bro. 
Jones' pen in last number? 

Ans.— In the main, yes. Perhaps no two writers would express 
the same thoughts in exactly the same words, but the sentiments, 
etc., I endorse, as being in my judgment in harmony with the 
teachings of the Word. Let me guard you, however, against 
supposing that the change from natural to spiritual bodies will 
be either a gradual one, or one of which you might be in doubt. 
We shall be "changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye," 
and it will be a radical change. No longer, natural, earthly, weak 
and corruptible, but powerful, spiritual, incorruptible, immortal- 
- "like unto Christ's glorious body;" though appearing (as seems 
to be taught in the types) for awhile to mankind in general, as 
though we had not been changed. When thus changed, we can 
see all others on the spiritual plane, the Lord, the prophets and 
resurrected saints and those similarly changed. The vail will be 
only to those on the natural plane. Therefore be not deceived 



into supposing either yourself or others changed until you can 
do as Jesus said everyone born of the Spirit can do, and as he did 
when he was born from the dead, viz.: Go and come like the 
wind, and no man know whence you came or whither you went. 
"So is every one that is born of the Spirit." John 3:6. 

How beautifully clear it is that our change from natural to 
spiritual conditions is not the marriage but a preparation for it. 
The Bridegroom is since His resurrection a spiritual body, and 
how fittingly proper it would seem that the bride should be 
changed to the same image and nature before sharing the glory 
of power with him—the marriage. 



Other questions and articles crowded out this month. 
R202 : page 8 

DEAD AND BURIED. 

In the fourth century a young earnest disciple sought an 
interview with the great and good Macarius, and asked him what 
was meant by being dead to sin. He said, "You remember our 
brother who died and was buried a short time since. Go to his 
grave and tell him all the unkind things you ever heard of him. 
Go, my son, and hear what he will answer." The young man 
doubted whether he understood; but Macarius only said, "Do as 
I tell you, my son; and come and tell me what he says." He 
went, and came back, saying, "I can get no reply; he is dead." 
"Go again and try him with flattering words-tell him what a 
great saint he was, what noble work he did, and how we miss 
him; and come again, and tell me what he says." He did so, but 
on his return said, "He answers nothing, father; he is dead and 
buried." "You know now, my son," said the old father, "what it 
is to be dead to sin, dead and buried with Christ. Praise and 
blame are nothing to him who is really dead and buried with 
Christ." (Rom. 6:3.)-Selected. 



page 8 



NO WESTERN TRIP YET. 



Some of the tracts seem to require much more time for 
preparation than we had expected, especially the one on the 
"Tabernacle." Our Western trip we therefore indefinitely 
postpone. You will, however, be duly advised of the time 
through our paper or by mail. 

R204 : page 8 



A GOOD man incarnates goodness. The flower and its 
fragrance are one. 



R178 : page 8 

Tract Supplement No. 1. 

With this number we send Tract No. 1. We have arranged for 
quite a number of them, and you may expect one or two a month 
for several months. They will all be free, on condition that you 
order no more than you will wisely use. 

We will not send more than 25 at one time. You can re-order 
when they are gone. This is a way in which all can "both labor 
and suffer reproach," as well as give the "glad tidings" to some 
who have ears to hear and hearts to appreciate; "The love of 
God, which passeth all understanding," revealed to us in His 
word. 

We suggest that each tract be carefully read by you before you 
give it to others. 

page 8 



"DAY DAWN" ERRATA. 

On page 55, seventh line from bottom, should read: "A person 
must be begotten," &c. 

On page 235, third line from bottom, should read: "It is raised in 
incorruption." 

On page 330, fourth line from top, read 1874 instead of 1844. 

If each one having a book will mark these changes in his book, 
it may help whoever reads it. We discover quite a number of 
typographical errors, and words misspelled, which we trust the 
reader to correct. The three mentioned above are perhaps the 
most important mistakes; the second and third very important. 

J. H. P. 

[Any of our readers who have not yet read this valuable book 
should do so at once. It will renew your strength. -ED.] 



THE PITTSBURGH MEETINGS. 

We have received, during the last month, quite a number of 
letters, inquiring whether we have regular meetings, and where 
held; the writers expressing themselves as desirous of meeting 
with us when in the city. 

R204 : page 8 



We have meetings every Sunday from 2:30 to 4 P.M., and a 
Wednesday evening meeting at 7:30 o'clock. We shall make any 
who can meet with us very welcome. It was quite a neglect, that 
a regular standing notice of these meetings has not been kept in 
the paper from the first; It will, however, be found this month 
and hereafter, in first column of first page. 

R204 : page 8 

IT seems to me the trials and the temptations of this life are all 
making us fit for the life to come-building up a character for 
eternity. You have been in a piano manufactory; did you ever go 
there for the sake of music? Go into the tuning room and you 
will say, "My dear sir, this is a dreadful place to be in; I cannot 
bear it; I thought you made music here." They say, "No we do 
not produce music here; we make the instruments and tune them 
here, and in the process much discord is forthcoming." Such is 
the church of God on earth. The Lord makes the instruments 
down here, and tunes them, and a great deal of discord is 
perceptible, but it is all necessary to prepare us for the 
everlasting harmonies up yonder. -Spurgeon. 

R204 : page 8 

—Subscribers write us saying that they are 'very poor and will 
send money for the paper as soon as they can get it.' To answer 
all such at once let us say, that if you are very poor we do not 
want you to send us any money. Let us know that you want it 
and you can have it free. 


