Gaining Freedom from Wicked Spirit Forces
FEAR of spirits has enslaved many people. Others, through involvement with occultism, have come under demon harassment, hearing strange voices. Some have even lost their sanity. Nevertheless, relief is possible. By studying the Bible and applying what they learn, many have been able to gain freedom from enslavement to wicked spirit forces.
In Liberia, a woman spent nearly three months as a prisoner in her own home, fearing to leave. Why? She said a spell had been cast on her and she had been told not to enter or leave her house by the front door for seven months. One of Jehovah’s witnesses called on her and began a Bible study. Soon the Witnesses encouraged the “imprisoned” woman to put her trust in Jehovah, disregard the spell and begin attending meetings at the Kingdom Hall. This she did, and for the first time in months she left through the door of her home. Acting in harmony with the Bible set her free.
In Chile, one of Jehovah’s witnesses visited a young man who had been released from an insane asylum as being hopelessly incurable. The Witness found the young man in one of his more rational moments and succeeded in starting a home Bible study with him. The young man’s mother was glad that someone was taking an interest in her son, but she told the Witness that everything had been tried with no success.
When information about wicked spirit forces was considered during one of the studies, the young man remarked that he had been studying books on black magic and found them useful. The Witness explained to him that black magic was the product of an evil force​—Satan the Devil—​and presented the Bible’s evidence concerning the dangers involved. The man immediately accepted what was said and burned the books. From that day on he made excellent progress. He no longer complained about violent headaches, and could sleep at night without hearing any voices. Soon he began attending meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses and started sharing with others the things he had learned from the Bible.
The neighbors were simply amazed at the change in this young man. In the past he at times became extremely violent, throwing stones at passersby and beating up children. But such violent outbursts came to their end, and he is now striving to maintain peace with fellow humans.
Others have experienced like beneficial changes and personal relief after destroying items associated with the occult and then conforming their lives to God’s will. A woman from the United States relates: “Upon finding that it is against Bible principles to engage in any form of spiritism, I destroyed every book, picture and relic having to do with the occult or divination, and afterward felt as if a great weight had been lifted from my head.”
No question about it, Bible truth, if applied, can result in one’s release from slavery to wicked spirit forces.

