R425 : page 1 

VOL. IV. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JANUARY, 1883. 

NO. 6. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, 

Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper money to the amount of two dollars, by mail, at our risk. 
Larger amounts may be sent by Drafts, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers 
will be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or 
postage stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances 
may be made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 



without price. " And you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend 
money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



page 1 

POSTAGE STAMPS are inconvenient to us, but if it is 
impossible for you to send us paper money, you may send 1 cent 
or 2 cent U.S. Stamps. Foreign stamps are useless to us. 



R425 : page 1 

"MILLENNIAL DAY DAWN" is not ready. It has been 
hindered by the extra labor attendant on the recent large issues. 
We hope to have it ready by Spring. The edition of old "Day 
Dawn" is exhausted. 



page 1 

GREAT care should be exercised in writing addresses plainly. 
Many neglect to sign their letters. Many more neglect to 
mention name of town or state. Sometimes we can guess by the 
aid of the postmark, but even then much valuable time is wasted. 
Please be very particular. 



WE offered the TOWER three months on trial, free. Many 
availed themselves of the offer and others sent us lists of names 
of friends they thought would be interested by the papers. With 
this number we complete the three numbers to about ten 
thousand such trial readers. [Oct., Dec. and January.] All of 
these who are interested, we hope to hear from at once. The 
Lord's poor who are interested, but unable to pay, should 
remember that they are welcome to the TOWER free, but must 
ask for it. We have extra copies of these three issues. 



R425 : page 1 

NEW YEAR GREETING. 

We take this opportunity of expressing publicly our thanks to 
our Heavenly Father for the blessings enjoyed during the year 
just ended. To us it has been a year of growth in grace, 
knowledge and love toward God. The path— the same path- 
shines more and more. It is the old path which our Father in love 
marked out before the world began. And the light is the same, 
but it, according to His promise, continues to shine "more and 
more unto the perfect day. " We hope that the experience of our 



readers has been similarly blessed. As under-shepherds, we feel 
a deep interest in the welfare of every member of the flock of 
Christ-over whom, circumstances under divine supervision hath 
made us overseers— to feed the Church of God, which he hath 
purchased with His own blood. (Acts 20:28.) 

The New Year suggests new resolutions. We trust that you have 
each resolved to do your share toward having the year 1883 
bring an increase of spiritual strength and development, by a yet 
closer study to show yourselves approved unto God. Laying off 
yet more fully the things of the old nature— self-love, self- 
esteem, self-gratification, self-exaltation, and the fear of man 
which bringeth a snare, and putting on the elements of the Spirit 
of Christ- self-denial, humility, brotherly kindness, charity and 
boldness for the truth. While we seek God's blessing upon the 
year commenced, let us remember that "The Lord resisteth the 
proud, and giveth grace (favors) to the humble." (1 Pet. 5:5.) Let 
us thus resolve, and thus perform, and we will surely have, our 
wish both for you and ourselves— a joyous and blessed New 
Year. 



R425 : page 1 

OUR NEW DRESS. 

The TOWER appears this month in a new dress— larger size, 
wider and longer columns, and new type, giving you over a page 
more matter. We hope it will give general satisfaction. Our 
printers urge that you will blame them lightly for the delay 
which these changes have necessitated. 



R425 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

There are two sides to every question, so also there are two 
views from the TOWER. The one is glorious, bright and 
encouraging, the other dark, and would be discouraging were it 
not that "the foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, 
the Lord knoweth them that are His." (2 Tim. 2:19.) 

The dark outlook is that we see from the TOWER that another 
testing is in progress, and the adversary-Satan- presents errors 
under the guise of "light," and as his custom (Matt. 4:6) uses 
Scripture to accomplish his object -wresting it from its proper 
meaning. We are not surprised at this in one sense, because we 
have long seen that we are living in the "Evil Day" of which 
Jesus and apostles and prophets forewarn us, saying "that it will 
be difficult to stand-and not fall before the attacks of the 
enemy. (Luke 21:36; Mai. 3:2; Eph. 6:11,14,13.) Paul is very 
specific, and warns us that we will need the whole armor of 



God, because the conflict will not be with men (flesh and 
blood), but with the prince of darkness himself, whose "wiles" 
or deceptions he carefully mentions. (Eph 6:11,12.) Thus 
divinely forewarned of what we might expect in this day, we 
have been calling attention to the coming storm and dangers for 
some time, and endeavoring to have all the saints armed with the 
panoply of God, in order that whatever the test might be, ye 
might be able to withstand all the wiles and fiery darts of the 
enemy, and having done all, to stand. 

We have not the gift of prophecy, and could not tell you in what 
form, nor from what quarter the testing would come, for our 
adversary, the devil, is sure to bring the test from an unexpected 
quarter. This has ever been his policy. 

Our surprise is that some whom we had supposed to be well 
grounded upon the Rock foundation— our ransom— should be at 
all assailable from the standpoint of our redemption, and the 
nature of our Redeemer. Paul expresses the same surprise 
concerning some in his day, saying: "I marvel that ye are so 
soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ, 
unto another gospel: which is not another, but there be some that 
trouble you and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. " (Gal. 1 :6- 
8; notice also vs. 11,12.) 

As we had anticipated, our article, "An Unpleasant Duty," in last 
issue, was misjudged by some, as three letters received indicate. 
They hinted that our "DUTY" was too pointedly expressed, and 
that if we had said that we took a "different view" of matters, in 
a mild and very gentle way, it would have been more in the 
spirit of Christ. Our reply is, that our usual method is mild, 
especially when discussing differences of opinion relative to 
Christian faith, but when the foundations of all our faith are 
assailed by some among us attempting to teach, it is, in our 
judgment, the spirit of Christ to lay aside mildness and cry aloud 
so as at once to arouse all Israel to the danger of the hour. (Ezek. 
33:6.) 

Jesus did not hesitate to call doctrines and people by their true 
names. Please recollect that many of his utterances were far 
from "mild and gentle." While his utterances are devoid of all 
malice and hatred, they were often full of force and keenly to the 
point. Fear to speak the truth finds no place in the spirit of 
Christ. We feel sure that no candid reader can trace malice or 
hatred in our article referred to, and subsequent developments 
prove that we stated the matter none too strongly. 

Others, we are glad to know, rightly judged both of our motives 
and the necessity of the article. We extract a sentence from a 
letter of the latter sort, of which we received several: 

"Best thanks for the WATCH TOWER for December, in which 
you have performed An Unpleasant Duty,' as agreeably as 
possible, and respecting which it would have involved a serious 



sin not to have called attention to the present teaching of the 
'Day Star' after having recommended it." 

The importance of the subject is our excuse for devoting so 
much of the space of this number to its consideration. We trust 
that it will be helpful to you 

R426 : page 1 

to fully realize- 
How firm a foundation, ye saint of the Lord, 
Is laid for your faith in His excellent word; 
What more can He say than to you He hath said, 
You who unto Jesus for refuge have fled. 

It may be that the subjects treated will be very valuable to new 
readers and help to establish them firmly on the Rock. A testing 
on first principles seems peculiar at this late hour, yet, from 
present appearance, it seems to us that this will be the general 
line of attack in which the entire nominal Church is to be 
overwhelmed— in which "a thousand shall fall at thy side, and 
ten thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh thee, 
because thou has made the Most High thy habitation. " We hope 
that all will take their Bibles and refer to every text quoted in 
this issue and note the contexts. 

But we have very much to encourage and refresh us. Thousands 
of hungry hearts are upturned to God in thanksgiving for the 
blessed light now shining on and revealing the precious plan and 
promises of God. Thousands of letters tell of renewed faith in 
God and quickened lives resulting from even a first glimpse of 
"the riches of His grace," and the grandeur of the great plan of 
God for the salvation of all who die in Adam, based on the 
grand old rock of truth that we were "redeemed" -that "Christ 
died for our sins." Yes, praise the Lord, the general prospect was 
never so encouraging as now. But these new readers will find 
their love of truth and their reliance on and consecration to the 
Lord tested also. All must be tested; we are in the testing time; 
you should know to expect, that though these truths be in your 
mouths sweet as honey, yet after partaking of them you must 
expect to encounter bitter opposition from your old nature and 
your former friends. (Rev. 10:10.) Though you rejoice greatly in 
the strong meat of God's Word, yet you will find your after 
experiences with it to be bitter-friends and dear ones will 
oppose, and "ye shall be hated of all men for my sake and the 
Gospel's," yet rejoice and be exceeding glad, and 

Bear the cross, endure the shame, 
Supported by God's Word. 

Let us, then, stand the storms, 
It will not be very long, 
We will anchor by and by. " 



page 1 

We present you herewith extracts from a few of the many 
similar letters received daily: 

DEAR BRO.:-I have now mastered the "Food" after seven 
months' hard study, and believe it to be no more nor less than a 
revelation from our Heavenly Father. Next Sabbath I shall begin 
to preach for the first, on these blessed truths, regardless of 
friends or enemies. 

Send me 400 TOWERS (Oct. No.) and as many "Food" as you 
can spare, and I assure you that they will do as much good as 
any you ever had distributed heretofore. I am satisfied that I can 
get 500 subscribers in Orange and 500 in Rockland Counties. 
You shall hear soon. 

I shall use six months of my time now, just to distribute tracts 
and get subscribers for the TOWER. Help me by prayers and 
prompt returns. The "Food" and TOWER I distribute only to 
those whom I believe to be zealous Christians. 

Yours in the work, 



Dec. 25, 1882. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-The books ("Young's Concordance" 
and "Diaglott") came duly, and have proved a valuable help to 
me in studying the Bible. Heretofore I have been without a 
concordance, and have depended too much on the writings of 
others as a guide. Now I can judge for myself. I enjoy the study 
of the Bible more and more as the opportunities are increased 
for studying, and my love for my Savior is increased by the 
knowledge that I may be permitted to prove my following and 
"help fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ. " 

Yours in brotherly affection, 



AUGUSTA, ME. 

DEAR BRO.:-I write this to thank you on behalf of both my 
wife and myself for the papers sent her, and also for the copies 
of "Why Evil was Permitted. " That little book has done more 
than anything I ever read to resolve and remove my doubts 
about 

page 2 

the Old Testament Scriptures, and by its help and the help of the 
Holy Spirit I am indulging a hope that I may yet come into the 
kingdom. For thirty years I have been one of those who could 
see nothing in Christianity but a bone of contention between 
differing professors and churches, but now, thank God, I am 
able to look beyond professors and churches, and to believe that 



"Christ came to seek and to save that which was lost. " Thank 
God for me and pray for us both. 

Yours in faith and trust, 



R426 : page 2 

WATCH TOWER TRACT FUND. 

At the commencement of another year it is proper that you 
should have a report from this fund. It will be found below. We 
regret that it shows us to be so much in debt. An error in our 
bank account misled us, else we should not have published the 
last 100,000 edition of the Oct. Z.W.T. However, they are 
printed and most of them in the hands of new readers and we 
have reason to believe, from the letters constantly coming to 
hand, that they are seeking out and nourishing truth-hungry 
saints. So what is the fund's loss is their gain. Then, too, perhaps 
our Father designed testing our faith. In everything let us give 
thanks. 

As will be seen below, the Fund is in debt over $2,500, and of 
course no further work can be undertaken by the Fund until this 
debt is paid. We regret this exceedingly, and partly because in 
our last issue we held out a hope to some, who have long desired 
it, that we would soon issue the October TOWER in German 
and in Swedish. 

A plan suggested to us is the only way out of the difficulty 
which we can see. It is this: We can start two sub-funds, one for 
the German and the other for the Swedish papers, and those 
desirous of contributing specially to these can thus do so. A 
Swedish brother has already sent $8.50 for the latter, and a 
German sister $3 for the former fund. When either of these 
funds shall amount to $200, we will commence to print and go 
as far as we can. Meantime we will, by the assistance of 
brethren, have translations prepared. 

STATEMENT. 

Total amount expended up to Jan. 1, 1882.$35,336.18 

Amount expended during 1882 5,945.20 

Receipts during 1882 3,373.86 

Deficiency or amount owing 2,571.34 

Amount expended for year 1882 5,945.20 

Total amount expended up to Jan. 1,1883.. .$41, 281. 38 

As the result of this year's expenditure we have to report the 

publication of "The Tabernacle" pamphlet 15,000 copies 

Extra issues of Z.W.T. for use as tracts 347,000 copies 

Leaflets, "The Minister's Daughter" 100,000 copies 

Total (nearly half a million) 462,000 copies 



Of the above publications we have on hand about 40,000 
copies, nearly all of which are the October (Tract number) of the 
TOWER. 

During the year we mailed about 15,000 copies of the "Food" 
pamphlet, but as these were accounted for in last year's report, 
they are not mentioned above. 

When it is remembered that the very large majority of our 
readers are of the "poor of this world," it will be seen that their 
interest in spreading the truth extends to their pockets, and of 
some at least it is true, "She hath done what she could." We 
hope as you view the above statement you will be able, 
notwithstanding the fact of our large debt, to thank God and take 
courage. If you could be in this office but one hour, and read 
some of the letters received, it would cause a renewal of your 
zeal and a redoubling of your efforts to spread the glad tidings, 
and thus preach the Gospel. 

C. T. RUSSELL. 

[N.B.-In this connection we would remark that the supply of 
"Food for Thinking Christians" and "The Tabernacle" pamphlet 
is nearly exhausted. We urge, therefore, that you use the October 
TOWER when giving reading matter to truth seekers, and if 
after reading it, they are anxious for more, loan them "Food," 
and afterward, "Tabernacle." Beware of choking "babes in 
Christ," therefore give only one tract or paper at a time. 
Remember Jesus' example in this respect— "I have many things 
to tell you, but you cannot bear them now."] 



R426 : page 2 

CHRISTIANITY AND ISLAM. 

"A writer in an eastern publication, who is not supposed to aim 
at a support of heterodoxy, in his work, attempts, in an elaborate 
manner, to show that of all religions, Christianity to-day is most 
assailed, and most in danger of overthrow, though it be not 
subject to the religious wars which afflict some nations 
professing other religions. 

The writer points to the fact that while Buddhism, 
Mohammedanism, and Judaism hold a firm grasp upon the 
nations which profess them, Christianity is assailed by the ablest 
minds of the world in its very midst, and atheism, or rather 
agnosticism, is rapidly increasing in every so-called Christian 
country. He points to heterodox rule in France, atheism in Italy, 
the almost general unbelief among the educated classes of 
Russia, the skepticism of Germany, increasing liberality of 
England and Scotland, and the remarkable latitude allowed to 
infidels in America, where the laws make no distinction on 



account of religious belief. And he concludes from this that 
Christianity is likely to fail and die sooner than the older faiths 
whose devotees hold to them blindly and unquestioningly. " 

We clip the above from a recent issue of the Pittsburgh 
Dispatch, as showing that thinking Christians, though 
unacquainted with the fact that the nominal Gospel church is 
rejected of the Lord, and therefore failing to discern the cause, 
are nevertheless noting its rapid decline. The world sees it; 
thinking Christians see it; and only the blind worshipers of these 
gigantic and corrupt systems fail to see it. 

The Editor, commenting on the above, remarks that, "The very 
fact that infidelity has so rapid a growth among Christians, 
where it could so easily be crushed out by law or force, is 
evidence that the devotees of Christianity are conscious of the 
strength of their belief, and that its ultimate destiny is to conquer 
the world-not by arms, but by gentle means. A religion which 
cannot tolerate opposition that pretends to be founded on reason, 
is a miserable faith, and can only be maintained by the grossest 
illiberality and persecution. Buddhism and Mohammedanism are 
like the old Inquisition. The infidel is hunted out of society or 
murdered outright. Christianity invites all fair and sensible 
opposition and reasoning. That Christian theologian who does 
his whole duty will never flinch from intelligent disputation; and 
if there is one fault to be still found with Christianity in its most 
liberal form, it is that it is yet too liable to apply opprobrious 
epithets to antagonists, instead of inviting them into the pulpit, 
there to give them an equal hearing. Too many Christian 
ministers act as though they fear the infidel speaker-fear that he 
can offer a more 

R427 : page 2 

specious argument than they, and fear that he will commend 
himself to a Christian audience more strongly than they. This is 
a deplorable weakness." He then adds, "Nothing is plainer than 
that liberal Christianity has itself brought forth infidelity, and 
that Christians will yet be compelled to abandon portions of 
their creed. Sectarianism will have to melt away. And when that 
point of development is reached where the simplest reason 
cannot see anything left that does the plainest violence to reason, 
the goal of Christianity will be reached. Then atheists and 
infidels in all guises will have to give up their extreme position 
and the factions can clasp hands in the common cause of 
advocating precisely those things that were taught by CHRIST, 
and not the forms and follies that are attributed to him by so- 
called Christians, who have no comprehension whatever of the 
real character of Jesus." 

We agree with this Editor that the clergymen who try to defend 
their creeds fear and tremble before the infidel, whose reason 
leads to conclusions so opposite to their time-honored traditions, 



for which no basis can be found, either in reason or in the word 
of God. An infidel is an unbeliever. It is one thing to be an 
infidel to the nominal Church, and quite another to be an infidel 
to Christianity. Many so-called infidels are much nearer to both 
the truth of Christianity and the practice of its principles than so- 
called Christians. 

All are really infidels who attempt to set up their own theories, 
and to twist some portions of the word of God to support them 
while they bury its plain statements to the contrary. The effort to 
do this has given rise to the Babylonish confusion in the 
Churches, all of which, though most opposite in doctrine, claim 
the Bible as their support. And finding that in order to gain a 
position of influence and respectability before the world, it is 
necessary to present an imposing appearance, they unitedly 
agree to term themselves the exponents of Christianity, and as 
far as possible to ignore doctrine. 

It is, indeed, no wonder that this so-called Christianity, with its 
mass of contradictions, and its hideous misrepresentations of the 
glorious character of the blessed God, has made so many 
thinking people infidels. Neither is it surprising that this house, 
divided against itself, is about to fall. 

Infidels conclude that as these are the exponents of Bible 
Christianity they want nothing to do either with Christianity or 
the Bible; and that any book which will support such gross 
contradictions, and whose teachings produce characters little or 
no better, and often worse than the world, must be a worthless, if 
not a positively harmful book, unworthily carrying an influence 
with it, because of its claim to be a revelation from God. And so, 
many conclude to discard the Bible entirely, and, as Mr. 
Ingersoll expresses it, to make the best of this world, and if they 
light on another, to likewise make the best of it, and to be happy 
and enjoy themselves as best they can, and let others do the 
same. 

The whole nominal system claiming the name of Christianity is 
out of harmony with Scripture teaching, and her creed- 
worshipers are all infidels to the Bible. They dare not open the 
book before a candid searcher after truth, to whom God says— 
"Come, let us reason together" -lest it reveal truth which will 
overturn their cherished creed. Shame and confusion of face is 
coming upon, and will cover, such God-dishonoring hypocrisy. 
No wonder that those "who teach for doctrines the 
commandments of men" tremble and cower before the reasoning 
infidel, as well as before the earnest truth-seeker, who 
persistently demands a "Thus saith the Lord" for his faith. 
Opprobrious epithets and denunciations become their only 
stronghold, while they warn others of the danger of using their 
reason and diligently searching the Scriptures lest they become 
infidels. Infidels to the Bible? No-infidels to church creeds. 



We praise God that by his grace we have been able to shake off 
the shackles that bind so many. Yes, we dare stand erect "in the 
liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free," and, defying the 
anathemas of a lifeless Church, we declare to the world that the 
Bible is indeed the revelation of a glorious plan, well worthy of 
an infinite God, that the nominal Christianity of to-day is a gross 
misrepresentation of its teachings, and that the ideal character of 
the Bible is never even approximately illustrated by any, except 
those who are truly students of its sacred pages, and imitators of 
its grand example. Let all true children of God search the 
Scriptures, and be able to give a reason for their hope. Then the 
goal of true Christianity will be reached. 



page 2 

"YOUNG'S BIBLE CONCORDANCE." 

To the Bible student, we can scarcely speak too highly of this 
work. It certainly ranks next to the Diaglott as a help to Bible 
study. In fact the help which these two works afford to persons 
possessing an ordinary knowledge of the English language is 
more valuable than two years spent in the study of Greek and 
Hebrew. 

This Concordance gives every English word in our Bible under 
its proper Greek or Hebrew heading, together with its literal 
meaning. Mr. Young, the author, is acknowledged to be one of 
the ripest Greek and Hebrew scholars living. 

We wish that all Bible students who read the TOWER might 
have this work, and thus be able to convince themselves of the 
significance of Bible terms in the original. To this end we have 
for some time been endeavoring to procure for you this work at 
a low price. Within the past week we have succeeded far beyond 
our expectation, and are glad to state that we can now furnish 
you "The Students' Edition"-the latest revised and most 
complete edition of this work published-(white paper, cloth 
bound, regular price $3.50) at half price, viz., $1.75, by express. 
If sent by mail, 5 1 cents extra, for postage. Those living at 
greater distance than 800 miles from Pittsburgh, or in places not 
very accessible for express, would probably find the mail the 
cheapest method. 

We still have some copies of the "Emphatic Diaglott" at $1.50, 
postage paid by us. 



R427 : page 2 



THE JOYOUS RESULT. 

In due time. After that ye have suffered awhile. In due season 
the Lord trieth the righteous. Hereby qualities are produced and 
brought out that otherwise were hidden and non-existent. The 
process is severe, afflictive, terrible sometimes, but the fruits, if 
we endure faithfully, are precious, grand, glorious— worth all 
they may cost, and how much more only eternity will reveal. We 
should not know all the pity and tenderness of the Savior, did we 
not suffer in the furnace. Are not our most exquisite religious 
enjoyments born of, or at least administered during severe trial? 
It was during Jacob's flight from his murderous brother-and 
himself was by no means blameless— that he had the vision of 
the ladder and angels. It was when Elijah was so distressed and 
disheartened that he wished to die, that the angels repeatedly 
awakened and fed him, and then the wonderful vision at the 
cave was added. It was right in the hottest possible furnace that 
the Hebrew children found the form of the fourth beside them. 
And Daniel, did it not pay for him to pass a night with the lions 
to find them turned into lambs by the power of a heavenly 
keeper? I judge Paul and Silas never regretted the inner prison 
and stocks after their miraculous deliverance. 

But have we not an experience of our own to tell us that it is in 
time of greatest extremity that heaven's richest grace is 
vouchsafed? We may have waited for the due time and become 
somewhat exhausted and disheartened, but the time of the 
singing of birds did come, and they sang never so sweetly! 

Fighting, waiting, struggling, trusting, 
Is He sure to bless? 
Prophets, fathers, martyrs, Christians, 
Answer yes. 

Fearest sometimes that thy Father 
Hath forgot? 

Though the clouds around thee gather, 
Doubt him not! 

Always hath the daylight broken, 
Always hath He spoken! 
Better hath He been for years, 
Than thy fears. 

-"Words of Faith." 



page 2 



'COMPOUND OXYGEN. 



In reply to the question, Whose preparation of "Compound 
Oxygen" did Bro. Sunderlin use? we answer, it was that of 
Messrs. Starkey & Palen, No. 1 1 17 Girard St., Philadelphia, Pa. 



On learning of the benefit derived from its use by Bro. S., we at 
once sought reduced prices with a view to introducing it to your 
attention cheaper than the regular rate. The above firm would 
make no concession (their price being $15), while with Messrs. 
Feltwell & Co. we were able to make arrangements so as to 
offer it to you at one-half the above price ($7.50). 

There is an immense profit in it, and if we had time, we believe 
we could have it prepared so as to furnish it to you for $3. It is 
not patented. 



R427 : page 3 



THY KINGDOM COME." 

There's a work to be accomplished, 
Such as earth has never known; 
There are mighty forces gathering, 
And their power will soon be shown. 

They are choosing such material, 
As will serve their purpose true; 
And when this shall be perfected, 
Glorious work on earth they'll do. 

They'll beat back the powers of darkness, 
They will overturn false creeds; 
They will work for truth and justice, 
Human rights and human needs. 

Tyrant rule they will abolish, 
And oppression's galling chain 
Will be broken once forever; 
For the Christ on earth will reign. 

His an everlasting kingdom 
Which shall never pass away; 
And its principles eternal 
Must o'er all the earth bear sway. 

Mighty minds, through all the ages, 
Have been working for the plan 
Surely to be consummated; 
"Peace on earth, good will to man. " 

Yes, there dawns a brighter era; 

We can see the rising day, 

When man, freed from error's teachings, 

Soon will learn the better way. 

Superstition's darkening forces, 
Which so long have forged their chains, 
Every day are losing power; 
Only seeming strength remains. 



428 : page 3 



Not the work of worldly wisdom, 
Not the selfish schemes of man, 
E'er will execute this purpose; 
Tis a higher, nobler plan; 

Supervised by the immortals, 
Who can clearly see the true, 
And who know the wiser methods, 
And the time, their work to do. 

You who see the day-star rising 
And can read the passing signs, 
Watch, and ready stand for action; 
Follow wisdom's high designs. 

Trust no selfish, vain pretension, 
For the work is all divine; 
And the kingdom, power and glory, 
Are, O Lord, forever Thine. 



-MRS. E. G. LAKE. 



R428 : page 3 

YOUR BUILDING. 

"Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid which is 
Jesus Christ. " "But let every man take heed how he buildeth 
thereupon. " "Now if any man build upon this foundation gold, 
silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble; every man's work 
shall be made manifest, for the day shall declare it, because it 
shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man's work 
of what sort it is. If any man's work abide which he hath built 
thereupon, he shall receive a reward. If any man's work shall be 
burned, he shall suffer loss; but he himself shall be saved; yet so 
as by fire." (1 Cor. 3:9,11,10-15.) 

The individual Christian faith is a building, and as such must 
have both foundation and superstructure. Every principle of 
truth or error adopted becomes a part of our faith-building. A 
building made of wood, and thatched with straw, may look well 
and for a time protect, but it will not endure like a better and 
more costly structure. So a faith building, constructed of men's 
traditions, may for a time look passably well, be less costly and 
more quickly finished than one built of the precious truths 
patiently quarried from God's Word. The former is easily swept 
away with the storm of infidelity which does not even shake the 
latter. The one will stand the test of fire and protect its owner, 
the other will but feed the flame and endanger the owner. 

The building of our faith God leaves largely with us. He 
furnishes a mine of truth, places the tools within our reach, and 



urges us to build well of enduring materials, adding faith to 
faith, virtue to virtue, knowledge to knowledge. Thus he would 
have us grow in grace and knowledge and love, following 
examples of building which he has furnished. 

"Other foundation can no man lay than that (which) is laid- 
JESUS CHRIST. " This statement of the importance of Jesus as 
the foundation of all faith toward God, is in full accord with the 
statement that "There is none other name under heaven given 
among men whereby we must be saved. " No other basis of faith 
will do -"Other foundation can no man lay." 

Those who are building on this foundation rock are Christians 
no matter how poor a faith they build thereupon. Even though 
they build entirely with the wood, hay, and stubble of men's 
traditions, yet as builders upon the Rock they are Christians. 
Though in this DAY OF THE LORD into which we have now 
entered their works shall suffer loss, yet such themselves shall 
be saved so as by fire. That is, though God has arranged that a 
fierce trial of faith is coming upon all who profess to be on the 
Rock, Christ Jesus, which will burn up, eradicate, destroy every 
vestige of error, every thing which is of man and not from God's 
Word, yet all who truly recognize the Rock and are built on it 
shall be saved. 

Those who build on the rock with the gold, silver, and precious 
stones of God's revelation by reason of this good and proper 
faith-building, are enabled to overcome the world and carry out 
their consecration acceptably to God through Jesus Christ. "This 
is the victory that overcometh the world, even your faith. " These 
overcomers who now "follow the Lamb" shall in due time be 
everlastingly united to Him whom "God hath appointed heir of 
all things." As such they are sometimes called Jesus' brethren, 
and sometimes by that close and endearing name —"The Bride, 
the Lamb's Wife," and as such we are to be heirs of God, joint 
heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord. 

Those who build with poor stuff, the wood, hay, and stubble of 
human traditions, we understand to be those who do not 
overcome the world, but who are ensnared and bound by the 
spirit of the world and hindered from carrying out their 
consecration. Having only the traditions of men, they lack 
protection against error, and the strength necessary to overcome 
the world which is obtainable only from the truth. All, then, 
should recognize the value of truth in enabling us to carry out 
our consecration vows of death to the world and its ambitions. 

If all Christians valued truth properly all would buy it and never 
sell it, though it cost time, inconvenience and self-denial to get 
it, and reputation and sacrifice to hold it. 

The class who, though consecrated, are building a flimsy faith of 
man's wisdom, we understand to be the "great company" (Rev. 
19:6; 7:9-17) who will come to spiritual conditions, but through 



great tribulation brought on them by their erroneous faith, all of 
which dross of error must be consumed. Thus they will be saved 
by that fire or purification. This is the class which follows the 
Bride company (Psa. 45:14,15) as Rebecca's maids followed her 
(Gen. 24:61). This is called the servant class in distinction from 
the royal class which reigns. These shall "serve God in His 
temple" and be "before the throne." Thus in symbol we see a 
distinction represented between this class and the overcomers, 
the royal bride who shall reign with Jesus in the throne. Notice 
that the different rewards of these two classes (both spiritual) are 
shown by many scriptures (see Rev. 7:9,10,13-17; 19:6,7; Psa. 
45:10-15). Therefore let all who seek the prize of our high 
calling take heed how (with what material) they build their faith 
even though on the sure foundation. 



R428 : page 3 

ON WHAT ARE YOU BUILDING? 

What we have just seen regarding faith structures is important, 
but our present question is yet more so, because if not on the 
rock foundation, Jesus Christ, all our faith is vain and all our 
hope delusive. 

To believe that Mohammed once lived and died on earth does 
not constitute us Mohammedans, nor give a basis for faith and 
hope of a future life; neither does the simple belief that Jesus 
once lived and died on earth constitute us Christians, nor give a 
basis of faith or hope of a future life. But the belief that Jesus 
died as our Redeemer— "died for our sins according to the 
Scriptures," "gave himself a ransom for all;" that "the Lord laid 
on him the iniquity of us all, and that by his stripes we are 
healed, " does constitute us Christians and give a firm foundation 
for faith that our sins are cancelled, and that in his due time all 
may be released from sin's penalty— death. 

Some build on right doing as a basis of hope that God will grant 
them eternal life. These build not on the Rock, Christ Jesus, but 
upon their own works. Of this class were the Jews, who sought 
to justify themselves. But Paul assures us that they had not a 
good foundation; for "By the deeds of the law shall no flesh be 
justified. (Rom. 3:20.) 

Others build their hope of salvation on the love of God. They 
feel sure that because God is very pitiful and of tender mercy, 
therefore he will ultimately, eternally save every one from death. 
Such seem to forget that God had the same love for mankind for 
the past six thousand years, yet he has permitted mankind to go 
down lower and lower into misery and death. We suggest to 
these that if God has so long kept love subservient to justice, and 
never overruled his original sentence of death, their hope rests 



on a sandy foundation; for his word declares "With him is no 
variableness, neither shadow of turning" and "He will by no 
means clear the guilty." (James 1:17; Exod. 34:7.) Such are not 
Christians because they build hope and faith on the love of God 
and not on the only foundation, CHRIST JESUS. The LOVE of 
God provided the foundation, but the love of God is not the 
foundation of Christian faith. 

Others build on the justice of God and boldly declare that God is 
bound by principles of justice, to save all men out of Adamic 
death. Their argument is that God placed man in his present 
condition of sin and misery and death, and that in justice to his 
creatures he must restore them. To those who thus reason and 
build their hopes of future life on God's JUSTICE, we would 
suggest that if this reasoning is correct, the many Scriptures 
which tell us that by grace (God's favor) we are saved, are all 
untrue, because if He is compelled to save men on principles of 
justice, then salvation is not of grace, but of justice. We suggest 
further, that if God is bound in justice to save all men out of 
death, it is proper to infer that God has 

R429 : page 3 

been unjust toward man for six thousand years. The inference, 
then, would be that God will sooner or later be compelled in 
justice to change his methods and do right— do justly by his 
creatures. 

You never said it thus? We presume not. Perhaps you never 
thought of the God-dishonoring conclusions to which your false, 
though seemingly plausible, premise would lead. If you had, 
doubtless you would not be building your hopes on God's 
justice-outside of his plan to redeem through Christ Jesus-for if 
he has been unjust for six thousand years, he might continue to 
be unjust indefinitely. 

None of these theories are scriptural, hence none of them are 
proper foundations for faith, and any building reared thereon is 
doomed to destruction. We ask the question, Can those who 
build on these sandy foundations be properly termed Christians? 
Is not a Christian one whose hopes of future life are built solely 
and only, on the rock foundation which God has laid- Jesus 
Christ? "Thus saith Jehovah, Behold I lay in Zion for a 
foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure 
foundation." (Isa. 28:16.) 

Paul also declares the foundation of all Christian faith, saying, "I 
delivered unto you first of all that which I also received (first of 
all), how that Christ died for our sins according to the 
Scriptures." (1 Cor. 15:3.) In the two preceding verses Paul tells 
us that this was the Gospel which he preached, which they had 
received, and by which they might reckon themselves saved. 
This is not all of the Gospel— good tidings-no, there is much 
more, but it all comes as a consequence of this fundamental or 



foundation truth; and without this faith in Jesus as our 
Redeemer, who died and gave his life a ransom for our lives, 
which were forfeited through Adam's sin, we must see that we 
are still guilty and condemned before God's law and could have 
no scriptural grounds for expecting future life. 

It is in vain that any tell us that they are building on Christ 
because they acknowledge Him as a leader and noble pattern. 
All men— yes, and devils too must acknowledge the grandeur 
and perfectness of Jesus' life; all must admit that he is a noble 
example, but to acknowledge Jesus as the foundation of faith in 
a future life, is to recognize the fact that all men are sinners, and 
as such JUSTLY condemned to death, and that Jesus is "the 
Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the world; " and that 
thus, by paying the penalty of man's sins-death-he procured for 
all a release from death, a right to life. He justifies them, or 
makes them worthy of life, which in His due time he will give 
them. 

The plan of God, looked at from the standpoint of the inspired 
Word of God, recognizes the impartially just trial of Adam, his 
deliberate violation of God's just and easy requirement, and the 
justice of enforcing the penalty which God had threatened, viz., 
DEATH (not life in torment, but a loss of life totally). "In the 
day that thou eatest thereof-dying thou shalt die" (Gen. 2:17, 
Margin). God's foreknowledge of the consequence of Adam's 
sin cannot be urged against the justice of his trial, as the trial 
was the same and had the same results, as though God had not 
foreknown its result. 

God is not responsible for all the mental and physical 
imperfections of our race. These are traceable as results of sin to 
Adam their progenitor. Here is a thought not generally 
recognized, that God creates only perfect beings such as Adam 
was before sin; and all fallen, mentally and physically imperfect 
men and women, are not God's creation, but the offspring of the 
fallen Adam. These imperfections, therefore, are not chargeable 
to God, but to Adam's sin. All die, therefore, as a result of 
Adam's unrighteousness and not of God's injustice. If, then, God 
was just in condemning Adam, and in no way responsible to 
Adam's offspring, it must have been as Scripture states, "By 
God's grace (unmerited favor) we are saved." Yes, while we 
were in just condemnation as enemies and sinners, God so loved 
and pitied us that he gave his Son, that he "by the grace of God 
should taste death for every man. " To this agree the words of 
Scripture-- 1 Cor. 15:22; Rom. 5:12,17,19, and 11:32,33. If, then, 
the Scriptures are true, the theory that Jehovah has dealt unjustly 
by the race in condemning all to death, and the argument that he 
is bound injustice to restore them to life, falls. 

Looking from the standpoint of divine revelation, instead of 
purely human reasoning, we see that while love is a prominent 
factor in all God's plans and an element of the divine nature, yet 



his foreknowledge and omnipotence make it unnecessary for his 
love to come into conflict with his justice. God having justly 
condemned man as unworthy of life, love could not step in and 
reverse the decision and set the prisoner free without first 
satisfying the claims of justice. Should God do so we should 
properly consider him changeable; and not only so, but we 
should all see that either the first or the last decision was unjust, 
for if the first decision was just, then the reversing of it was 
unjust, and if the last decision be just, the first must have been 
unjust. God is just and true; in him is no variableness; He will 
by no means clear the guilty. The guilt of all our race was laid 
on Jesus, and the claims of justice were satisfied in his sacrifice. 
If we say we have no sin (and hence no need of a Savior to 
redeem from the consequence of it— death), "we make him a 
liar," for he declares, "There is none righteous; no, not one." 

When all were in this condition of sin and condemnation in 
which we could neither help ourselves nor each other, because 
all being from Adam were under the same condemnation, then 
God's love carried out a plan (already conceived) by which he 
could clear the guilty race and restore them to life and at the 
same time do it justly. He so loved the sinner, whom he had 
justly 

R429 : page 4 

condemned, that he gave his Son that he should taste death (our 
penalty) for every man; that he should be a propitiation 
(satisfaction) for our sins (the Church's), and not for ours only, 
but also for the sins of the whole world. (1 John 2:2.) Thus 
God's love and wisdom, operating in harmony with his justice, 
succeed in clearing the guilty without any injustice. Thus only 
can God be just and the justifier of sinners who accept of the 
ransom "when brought to a full knowledge of it." (Rom. 3:26; 1 
Tim. 2:4.) An earthly judge, before whom a criminal had been 
convicted and justly sentenced, could not justly set the prisoner 
free, nor declare him guiltless in the eyes of the law. But if some 
one came forward and paid the imposed penalty for the prisoner, 
the Judge could be just in justifying (declaring right in the eyes 
of the law) him whom he had formerly been just in condemning. 

We feel satisfied that few have seen into the "depths of the 
riches both of the knowledge and wisdom of God. " In wisdom 
and love all were judged according to the one representative 
whose example nearly all would undoubtedly have followed if 
they had been individually tried. If each of the one hundred and 
forty billions of human beings estimated to have been born into 
the world had been individually tried, and had yielded and been 
condemned as Adam was, it would have required as many 
perfect human beings to die for them, and thus pay their penalty 
and redeem them. 



But looking at it from God's statement, we see a depth of divine 
wisdom and economy in the plan adopted— the condemning of 
all through one man's disobedience, that he might have mercy 
on all through the sacrifice of another one as a sin offering. Note 
the force of the following Scriptures from this standpoint and 
their meaninglessness when otherwise viewed: "As in Adam all 
die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." "As by the 
offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation, 
even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all 
men unto justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience 
many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many 
be made righteous.... Where sin abounded, grace did much more 
abound: that as sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace 
reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our 
Lord. For what the law could not do in that it was weak through 
the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful 
flesh, by a sacrifice (see margin) condemned sin in the flesh. " 
"God hath concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have 
mercy upon all. " 

"O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of 
God: how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past 
finding out!... Who hath known the mind of the Lord, or who 
hath been his counselor? Of him, and through him, and to him 
are all things; to whom be glory forever." (1 Cor. 15:22; Rom. 
5:18-21; 8:3; 11:32-36.) 

In conclusion: On what are you building your faith, my brother, 
my sister? On the sands of men's opinions and theories, or on 
the one rock foundation which God himself has laid?— Jesus 
Christ, "the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the 
world"-who "died for our sins." 

My hope is built on nothing less 
Than Jesus' blood and righteousness; 
I dare not trust the sweetest frame, 
But wholly lean on Jesus' name. 

His oath, his cov'nant and His blood, 
Support me in the whelming flood; 
When all around my soul gives way, 
He then is all my hope and stay. 

On Christ the Solid Rock I stand; 
All other ground is sinking sand. " 



R430 : page 4 

IT IS a good deal better to live holy than to talk about it. We are 
told to let our light shine, and if it does, we won't need to tell 
anybody that it does. The light will be its own witness. 
Lighthouses don't ring bells and fire cannons to call attention to 
their shining-they just shine.— Moody. 



R430 : page 4 

HENRY WARD BEECHER. 

In a recent issue we called attention to Mr. B.'s theology, 
criticizing it sharply, but not unkindly. A reader of the TOWER 
thinks we were misinformed through the meagre press reports of 
Mr. B.'s recent utterances before the Congregational 
Association, and has kindly sent us a full report of the same, 
revised and corrected by Mr. B. himself. It is our desire to do 
justice to all. We have examined said reports and here make 
some extracts and comments. 

Mr. B. says: "I believe miracles are possible now; they were not 
only possible, but real, in the times gone by— especially the two 
great miracles-the miraculous conception of Christ and his 
resurrection from the dead. When I give those up, the two 
columns on which the house stands will have to fall to the 
ground." 

On the subject of the atonement he says: "I am accustomed to 
say that Christ is in himself the Atonement; that he is set forth in 
his life, teaching, suffering, death, resurrection and heavenly 
glory as empowered to FORGIVE SIN, and to transform men 
into a new and nobler life who know sin, and accept him in full 
and loving trust. " "The Scriptures declare that the sufferings of 
Christ SECURED the remission of sins." "The Apostles 
continually point to Christ's sufferings. They inspire hope 
because Christ has suffered. They include in their commission 
that their joyful errand is to announce remission of sins 
BECAUSE of Christ's work." "I regard the statement in Rom. 
3:20-26 as covering the ground which I hold, and as including 
all that is known." [Please read.] 

If we consider Mr. B. from the standpoint of these remarks 
alone, we should have some reason to say that he is sound on the 
subject of redemption through the blood of Christ. But when we 
notice that throughout the whole statement of his views, the oft 
repeated Scriptural terms— ransom, bought, redeemed, 
propitiation (satisfaction)-are conspicuously absent from his 
confession of faith; that in the statement quoted he refers to the 
sufferings and work of Christ as the cause of the remission of 
sins; and that he says that nowhere does he find in Scripture 
statements of why the sufferings of Christ were necessary, or 
how they opened a way for sinners, it causes us still to doubt 
whether he appreciates the value of Christ's death as a 
satisfaction for sins, and causes the less wonder that reporters 
never correctly represent his views. 

We are still in doubt as to whether Mr. B. believes that "Christ 
died for our sins;" that he "gave himself a ransom for all;" that 



we were "bought with a price, even the precious blood of 
Christ. " We wonder from his own expression whether he 
believes the text he quoted (Rom. 3:20-26) as covering the 
ground which he holds. Does it cover all and more than he 
believes, when it says of Jesus, "Whom God hath set forth to be 
a propitiation (appeasement or satisfaction) through FAITH IN 
HIS BLOOD to declare his righteousness for (in) the remission 
of sins that are past"? 

Again, Mr. B. says: "Man is a being created in imperfection, and 
seeking a full development. Second, I believe him to be sinful. " 
"No man ever lived, and no man ever will live, that is only a 
man that was not a sinner. " Thus he charges the sin to the 
Creator and not to Adam, through whom the Scriptures affirm 
all were made sinners, and on account of whose disobedience all 
were condemned. (Rom. 5:18,19.) This Scripture doctrine of 
hereditary taint and condemnation he characterizes as "spiritual 
barbarism" (page 5), while on page 20 he makes what seems to 
our mind a complete contradiction of this when he says, "It is far 
easier for some to rise than others. Heredity has a powerful 
influence. " 

We think we see the cause of this stumbling in Mr. B.'s case. As 
a man he is noble, fearless, reasonable and benevolent. We see 
him struggling manfully with the theology of to-day, vainly 
endeavoring to patch it up, and make it conform to his sense of 
justice and benevolence. Personally we can but admire and love 
such a character, but we would that he, and all such, would lay 
aside all theological creeds and begin afresh the study of these 
subjects, using God's Word as the only standard. 

We suggest that he might find, as we have, that God CREATED 
only our first parents, and that they were perfect and sinless as 
narrated in Scripture. That our imperfection, and consequent sin 
through inability to observe God's perfect law, is chargeable, not 
to God's having imperfectly created our first parents or 
ourselves, but to the fact that we derive our existence in a 
natural way from Adam and Eve since their fall by God's 
arrangement, and hence we have the hereditary taint and 
imperfection originally from Adam, increased or decreased by 
each generation, but without hope of ever being able to extricate 
ourselves from this condition of sin and death. 

With this view it is easy to see why Christ died. It is easy to see 
that he came into the world, not to patch up God's imperfect 
creation and help to get it into good shape, but he came into the 
world to redeem from sin and its specified punishment-deafh- 
the race which, in its progenitor, God had created perfect and 
upright in his own moral likeness, but which, through sin, had 
lost all right to life. Since Jesus paid the very penalty which was 
against all— death, the sacrificing of his perfect humanity-how 
clear it is that all men are redeemed, or bought back from death, 
and re-established in a right to life (resurrection) through the 



ransom price given by our substitute, even the precious 
(valuable) blood (life) of Christ, which was "shed for the 
remission of sins that are pasf'-Adamic sins. 

How much in harmony with this are the statements of Rom. 
5:12,18,19. "By one man sin entered into the world and death by 
(as a result of) sin; and so death passed upon all men for that all 
have sinned. " "Therefore as by the offence of one judgment 
came upon all men to condemnation (condemning them as 
unworthy of life), EVEN SO by the righteousness of one (Jesus) 
the free gift came upon (to) all men, unto justification of life. 
(Life became a free gift because we had as a race forfeited our 
right to the life originally given to Adam.) For as by one man's 
disobedience many (all) were made sinners, so by the obedience 
(even unto death- Phil. 2:8) of one shall many be made 
righteous." Paul regarded this fact that God had condemned all 
in Adam and justified all in Christ as a master piece of wisdom, 
and we should so mould our faith according to God's Word as to 
have it so in our estimation. If our theology does not make it 
appear so, we should conclude that something is wrong with our 
theology, and at once set about the prayerful closet study of the 
Bible to have it made right. God will reveal his gloriously 
harmonious plan to every diligent and fully consecrated 
searcher. "Light is sown for the righteous." 

If Mr. B. considers himself misstated, and desires to correct our 
present understanding of his views, we shall be glad to furnish 
him as much space in a future issue as this article occupies. "Let 
God be true." 



R430 : page 4 

PRESENT DANGER. 

"Blessed is he that watcheth and keepeth his garments." 

The day of the Lord, in the beginning of which we are now 
living, is everywhere throughout the Scriptures referred to as a 
time of special trouble— beginning first on the Church. But why 
should it begin with the Church? or rather, why should not the 
Church be entirely exempt from it? Let us look first to see what 
is the cause of the trouble, and the question may be readily 
answered. 

The day of the Lord is the day when Jesus takes to himself his 
kingly power. The first work of the new king is the binding of 
Satan, the present "prince of this world," for "how can one enter 
into a strong man's house and spoil his goods, except he first 
bind the strong man? then he will spoil his house" (Matt. 12:29); 
and "For this purpose was the Son of God manifested, that he 
might destroy the works of the devil." (1 John 3:8.) Satan's reign 
has been one of terror under cover of the darkness (ignorance) of 



this world. But the present domination of evil is to end, and the 
prince of darkness (Satan) is to be bound. The kingdom of 
Christ is to bring joy and peace, and the nations shall walk in the 
light of it. (Rev. 21:24.) 

As the light of truth increases darkness (ignorance) must flee 
away, and Satan to that extent must lose his power. Light-truth, 
will be the chain which will bind evil in the coming age under 
the reign of Christ. And when the knowledge of the Lord fills 
the whole earth as the waters cover the sea, then Satan will be 
completely bound. Now, it will be clearly seen that the Church- 
those walking by the light of the lamp of truth-are the first to 
escape from the kingdom of darkness. Over them Satan first 
begins to lose his power, and he here discovers that the binding 
influence is at work. Since our Lord and King has come, the 
light of truth has been shining as never before. 

R431 : page 4 

It is not a supposable case that Satan will give up his dominion 
without a struggle, and this terrible struggle between light and 
darkness, truth and error, is now going on specially in the 
Church. Every new truth is confronted by some seemingly 
plausible error, and every old truth is assailed and unsettled in 
the minds of those not fully equipped for the fearful contest. 
Lukewarm and merely nominal Christians are little troubled 
about these things, and as long as they sleep on, ignoring the 
light that has come into the world, Satan can afford to let them 
alone. 

One of the devices of the adversary now, so closely resembles 
his policy in Eden, that if God's children will note it, they can 
but indignantly repulse his audacity. He first presented a 
temptation to Eve, attempted to prove the advantages of 
partaking of the forbidden fruit; reasoned that God was unjust in 
depriving them of it, etc. Eve replied, "God hath said, Ye shall 
not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die." But Satan said, 
"Ye shall not surely die. " The act of disobedience in eating that 
fruit was sufficient to accomplish the work of death. Obedience 
was the rock on which they stood in harmony with God, having 
the promise of everlasting life, but they left the rock and thus 
lost life and all claim to it. 

Death to all eternity, was the result of that act had not 
deliverance been provided through a Redeemer, who became 
man's substitute in death, thus ransoming him from the power of 
the grave. Faith in the efficacy of our ransom price -the 
precious blood of Christ— is now the only means of access to 
God's favor, the only sure foundation, the rock on which we 
may now stand. Those who come to a full knowledge of the 
truth in this age, may now be justified and at peace with God, 
standing on this rock by faith. All the world shall in the next age 
come to the knowledge of the truth, and can find favor with God 



only through acknowledging and resting on the merit of the 
Redeemer. And now Satan is again at work seeking by every 
means in his power to undermine and unsettle this foundation of 
our faith, trying to show that we need no Redeemer, and that he 
who claimed to be our Redeemer was a sinful man even as we; 
that his life was a forfeited life coming down from Adam 
through Joseph, instead of a new creation, perfect, from God his 
Father. Ah! but we reply, "God hath said," "There is no name 
given under heaven, or among men, whereby we must be saved, 
but the name of Jesus." "In him was no sin," and we are 
redeemed "with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb 
without blemish and without spot." 

Oh, says the adversary, that is not to be taken literally; those are 
only figurative expressions, and do not mean what they appear 
to. If you were only spiritually minded you would see that they 
mean the very opposite. Here is a sly appeal to the old pride 
which we had covenanted to crucify. Again, we reply, but God 
hath said, that if those who were once enlightened count the 
blood of 

R431 : page 5 

the covenant wherewith they were sanctified an unholy 
(common) thing, such draw back unto perdition (destruction), 
there remaineth no more a sacrifice for sins (Heb. 10:26-29)- 
such shall surely die. No, says the deceiver, ye shall not surely 
die, and then he quotes a text where it does not belong, saying, 
"God will have all men to be saved." This is true of the Adamic 
death— "God will have all men to be saved" from the first or 
Adamic death, and then to be brought "to a knowledge of the 
truth;" and after that, if they sin wilfully, etc., they die a second 
time, and there remaineth for such no more a sacrifice for sins. 
The ransom given was for Adamic sin, and releases only from 
the death which came by Adam. There is no ransom given and 
no redemption promised from the "Second death," which is the 
punishment for wilful sin after justification and enlightenment. 

The world is not thus enlightened yet, only God's children are. 
We, are already reckoned of God as having passed from death 
unto life, since justified by faith in the precious blood of Christ. 
And not only so, but being thus justified, and having presented 
ourselves as living sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 
we have access into this grace wherein we stand as "new 
creatures." Thus all our hope will be seen to depend entirely on 
our acceptance of Jesus as our Redeemer, Ransom, Substitute, 
his payment of our penalty. And, therefore, to all the dear 
household of faith we would say, Beware of the deceiver! This 
is his old battle-plan, and all should be able to recognize it. He 
still claims that the wages of sin is not death- "Ye shall not 
surely die. " And be assured that if this policy does not 
accomplish your overthrow, some other device will be tried. 



Let not the storm of his wrath sweep you off the Rock; keep 
your building on this foundation, and continue to build with the 
gold and silver and precious stones of truth. Most of those in the 
nominal Church have been building on this rock, but the 
material they have used was mainly the wood, hay and stubble 
of men's traditions. But the trial of this day shall try every man's 
work of what sort it is. The storms, and the floods, and the 
winds, and the hail shall beat upon your house, and the fiery trial 
shall prove all. "Who shall be able to stand?" All on the rock 
shall stand, though any whose building is of wood, hay and 
stubble shall suffer loss, and they shall be saved, yet so as by 
fire. Remember, "We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but 
against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the 
darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high 
places." (Eph 6:12.) 

Ne'er think the victory won, 
Nor once at ease sit down; 
The work of faith will not be done, 
Till thou hast gained thy crown. 

Since our sins were laid upon Jesus, and we by faith accepted 
him as our Redeemer, his righteousness has been laid upon us. 
Yes, his righteousness is our glorious dress. "Blessed is he that 
watcheth and keepeth his garments." 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R431 : page 5 

IN DEFENCE OF TRUTH. 

In our last issue, in the article headed "An Unpleasant Duty," 
we called attention to the "Day Star," a paper which we once 
warmly commended to our readers, and which we were pleased 
to recognize as a co-laborer in the spread of divine truth. 

We called attention to the fact that the "Day Star" had recently 
left the basis of Christian hope, viz. : Redemption from sin and 
death by the ransom price-Jesus' death-and that it was 
evidently seeking to lead in a race for open infidelity by 
endeavoring (without cause) to throw discredit on the first 
chapters of Matthew and Luke, in order to support the erroneous 
claim that Jesus was the son of Joseph, and altogether born in 
sin and shapen in iniquity as much as any other man, having 
descended from the fallen Adam. 

As we stated then, we repeat now, that this has been to us a very 
unpleasant duty. We are sorry to lose the company of the "Day 
Star," which for nearly a year gave promise of being a faithful 
co-worker in the spread of "good tidings of great joy." 



Our grief is two-fold, however, for we not only mourn the loss 
of a fellow laborer, but we behold in it an "enemy of the cross of 
Christ," whose spread and increase means opposition to truth 
and increase of error. Nor have we any hesitation in saying that 
the fact that it still retains some of the truths of restitution will 
but aid in the overthrow of the faith of some, by reason of whom 
the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. (2 Pet. 2:2.) Restitution 
will be the bait, error will be the hook, and sophistry the line by 
which the unwary will be drawn into infidelity. Sadly we mourn 
our loss. 

We called attention to the "Day Star" because we wanted to put 
all on guard, for we well knew that all would not at once 
recognize the deadly mixture which is being presented to them 
under the cover of some truth. 

We knew, too, that many had been so long starved in Babylon, 
that having come to taste and see the goodness of God and the 
beauty of His plan for the restitution of all things, their appetite 
for truth was so sharpened that they could easily be poisoned if 
not shown the error-hence our word of caution. 

Arsenic is white and resembles sugar. If it were presented to you 
by a friend marked sugar, you would perhaps use it and be 
poisoned. The "Watch Tower" was the friend which handed you 
sample copies of the "Day Star" marked sugar, and now we find 
that it is changed to poison, though mixed with the sweets of 
restitution. Surely, then, if we did not cry aloud and properly 
label it poison, we should be guilty before God. (Ezek. 33:6.) 

Druggists are accustomed to put the label, "POISON," on all 
poisonous drugs, not to prohibit their use, but to prevent any 
from using them in ignorance of this true character. So with us, 
we do not seek to prohibit our readers from reading the works of 
Paine, Voltaire or Ingersol, or the "Day Star," but we want the 
latter as well as the rest labeled infidel. All except the latter 
claim to be 

R432 : page 5 

infidel, i.e., rejecters of the Bible's teachings. The latter, 
claiming to be a believer, is "privately" (i.e., under cover) 
denying the redemption, seeking to undermine the nature of the 
Redeemer, and to overthrow confidence in the value of the New 
Testament generally. 

In its last issue the "Day Star" takes notice of our "Unpleasant 
Duty. " It affects a tone of injured innocence, and claims that our 
saying that it was seeking to "lead in a race for open infidelity" 
is unjust; but in the same paper it shows that our statement had 
the best of foundation, for in another column we find that it not 
only rejects those chapters of Matthew and Luke which teach 
that Jesus was born of a virgin-conceived in her by the power 
of Jehovah-but rejects the inspiration and value of the New 



Testament Scriptures totally. We quote the following sentences 
from it: "We feel confident that the acceptance of the Old 
Testament writings and the rejection of those of the New 
Testament, not in accord with it, will free us absolutely from 
Babylon's isms." "We have more confidence in the authority of 
the Old Testament writings taken as a whole, and of their 
importance in arriving at the truth, than we have in the reliability 
of all the New Testament Scriptures." "We repeat, that all who 
would GROW must rid themselves of the childish idea that it is 
wrong to question the sense or application of a Scripture, even 
though it be made by an apostle. " 

Why, this is just what Ingersol and all other infidels would say 
of the New Testament; the only difference is that they would say 
the same of the Old Testament. And at the present rate of 
progress, the "Day Star" will soon pronounce the Old Testament 
as unreliable as the New Testament. Already we regret to learn 
its Editor scoffs at the narrative of Noah and the Ark as recorded 
in Genesis. 

And yet the "Day Star" states that it is misrepresented by us 
when we say it is on the race for open infidelity. Does our 
contemporary know the meaning of the word infidel? It signifies 
unbeliever-one who rejects the special inspiration of the New 
Testament— or one who denies that the man Jesus had Jehovah 
for a father. Since this is the unbelief of the "Day Star," why 
object to calling it by its true name, infidelity. It is those errors 
which are brought in "privately" (secretly under cover of truth) 
which the Scriptures call "damnable heresies." 

But we are not satisfied fully yet. The "Day Star" tells its readers 
that we misrepresent it when we say it denies that the Lord 
bought us; and it contends that it does believe and teach that 
"Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures." 

The "Day Star" has fallen into a habit common to some other 
publications, of quoting certain passages of Scripture and 
claiming that they believe them, and giving the impression that 
those Scriptures are favorable to their theories, when such is not 
the case. For instance, such texts as the following are often 
quoted: "Who gave himself a ransom for all" (1 Tim. 2:6). 
"Christ died for our sins" (1 Cor. 15:3). "Ye are bought with a 
price" (1 Cor. 6:20). "Ye were redeemed ...with the precious 
blood of Christ" (1 Pet. 1:18). Then, in the very same paper, the 
idea of our being "bought" will be scouted as ridiculous. 

This conduct attempts to excuse itself by saying, "We do not 
believe that Christ died for any man's sins according to men's 
theories." Now, we ask, has any one the right to use the words 
ransom, redeem, bought, etc., and put a private interpretation on 
the meaning of those words in order to say he believes them? 
We think not. The "Day Star" is published in the English 
language, and common honesty demands that those words be 



used according to their true meaning and not according to the 
convenience of any theory. There are standard authorities on the 
meaning of both Greek and English words, and according to 
these the "Day Star" does not believe, nor teach, that Jesus was 
our "ransom," our "Redeemer," nor that we were "bought with a 
price." 

It has been shown heretofore in these columns, not only that 
these English words (ransom, bought, redeem) mean the giving 
of one thing instead of, or as a substitute for another, but also 
that the Greek words which these are used to translate are, if 
possible, still stronger expressions of the same idea. We have 
shown scripturally that Jesus was a perfect man, and though 
born of a woman, his life came not from man, but from God. 
"The angel said unto Mary (Luke 1 :35), The Holy Ghost shall 
come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow 
thee: THEREFORE also that HOLY THING which shall be 
born of thee shall be called the Son of God. " He is here and 
elsewhere declared holy, undefiled and separate from sinners, 
even from his birth. Then he did not partake of the condemned 
or forfeited life of Adam through Joseph, but of a life as directly 
from God as was the first Adam's. We have shown that because 
thus born "holy," or sinless, he had an unforfeited life which he 
could give for the life of Adam and all who died in him. This he 
did. "He came to give his LIFE a ransom (exchange) for many" 
lives. (Matt. 20:28.) (See Rom. 5:18,19.) 

Of course when the "Day Star" claims that Jesus got his life 
from Joseph, and was as much born in Adamic sin as any other 
man, it must needs deny the meaning of the word ransom, 
because one sinner cannot ransom another. 

Now, we wish the "Day Star" to tell us, not what it does not 
believe, but what it does believe on this subject: Why did Jesus 
die? How does it effect our sins? How did he put away sin by 
the sacrifice of himself? In what way did he give "himself a 
ransom (Gr. antilutron -an equivalent price) for all?" In what 
sense was he a propitiation (satisfaction) for our sins? In what 
sense were we "bought with a price"? We desire an answer to 
these questions full and explicit for the truth's sake, and any 
evasion of them we will regard as an admission of the "Day 
Star's" inability to answer. These questions relate to the very 
foundation of Christianity. 

We have put these questions so pointedly that we hope the "Day 
Star's" private and peculiar and new use of English words will 
hereafter be understood. We esteem that method which attempts 
to palm off error under guise and cover of scriptural words and 
phrases, while ignoring their meaning, as the most insidious and 
injurious form of infidelity. We do not like to see the label 
"sugar" put on arsenic and handed to God's children without our 
emphatic protest and exposure of its true character. We are glad 
to know that some by use, have had their senses so exercised as 



to be able at once to distinguish between the truth concerning 
the restitution and the deadly error handed with it, which takes 
away the very and only basis of restitution— the ransom price. 
Put on the proper label, and then let every man who wants to use 
it do so, but so far as possible keep it out of the reach of babes. 



R432 : page 5 

CHANGE YOUR MINDS. 

[CONCLUDED.] 

At the dawn of the Gospel dispensation, when the star of 
Bethlehem had arisen, and was about to be manifested to Israel, 
John cried: "Reform, (change your minds), because the Royal 
Majesty of the heavens has approached." (Diaglott). His 
audience was made up of all classes dwelling in and about 
Jerusalem at that time, and doubtless all, or nearly all, were 
more or less under the influence of the teaching of the Jewish 
church. 

But was not the teaching of the Jewish church correct up to that 
time? asks some one: No, not altogether. 

True they had the law given by God to Moses, and it was "holy, 
just and good," but those Jewish doctors had, by their traditions, 
added to and taken from to such an extent that the minds of the 
people were corrupted, being taught "for doctrines the 
commandments of men. " 

The nominal Christian church of to-day occupies, in many 
respects, a position similar to the nominal Jewish church at that 
time. The idea that "salvation is of the Jews," was a deeply 
rooted one, but lacking the grand and glorious significance 
which attached to it in the mind of Jesus, when he gave 
utterance to the words. (John 4:22.) There is no doubt that the 
Jewish teachers of that time had taken great pains to instill into 
the minds of the people at large the idea that if they would enjoy 
a blissful hereafter they must attach themselves to the Jewish 
church; in fact, Jesus said they "compassed sea and land to make 
one proselyte." (Matt. 23:15.) But that their teaching was not of 
a nature to greatly improve their morals, we infer from the 
remainder of the passage just quoted. 

What was their doctrine and teaching, then, we may aptly 
inquire? 

Briefly, we may say, among other things, the Pharisees believed 
in the immortality of the soul, and in the eternal suffering of the 
wicked. The Sadducees, another class, disbelieved in the 
resurrection; neither did they believe in angel or spirit. How 
striking the similarity and effect of the teaching of these 
fundamental doctrines by the nominal church then and now! 



Both classes of Jews, by their traditional teaching, did away 
with the need of a resurrection; and though the Pharisees 
professed to believe it, yet they practically denied it; and the 
Sadducees, denying a future life, of course had no use for the 
doctrine of the resurrection. 

The tradition of the Pharisees that man does "not surely (really) 
die," but 

R433 : page 5 

only changes his mode of existence, could claim great antiquity, 
having been promulgated in the garden of Eden. (Gen. 3:4.) That 
our blessed Lord, when warning the disciples against the 
"doctrine of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees" (Matt. 16:6- 
12,) had especial reference to the state of the dead, we cannot 
doubt, for it is primary. 

If, to use the language of orthodoxy, "the soul lives after the 
body dies," then Satan's statement would not have 

R433 : page 6 

been a very killing thing, and the worst we could say of it would 
be, that he did not tell the whole truth; but Jesus said he was a 
murderer from the beginning, and that he is the father of lies. 
(John 8:44.) What was the first lie, if this was not it? We 
conclude, therefore, that he did a killing thing, that he told a 
murderous lie when he said "thou shalt not surely die, " and this 
in flat contradiction to God's words: "In the day thou eatest 
thereof dying thou shalt die. " One thing is noticeable; let the 
statements mean what you will, they do not agree. Which will 
you believe? 

What is the popular teaching upon this subject now? 

Just exactly what Satan taught then: man does not surely (really) 
die; his body dies, his soul still lives. 

Upon the capital which this statement furnishes, Satan has done 
business for thousands of years; but the light shines, day dawns, 
"the Royal Majesty of the heavens has approached," blessed be 
his name, and though man dies, he shall live again. Glory be to 
God! 

Knowing that the wages of sin is death, it is the greatest 
importance for us to find out how we can be saved from death, 
not from dying; for as all have sinned, all must die. 

Our inquiry is answered by Paul in 1 Cor. 15:22. As in Adam all 
die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive; "but every man in 
his own order." Ver. 23. This reveals the fact that there are 
different orders or grades of life. See also 1 Cor. 15:39-42, and 
"Food" page 134. And the term "salvation" is properly applied 
to either grade, because before they reach either order, they must 
have been saved from death. This shows that when speaking of 
salvation we should use some discrimination, as to what order or 



rank of salvation we refer to, and leads to the conclusion that 
those who are not in a given order of life are not necessarily 
eternally damned, nor cut off from every kind of life, but may be 
found in some other rank or order. After examining much 
scripture evidence upon this point carefully, we conclude that all 
men die, and that all men will live again; and therefore we 
change our mind as to there being but one order of life among 
the sons of God, redeemed from Adam's fall, and that only a few 
share in any manner in the merits of Jesus Christ's death. 

We once believed that only a few were brought to blissful life, 
and that all the rest were consigned to a miserable life, and in 
this misery were immortal, and this we called death. Now, as 
God's Royal Majesty has approached again, the darkness is 
being driven away, and we repent, (change our mind), regarding 
this doctrine, which has been made the evil instrument of getting 
money from the poor, who are made to believe that their dead 
friends are alive, and that a few prayers, paid for with their 
money; would get them from one rank of miserable life into an 
order of life more desirable. Into how many multiplied forms of 
evil this beginning of lies has grown; but we are glad we find 
space for repentance, and are permitted, "by patient continuance 
in well doing, to seek for immortality. " 

We said Satan has for a long time done business upon the capital 
growing out of this first murderous lie. 

Let us notice a few points: 

First; if men are dead they are not in torment, (this truth would 
ruin that slander upon God's mercy and justice), neither are they 
in heaven— hence; second; they would need a resurrection; and 
third; to have a resurrection there must be some one to raise 
them (a Savior), all of which might be dispensed with if man did 
not die. Thus the adversary has made many believe that they do 
not need a Savior, and that they receive communications from 
their dead friends. But says one: "Our Savior saves his people 
from their sins, and when saved from sin, they are saved from 
death. Ah, no, my orthodox (?) brother, your being saved from 
sin does not save you from death. Read more carefully, think 
closely. You are now living, your fathers have been living in an 
age where men do not die for their own sins. Adam, who lived 
in "the world that was," died from his own sin, and we have 
"sprung from the man whose guilty fall corrupts his race and 
tints us all. " "The fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the 
children's teeth are set on edge." (Jer. 31:29.) If you were to live 
a sinless life from the moment your sins were forgiven, you 
would die, but in the resurrection you would come up in a 
different order from what you would, if they had not been 
forgiven in this age. Do you say: "Well, if I am not saved from 
my sins in this world, I never shall be?" Then we should say, 
that will depend upon how incorrigible you are under the "many 
stripes" which you will certainly get, if you do not forsake sin in 



the coming age, for in that age every man who dies, dies for his 
own sin. (Jer. 31:30.) Now, as we said, you die on account of 
Adam's sin, and perhaps a little sooner on account of your own, 
but you must die anyhow; but in the age to come, if you will be 
obedient to the heavenly messengers (for then they shall all be 
taught of God), you may live forever. Perhaps you say: "Well, I 
don't believe we shall have any second chance for salvation if 
we are not saved here. " My dear brother, "of which salvation" 
are you speaking? Do you say you do not know but one 
salvation? 

In the sense of there being salvation only through Christ, it is 
true there is but one salvation, but in the sense of there being 
degrees or orders of life, it is plain there are more than one. The 
prize held out to view now, is, that under certain conditions we 
may be partakers of the divine nature, that prize can only be 
reached in this world (or age), for the very good reason that a 
part of the conditions can only be met in this age. Those who 
wish to be made like Christ, and receive the "great salvation" 
(become immortal), must suffer with him, must "fill up that 
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ." (Col. 1:24.) Those 
who are of this class, are chosen "through sanctification of the 
Spirit and belief of the truth." (2 Thes. 2:13.) May we be "kept 
by the power of God through faith unto (this) salvation?" Yes, 
this is the salvation now about to be revealed, of which the 
prophets have inquired and searched diligently, who prophesied 
of the grace that should come unto us, a salvation embracing 
things which the angels desire to look into. 1 Peter 1:3-12. 

Those who would be Christ's, can only become members of his 
body in this age: members of that anointed company of which 
Jesus is the chief or head. "Do you not know that the saints shall 
judge the world?" (1 Cor. 6:2.) Surely they are not judging the 
world now? Does some one say, "Well, then, what is meant in 
John 12:31, "Now is the judgment of this world?" Read on a 
little further, "Now shall the prince of this world be cast out." 
Who is the prince of the world? He is the one who now rules in 
the children of disobedience." (Eph 2:2.) Is he cast out? No. 
Well, the same "now" that applies to judgment," applies to being 
"cast out." Then the words of Jesus must have meant this: 
"now," i.e., by this arrangement of Christ's incarnation and death 
Satan is to be cast out. By this means will finally be 
accomplished the judgment of this world. The saints (partakers 
of the divine nature), are judged now, and will not come into 
judgment again. "He that heareth my word (they do not all hear 
who are spoken to), and believeth him that sent me, hath eternal 
life, and cometh not into judgment, but hath passed out of death 
into life." (John 5:24. R.V.) Does our orthodox (?) brother say 
"There, now stop right there; does that not prove that if we are 
saved from sin we are saved from death?" 



Well, let us see. How is he passed out of death into life? By 
judgment. 

O yes ! he is judged out, and cannot have another judgment 
passed on him. It is a legal proceeding, then, by the highest 
tribunal, and is a conclusive argument to prove that a judgment 
day is now in progress, and that this judgment will be executed 
(realized) when he stands up in the "first resurrection" with 
Christ's likeness, the conflict being over. He will then be 
immortal, and "cannot die any more," and will be in a fit 
condition to judge the world and angels. (1 Cor. 6:2-3.) 

"And it shall come to pass in that (judgment) day, that the Lord 
shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant 
of his people. " (Isa. 11:11.) Then Satan will be cast out, 
obstacles will be removed, "all shall be taught of the Lord" (the 
judicial body, the complete Christ), and doubtless nearly all will, 
under such circumstances, obey and accept of life. This will be 
everlasting human life in harmony, peace and filial obedience to 
God— the blessed estate which Adam lost— a gloriously satisfying 
portion to the natural man who cannot now, and never will 
comprehend spiritual things, because he never is to have them. 

A word more. 

Let us earnestly entreat those who by consecration have become 
"new creatures," (spiritual) and as such, are hoping for the prize, 
to remember Paul's words (and they may be emphasized now), 
in this time of worldly pressure and conflict. "This one thing I 
do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth 
unto those things which are before, I press toward the mark for 
the prize of the HIGH CALLING of God in Christ Jesus." Now 
is the special time of instruction for earth's future rulers. 

"Be wise now, therefore, O ye kings, be instructed ye judges of 
the earth. " 

Satan's first lie believed, would blind us to the whole line of 
God's truth and plan. We did believe it, but we now repent. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R434 : page 6 

ANCIENT NT. GREEK MSS. 

In our last issue we found fault with a contemporary's desire to 
set aside the first chapters of Matthew and Luke, and showed 
that its claim that the authenticity of these chapters was 
questioned by scholars, was untrue— which we repeat. We said 
that these chapters were recognized by the very best authority, 
viz., the three oldest Greek MSS. of the N.T.-the Sinaitic, 
Vatican and Alexandrine -whose value and age is in the order 
mentioned; the Sinaitic being the oldest and most complete. 



Replying to this, our contemporary, still attempting to set aside 
Matt. 1 , and Luke 1 , endeavors to cast discredit on the entire 
N.T., as well as these chapters. It attempts to show that these 
three most reliable MSS. are widely at variance, some omitting 
whole passages and books which others contain, and no two 
omitting the same chapters, verses and books, giving on the 
whole the impression that the whole matter is so mixed that it is 
totally impossible to reach any satisfactory conclusion as to 
what was, or was not written, by the Apostles. To prove this 
confusion of testimony, numerous quotations are made from the 
preface of Tischendorf s New Testament. 

We shall not consume our space with extracts from 
Tischendorf s preface, for, as promised, we shall arrange shortly 
that all who desire shall have opportunity of procuring these 
various readings and the explanatory preface complete.* Suffice 
it for the present for us to say that our contemporary so quotes 
and so argues as to give a false impression in this matter. If this 
is done knowingly it is a crime against truth- if done ignorantly 
it is a shame. 

Mr. Tischendorf favors the Sinaitic MSS. His claim is that the 
Sinaitic MSS. is not only the oldest, but also the only old MS. of 
the New Test, which is "perfect, without the loss of a single 
leaf." In proving this he refers to the Vatican MS., and says that 
from Heb. 9:14 to the end, the N.T. is missing from it. Referring 
to the next oldest MS., he shows the superiority of the Sinaitic 
over it, also, by calling attention to the fact that it is imperfect 
also, parts of the MS. parchment having been lost or destroyed 
during the twelve hundred years preceding its bringing from 
Alexandria. He shows that all of Matthew up to chap. 25 : verse 
6, is missing; also about two chapters in John, and nearly eight 
chapters in Second Corinthians. But he is not showing that these 
MSS. contradict each other, which is our contemporary's object, 
but that these chapters are missing; and hence he proves the 
Sinaitic most valuable, since not a single leaf of it is missing. It 
is truly remarkable that MSS. of such an age should be so well 
preserved. 

We repeat, then, that the narrative of Jesus' miraculous 
conception as recorded in the first chapters of Matthew and 
Luke, has the very best and oldest Greek MSS. to support it. The 
Sinaitic and Vatican, the oldest and best, contain both chapters, 
and the Alexandrine MS. contains the account in Luke; that in 
Matthew was missing— not omitted. 

The doctrine of the "Immaculate Conception," as held by 
papists, relates not to Jesus, but to Mary, his mother. Papists 
claim that Mary was immaculate (pure), free from Adamic sin, 
by reason of her mother's miraculous conception of her. It is one 
of the strong evidences of the purity of the old N.T. MSS. and of 
God's care in their preservation, that they are free from the 



doctrines peculiar to the "Mother of Harlots"-even though 
unwittingly one of them was hid in the "Vatican Library." 



*The New Testament, with various readings of these oldest 
MSS., will be duly announced in the TOWER as soon as ready. 
Some have already ordered and sent money for it. Please do not 
do so until it is ready and announced. 



R434 : page 6 

CANON OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

"The prophets" in the Christian Church, speaking themselves, 
under inspiration, and those having the Spirit's gift, "the 
discerning of spirits," acted as checks on the transmission of 
error orally before the completion of the written word. Secondly, 
it was under their inspired superintendence that the New 
Testament Scriptures were put forth as they were successively 
written. (1 Cor. 14:37.) "If any man.. .be a prophet or spiritual, 
let him acknowledge that the things that I write... are the 
commandments of the Lord." Thus, by the two-fold sanction of 
inspiration, that of the authors and that of the judges, the 
canonicity of each book is established. By God's gracious 
providence most of the books of the New Testament were in the 
Church's possession years before the death of leading apostles, 
all of them before the death of John. If spurious books had crept 
into the cycle of professedly inspired books, they would have 
been at once removed by apostolic authority.... The earliest 
notice of a collection is in 2 Pet. 3:1-6, which speaks of "all the 
epistles" of Paul as if some collection of them then existed, and 
was received in the churches as on a par with "the other 
Scriptures." The earliest uninspired notice is that of the 
anonymous fragment of "The Canon of the New Testament" 
attributed to Caius, a Roman presbyter. It recognizes all the 
books except Ephesians, Hebrews, James, the two epistles of 
Peter, and perhaps 3 of John. It condemns as spurious "The 
Shepherd, written very recently in our own times at Rome by 
Hermas, while his brother Pius was bishop of the see of Rome"- 
i.e., between A.D. 140 and 150. Thus the canon, in far the 
greater part, is proved as received in the first half of the second 
century, whilst some of John's contemporaries were still living. 
In the same age the Peshito or Syriac version remarkably 
complements the Muratorian fragment's canon, by including 
also Hebrews and James. In the latter part of the second century, 
Clement, of Alexandria, refers to "The Gospel" collection and 
that of all the epistles of "The Apostles." The anonymous epistle 
to Diognetus still earlier speaks of the "Law, the Prophets, the 
Gospels and the Apostles." Ignatius, of Antioch, a hearer of 
John, terms the written gospel "the flesh of Jesus," and the 



apostles, i.e., their epistles, "Presbytery of the Church." 
Theophilus, of Antioch, and Irenaeus term the New Testament 
writings "the Holy Scriptures." Tertullian uses for the first time 
the term, "New Testament," and calls the whole Bible "the 
whole instrument of both Testaments." 

R434 : page 7 

Thus there is a continuous chain of evidence from the apostles 
down to the third century. The quotations by the fathers (of 
whom, Origen quotes at least two-thirds of the New Testament), 
and the oldest versions, the Syriac, Latin and Egyptian, prove 
that their Scriptures were the same as ours. Eusebius, the 
ecclesiastical historian (A.D. 330), mentions all the 27 books of 
the New Testament, dividing them into the universally 
acknowledged and the debated; the latter the Ephesians, James, 
Jude, 2 Peter, 2 and 3 John, and Apocalypse "received by the 
majority," and at last received by all the churches when the 
evidence had been more fully tested. A third class he calls "the 
spurious," as the "Shepherd of Hermas," "the Epistle of 
Barnabas," "the Acts of Paul," which all rejected. Moreover, all 
our oldest Greek MSS. of the epistles contains those epistles 
once doubted by some; so do all the versions except the Syriac; 
see above.... The transition from oral to written teaching was 
gradual. Catechizing, i.e., instructing by word of mouth, was the 
mode at first, and "faith" then "came by hearing" (Luke 1:4; 
Romans 10:17), in which, however, there was always an appeal 
to Old Testament Scriptures (Acts 17:11). But that the orally 
taught might know more fully "the (unerring) certainty of those 
things wherein they had been instructed," and to guard against 
the dangers of oral tradition (illustrated in John 21:23,24), the 
word was committed to writing by apostles and evangelists, and 
was accredited publicly by the churches in the lifetime of the 
writers. The approach of their death, their departure to foreign 
lands, their imprisonment, and the need of a touchstone to test 
heretical writings and teachings in their absence, all made a 
written record needful. The cessation of miracles and personal 
inspiration was about the same time as the written inspired word 
was completed. Bishop Kaye (Eccles. Hist. 98-100) observes 
that Justin Martyr, Theophilus, etc., only make general assertion 
of miracles still continuing, being loathe to see what seemingly 
weakened their cause, the cessation of miracles; but they gave 
no specific instance.... With much good that is in the apostolic 
fathers, their works "remind us what the apostles would have 
been had not they been inspired, and what we ourselves should 
be if we had not the written word" (Wordsworth, Canon Scr., 
page 137). 

So far from there being a gradual waning of inspiration from the 
writings of the Apostles and Evangelists to those of succeeding 
Christian writers, there is so wide a chasm (the more remarkable 
as the early fathers had the apostolic writings to guide them) that 



this alone is a strong proof that the Scripture writers were guided 
by an extraordinary Divine power. Their previous habits (as 
being some of them illiterate, and all bigoted Jews) prove that 
nothing but Divine power could have so changed them from 
their former selves as to be founders of a spiritual and 
worldwide dispensation (see Luke 24:25-49), utterly alien to 
their Jewish prejudices. Their style accords with their supposed 
position, simple and unlearned (except Paul's), yet free from 
aught offensive to the polished. If it be asked why we do not 
receive the epistles of Barnabas and of Clement, the Acts of 
Paul and Thecla (one of the earliest apocryphal writings), 

R435 : page 7 

etc., we answer, not because (as Rome would have us say) the 
Churches could not err in judgment in rejecting them, but 
because, as a matter of evidence, we believe they did not err. 
These works were not received by contemporary Christians who 
had the best of opportunity of knowing evidences of authenticity 
and inspiration. If one or two cite them, it is an exception, not 
invalidating the otherwise uniform testimony against them. The 
internal evidence of their style is fatal to their pretentions. So 
"the Acts of Paul", Tertullian testifies its author was excluded by 
John from the office of presbyter for having written it. The New 
Testament is a complete organic whole, so that even one book 
could not be omitted without loss to the completeness of the 
Christian cycle of truth. -Fausett. 



R435 : page 7 

WORTHY OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 

From quotations given in another column from a contemporary, 
it will be seen that it boldly advances the teaching that the New 
Testament will not compare with the Old Testament as an 
authority; that if it be received as sacred Scripture at all, it is to 
be completely subordinated to the Old Testament, and that any 
doctrine or statement of the New Testament not supported by a 
similar statement in the Old Testament is unworthy of 
acceptance and belief. 

The basis upon which these conclusions are built is, that the 
Apostles were not inspired as were the Prophets, and hence they 
could judge of truth and error only as we do. 

If this be true, if this be new light, then we have all along been 
in darkness, and the poor Jew which Paul says was blinded was 
really in the light all the time, and the Christian Church, instead 
of walking in the path of light, has been in darkness from the 
Apostles down. Why, this is the exact teaching of Judaism. 
From such new light (?) we pray to be delivered. 



We wish to reply to the above, and to show that the basis is 
false, and the deductions consequently erroneous. First, 
however, let us remark, that if the above be true, if we are to 
believe only what is taught in the Old Testament, then our faith 
is vain, for in the Old Testament we find nothing concerning our 
HEAVENLY hopes. There is not in it a promise of a heavenly 
crown, not a promise of a spiritual body, not a promise to the 
"Royal Priesthood," not a mention of the "new creature." No, its 
choicest promises are all earthly, like that given to Abraham- 
"Lift up now thine eyes and look... for all the land which thou 
seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed after thee. " (Gen. 
13:14,15.) 

No, nothing was seen of the spiritual blessings in reservation for 
you (the gospel Church) until "our Savior Jesus Christ brought 
life and immortality to light through the Gospel." (2 Tim. 1:10.) 
These are not found in the Law nor in the Prophets' writings, but 
only in the New Testament. No, the very most we can say of the 
teaching of the Old Testament relative to "our high calling," is 
that it gave fleshly shadows of some of our blessed hopes. And 
these we should never have been able to understand any more 
than did they, but for the keys furnished by the Holy Spirit 
through the Apostles. 

Paul tells us that he had special revelations from the Lord (2 
Cor. 12:1-7; Gal. 1:12, and 2:2; Eph 3:3), and claims for his 
writings that they are specially inspired. (1 Cor. 14:37.) He even 
mentions those items of his teachings which were not "by 
commandment of the Lord." (1 Cor. 7:6.) 

The book of Revelation opens with the statement, that it is a 
revelation which God gave, not to the Prophets, but "to Jesus 
Christ. " Such a revelation would have been superfluous if the 
Old Testament contained all needful information. Peter also 
claims special inspiration, power and knowledge as an Apostle 
over and above the Prophets. (See Acts 5:2-5; 1 Pet. 1:10-12.) 

We claim, furthermore, that the operation of God's power- 
Spirit-on the Prophets was so different from the operation of 
the same Spirit upon the Gospel Church, that the humblest 
Christian may know more of God's plan than could the greatest 
prophet. Though there had not arisen a greater prophet than John 
the Baptist, yet the "least in the kingdom of heaven is greater 
than he. " (Matt. 11:11.) The prophets belonged to the fleshly 
house, we to the spiritual. "Moses (a prophet) verily was faithful 
as a servant over all his house (of servants), but Christ as a Son 
over his own house (of sons), whose house are ye— if, etc." (Heb. 
3:5,6.) Jesus tells us of our special privileges over the prophets 
and others, saying, "To you it is given to know the mysteries of 
the kingdom of Heaven, " and "Verily I say unto you, that many 
prophets and righteous men have desired to see those things 
which ye see, and have not seen them, and to hear those things 
which ye hear, and have not heard them. " (Matt. 13:11,17.) 



Paul tells the same story of how God had revealed to the Gospel 
Church that which had not been known previously. He says: "If 
ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God which is 
given me to you-ward; how that by revelation he made known 
unto me the mystery (as I wrote afore in few words, whereby 
when ye read ye may understand my knowledge of the mystery 
of Christ) which in other ages was not made known unto the 
sons of men, as it is now revealed unto the holy apostles and 
prophets (teachers) by the Spirit." (See Eph. 3:2-10.) Peter adds 
his testimony, saying: "Of which salvation the prophets have 
inquired and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace 
(favor, knowledge) that should come unto you. Searching what, 
or what manner of time, the Spirit of Christ which was in them 
did signify when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ 
and the glory that should follow. Unto whom (the prophets) it 
was revealed that not unto themselves, but unto us they did 
minister the things which are now reported unto you by them 
that have preached the Gospel unto you with the Holy Spirit sent 
down from heaven." (1 Pet. 1:10-12.) 

If we reject the foregoing testimony of the apostles regarding the 
special revelation made to them, whereby they were able to give 
us a knowledge of the mystery hid from other ages, we should 
reject all of their teachings on every subject, since men who will 
lie are not to be trusted at all. 

Furthermore, we claim that though this favor of greater 
knowledge and revelation is to the humblest member of the 
Church, yet it came to us directly through the Apostles; and their 
writings are the basis of proper Christian faith to-day. We read 
that God hath set in his Church various members with various 
gifts for the edifying of the body of Christ, but first (chiefly) 
Apostles. (1 Cor. 12:28.) 

The Spirit has raised up in the Church evangelists, pastors, 
teachers, for the edifying of itself; but it never gave more than 
one head— Jesus— nor more than the original twelve Apostles. 
These are enough, they are still with us; we have their words of 
reproof, correction and instruction to-day, even better 
understood now than by those whom they more directly 
addressed. 

True, Paul was not of the original twelve, neither was he the one 
the eleven mistakenly appointed to Judas' place (They did it 
before the Pentecostal blessing); yet he not only informs us that 
he was specially appointed to be an apostle, but his teachings 
prove it. 

Paul, who had more abundant revelations than all the apostles, 
knew more about the "mystery" of the Gospel than he was 
permitted plainly to express to the Church then living— it being 
meat not then in due season. This he himself expresses, saying 
that he had learned "things not lawful to be uttered. " But though 



he was not permitted to utter all of "the deep things of God," 
nevertheless the fact of his possessing a knowledge of those 
deep things cast such a reflection upon all that he did write, that 
his words have been the basis of almost all the "meat in due 
season" furnished to the Church since. He himself tells us that 
an affliction was permitted (a thorn in the flesh) lest he should 
be exalted above measure by God's revelations to him. (2 Cor. 
12:7.) 

As it has been affirmed that the Apostles evidently made 
mistakes of quotation, and misapplied prophetic statements, we 
want to consider that feature of the subject. For this purpose let 
us have a careful 

BIBLE READING. 

We want to refer you to a number of prophetic statements, and 
have you note the connections closely and see that the 
statements which met a fulfillment in Jesus were so mixed up 
with other statements not specially applicable to him, that you or 
I or the Jew might have readily stumbled over them and never 
have thought of applying them to Messiah, had not the Holy 
Spirit brought these things to the attention of the Apostles. In 
fact, we know that the disciples understood not these things and 
saw not their true application until after Jesus was risen. (See 
John 12:16.) 

Turn to Micah 5:2, and see how obscurely the birthplace 
(Bethlehem) is mentioned. The birthplace is mentioned, and the 
humiliation, yet in so 

R436 : page 7 

disconnected a manner that though the Scribes and Chief Priests 
understood of his birthplace (Matt. 2:4-6), yet they could not see 
that as the Judge of Israel he would be smitten "with a rod upon 
the cheek." (Matt. 27:30.) 

Take another. Turn to Hosea 11:1 and find the record: "I have 
called my Son out of Egypt. " Nothing about the context would 
ever lead you to suppose this to apply to Jesus. It altogether 
seems to relate to Israel as an infant nation brought from Egypt. 
But when our attention is once called to it, we can see how the 
name Israel (prevailer) applied well to Jesus; and not only so, 
but that the coming of the nation Israel out of literal Egypt and 
the coming of Jesus out of literal Egypt (Matt. 2:20) are types of 
the coming of the entire Israel (the Church) out of the antitype 
of Egypt, viz., the world. 

Jer. 31:15 introduces Rachel weeping for her children in an 
entirely disconnected manner, and it could not be understood 
until fulfilled (Matt. 2:17). Rachel was the mother of two of the 
tribes-Joseph and Benjamin. Bethlehem was in the country 



apportioned to Benjamin, which tribe, with Judah, occupied 
Palestine at the time of the first advent. 

Look at Psalm 22. Any one might read that Psalm throughout 
and not doubt but that David was speaking of himself. And we 
doubt not that David thought the same; but Jehovah guided his 
utterance and made him thus to represent Messiah. 

Read Psalm 1 18:22,23,26, about the stone which the builders 
rejected, etc., which our Lord applied to himself (Matt. 21:42); 
yet these prophetic statements of Messiah evidently stand mixed 
up with David's own experiences. 

Look, also, at Isaiah 61. Here the prophet personates Christ, 
saying: "The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the 
Lord hath anointed me to preach," etc. To all appearance the 
prophet was the person meant, yet when Jesus points out its 
fulfillment in himself (Luke 4:18) we see that in him its 
conditions were fully met. 

See Zech. 11:12. Here Zechariah was sold for thirty pieces of 
silver, and nothing in the connection indicates that he was a type 
or representative of Jesus, who was afterward sold for thirty 
pieces. 

But we must notice one Scripture which has been cited as 
specially misapplied by Matthew in chap. 1:23, viz., Isaiah 7:14, 
"Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call 
his name Immanuel." The objection is made that because this 
promise had a typical fulfillment at that time, as mentioned in 
chap. 8:3, therefore it could not have a reference to Mary and 
her son Jesus. We reply that its partial fulfillment at the time is 
no argument against its application to Mary as made by the 
Apostle. It would be equally consistent to argue that because 
thirty pieces were actually weighed out for Zechariah, therefore 
that prophecy could have no reference to Judas' sale of Jesus. 

On the contrary, it was not uncommon for Jehovah to deal in 
this very way— causing a typical fulfillment of a prophecy to 
transpire, and thus attract attention for a time away from the 
actual fulfillment. In this case of typical fulfillment we suggest 
that the prophet represented Jehovah, the prophetess represented 
the Virgin Mary, and their child represented Jesus. But is it 
objected that Mary's son was called Jesus, and not Immanuel? 
We reply that such shortsighted reasoning would make nonsense 
of both Old and New Testaments. How about the names given in 
Isaiah 9:6? "His name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, 
the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace." 
Must we set aside this prophecy also, because the child was 
called Jesus, or shall we recognize the fact that many names, as 
well as many offices, are his? In answer we would say— his 
name has been called Immanuel. We 

R436 : page 8 



call him Immanuel (God with us), and the Church in general has 
recognized him by that name for eighteen hundred years. And in 
the incoming Millennial Age, when the knowledge of him shall 
fill the earth, all shall recognize him by his various and 
significant titles. 

In closing, we want to give one more illustration of a prophecy 
which has had one literal fulfillment, and is about to have its 
second or higher fulfillment- just as Isaiah's prophecy, above 
referred to, had one fulfillment in his day and another hundreds 
of years after at the birth of Jesus. Our illustration is Babylon. It 
was the chief empire of earth in Jeremiah's day, and his 
prophecy records in strong language its overthrow. It has been 
overthrown as foretold; but were it not that we see that there is a 
mystical, "Babylon the great, the mother of harlots," for whom 
the severest language applied to literal Babylon is intended, we 
should wonder indeed. 

Those who saw the fulfillment of Jeremiah's prophecy in the fall 
of the city of Babylon, doubtless concluded that a very strong 
description had been given of so commonplace an event as the 
overthrow of a nation; and having seen that one fulfillment, few 
realize that the real force of the prophecy is to mystic Babylon. 

We refer you to but one chapter out of many, in which 
statements once fulfilled are to have a second and larger 
fulfillment, just as Isaiah's prophecy of Immanuel had a second 
and complete fulfillment in Jesus' birth. Compare the following: 

Jeremiah 5 1:6 with Rev. 18:4. 

Verse 7 with Rev. 17:4 and 14:8. 

Verse 8 with Rev. 14:8 and 18:2,9,11,19. 

Verse 9 with Rev. 18:5. 

Verse 13 with Rev. 17:1,15. 

Verses 48,63,64 with Rev. 18:20,21. 

We conclude, then, that the New as well as the Old Testament- 
the writing of the apostles as well as that of the prophets-is 
worthy of all acceptation as divinely inspired. 



R436 : page 8 



THE GIFT OF HEALING. 

There is nothing strange in the fact that men of the world, 
people who have not become new creatures (by faith) in Christ 
Jesus, should doubt the power of God to heal diseases without 
any visible agency; but that any who have been "chosen through 
sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth," should doubt 
it, is strange. 

We can hardly believe that any who are thus chosen do doubt, 
either God's power or willingness to heal in answer to the prayer 



of faith, without any visible remedial agent. Why should the 
child of God limit the power of Him "in whom we live, and 
move, and have our being?" But perhaps some who do not doubt 
the power of God, doubt that He has the will, or that He does in 
these days heal the sick in answer to the "prayer of faith. " 

For our part we do not doubt the power, nor the will, nor the fact 
that He does thus heal in answer to the prayer of those who are 
inspired with faith to ask for it. 

But as it is very desirable to be healed when suffering with 
diseases, the question naturally arises, "May all be thus healed?" 
We think we may safely answer, that if all men were thus 
inspired with faith, they might. By the term "inspired with 
faith," we mean, to be animated by the Spirit of God with faith. 

We will not here enter into a discussion of the different 
meanings of the word faith, which are so various, but only say 
that, as it is used here, it means confidence. 

Confidence or faith in what? In God's word. But, says one, "faith 
cometh by hearing." Yes, and "hearing by the word of God," and 
when the Spirit of God speaks the word to us, as it does 
sometimes, it inspires us with faith. 

How shall I then obtain that much to be desired object, 
inspiration of faith for healing? Find out if possible if it is God's 
will to heal you. But, says one who is very enthusiastic, surely it 
is his will to heal us, if we only will to have him, for 
"whatsoever things ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye 
receive them, and ye shall have them." (Mark 11:24.) But notice, 
it is as if he had said, "whatsoever things ye desire when ye 
pray," see that those desires are in accord with the Spirit and 
word of God, so that ye may have a foundation to "believe that 
ye (are entitled to) receive them, and ye shall have them. " If one 
were desiring to offer a petition to some earthly potentate, the 
proper thing would be to find how it could be done in harmony 
with His laws; and it is fully as important when offering a 
petition to the "King of kings." 

The apostle says, "Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask 
amiss." (James 4:3.) This is what Jesus wanted those to whom 
he was speaking to guard against, viz., careless asking; that 
whatsoever they desired there should be sufficient ground for 
believing they would receive, and when such was the case they 
would receive it. An all-sufficient ground for believing would be 
to know that it is His will. 

The leper offered a very good prayer (Matt. 8:2.) when he said, 
"Lord, if thou wilt thou canst make me clean. " He was inspired 
with faith as far as his knowledge went, and Jesus graciously 
supplied the missing link by saying, "I will." 

Now, let us suppose we are diseased and suffering. We wish to 
be healed. But are we sure that we do? The confiding child of 



God, he who has faith in His wisdom and love says, "If it is His 
will; He knows better than I do what evils I am exposed to, 
understands my 

R437 : page 8 

nature better than I do myself, knows what influence I would 
exert in whatever condition. If it is His will to rebuke the enemy 
now, Amen." 

But shall I try to find out what His will is in the matter? 
Certainly, for how can I ask "according to His will" (1 John 
5:14,15) unless I do? 

Then I will inquire if it is God's will that all diseases, and death 
even, should be removed now in this age? Manifestly not, for 
they are the penalty of sin, and the penalty must be executed 
(Gen. 3:16,19.) All the descendants of Adam must die, all must 
become acquainted with the exceeding sinfulness of sin by 
experiencing the sorrowful effects of it. Then only in 
exceptional cases can it be asked "according to His will." What 
are those cases then, those exceptions? Under what 
circumstances may I ask my Heavenly Father, in the name of 
Jesus, to heal or cure? Under the same circumstances that Jesus 
did. 

He was invested with the power of God (John 5:30), and used it 
to do miracles and thus attest His divine commission and glorify 
God in the fulfillment of the Scriptures (Matt. 8:17), giving to 
the world the assurance that in the fulness of time (Eph. 1:10), 
this same power manifested in the sons of God (Rom. 8:19), 
complete in him, should restore fallen humanity to its sinless, 
painless, physically and morally perfect condition. 

But does He not heal for any other purpose now? None that we 
know of. What is done now we understand to be done to attest to 
divinity and give assurance that He will "show the exceeding 
riches of His grace in the ages to come." (Eph. 2:7.) 

What, attest to divinity now? Yes, divinity operating through the 
chosen members of the body of Christ. (Eph. 1 :22,23.) Then, 
shall we expect that every member will be invested with the 
power of healing, and that this is an only evidence of 
membership in the body? Oh, no, certainly not, that which 
should be satisfying to us is that the gift of healing is retained in 
the body. 

We have many members in one body, and all members have not 
the same office, so we being many, are one body in Christ, and 
every one members one of another. " "Having, then, gifts 
differing according to the grace given unto us." (Rom. 12:4,5,6.) 
"Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. For to 
one (member) is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom: to 
another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit; to another 



faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the 
same Spirit." (1 Cor. 12:4,8,9.) 

But do you ask, "Will my prayer of faith heal the sick, either 
myself or others"? Yes, your "prayer of faith" would, if you are 
an individual belonging to that member to whom the gift of 
healing is given. But if I am not, then how? In that case the 
Apostle James gives the best advice we know of: "Call for the 
elders of the church (congregation) and let them pray over him 
anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord, and the prayer of 
faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up. " 

But when he calls for the elders he should use discrimination. 

As in the physical body we would not make use of the foot, to 
perform the work of the hand, so now; send for those elders who 
have the "gift of healing" if you know of any such, if you do not, 
you might as well not send for any. Those having the "word of 
knowledge," or the "word of wisdom," or the "discerning of 
spirits," though imparted "by the same spirit," would be of no 
service to you for healing, and you should not feel like chiding 
them for not possessing that gift, or for not being an individual 
belonging to that member whose office it is to heal. 

We have reason to believe that when the Lord is about to do 
through any member of the body, a supernatural work, he will 
make it known beforehand to that member through whom the 
work is to be accomplished. (Amos 3:7.) 

"The Spirit of truth will declare to you the coming things." (John 
16:13. E.D.) We understand by this and other Scriptures, that the 
Spirit of truth shows, not only the things of the coming age, 
referred to in God's Word, but impresses the member or 
members through whom God would do a work, that he is about 
to do it; and this is what we mean by being inspired with faith; 
and it is this inspired prayer, we think, which the Apostle James 
calls "the prayer of faith. " 

Let us not fall into the error of thinking that any individual 
constitutes a complete member of the body of Christ, for it 
cannot be that there are so many members as there are 
individuals; but all those having "the same office" constitute one 
member, and those having another office another member, and 
so on, and herein we see the significance of the provision made 
in the promise that two (or more) shall receive what they are 
agreed in asking (according to His will of course). (Matt. 18:9.) 
We see the beauty of many members constituting one body, let 
us not lose sight of the beauty of many individuals constituting 
one member; as there are in the natural body individual muscles, 
tendons, nerves, veins, &c, constituting one member. If we 
should bear this in mind, we should not feel any uneasiness 
because certain individuals of some member had not the 
qualities belonging to the individuals of some other member, but 
would allow the mind to dwell with delight upon the necessary 



difference between the individuals constituting the members, 
and the difference between the members themselves, and yet the 
beautiful oneness of the whole. One individual may sometimes 
represent a member, but it requires more than one to constitute a 
member. Therefore we can see that the different individuals in a 
member should be united in their petitions, and because the 
greater share of our spiritual wants are in common. 

It is no cause for discouragement, that we can see, because more 
have not the gift of healing, any more than it would be, that one 
person does not have more than two eyes, or a greater number of 
any members in the natural body. But it is blessed to know that 
the body of Christ is thus in connection with the throne of God. 
It is blessed also to know that there is yet an active member in 
the body, having "the word of wisdom, " and another having "the 
word of knowledge" imparted by the same Spirit, and so of other 
gifts and graces, and to each (member) is given the 
manifestation of the Spirit, for the benefit of all" (the members.) 
(1 Cor. 12:7 E.D.) 

So if one member, or individual of a member, has not a certain 
gift, for instance, the gift of healing, it may be benefited by 
some member that has. If one has not the word of knowledge it 
may be benefited by some member that has, and so on. 

Let us not despise each other's gifts, nor wish that we belonged 
to some other member, for "all these things performs the one 
and the same Spirit, distributing to each in particular as it will. " 
E.D. 

Neither should we despise our own gifts, and thus undervalue 
what God has given us. "If the foot should say because I am not 
of the hand, I am not of the body. Is it, therefore, not of the 
body?" We are glad and rejoice that the gifts of this Spirit are 
still manifested in the body, and among them, "the gifts of 
healing," but let us not all desire the gifts of healing, nor find 
fault with those who have them not, for "now hath God set the 
members, every one of them, in the body as it hath pleased 
him," and "if they were all one member where were the body?" 

So we see the need of a diversity of gifts. Hence "he gave some, 
apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, 
pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the 
work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. " 

This is the work of the members now, "till we all come in (into) 
the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, 
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness 
of Christ." 

We are sorry to think that any should doubt that the gift of 
healing is still an office belonging to a member of the body of 
Christ, and we are somewhat surprised to see that some 



individuals of that member should think that any, or all of the 
other members, might, or should, have the same office. 

"But you earnestly desire (are we not too apt to?) the more 
eminent gifts, and yet a much more excellent way I point out to 
you," (in the thirteenth chapter of 1 Cor.) 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R437 : page 8 



SOME OF YOUR DIFFICULTY. 

It may be that you do not have advantage of attending meetings 
where special and definite instruction is given upon holiness, it 
may be there is no one near you to whom you can open your 
heart fully and freely as to your religious experience, and thus 
your heart-longings and spiritual problems are kept in your own 
heart and closet. When you read or hear of the clear instruction 
and victorious experience that others have you feel like pining. 
Remember that this very solitude of soul may in the end work 
out for you a deeper and stronger experience in Divine things. 

page 8 

You are shut away from human help, God compels you to draw 
very near the original fountain of light; His loving voice 
penetrates your heart, calling you to be holy; the luke-warm 
souls about you have little or no interest in that which engrosses 
your thoughts; yet God's providence has put you in your present 
locality and sphere; He has His finger upon all your 
circumstances, and in answer to your tears and prayers He is 
making your deprivations and perplexities work out for your 
good. 

R437 : page 8 

Do not try to run away from your circumstances; some other 
place or surroundings may seem enchanting to your mind, and 
you fancy you could be holy much easier were your lot cast 
there or yonder. You forget that wherever you fly you must 
carry your poor self along with you, and those fancied 
circumstances of easy piety might prove your utter ruin. In your 
solitariness of soul you are drawn away from human aid that you 
may more truly be as a little babe with God and learn directly 
from His Spirit. Oh, lonely seeker after holiness, let nothing 
deter you; give yourself and your present surroundings utterly 
into God's hand; spend every hour in doing His will as it is 
revealed to you, and He can turn your apparent disadvantages 
into a throne of triumph. -GEO. D. WATSON. 


