We Are Never Off Duty
 1. How do we know that first-century evangelizers never considered themselves to be off duty?
1 Zealous first-century evangelizers declared the good news “without letup” wherever people were found. (Acts 5:42) So we cannot imagine that when going from house to house they would walk past people on the road without preaching to them too. Neither would they forgo an opportunity to witness informally while shopping in the marketplace after finishing the field ministry. Like Jesus, they never considered themselves to be off duty.—Mark 6:31-34.
 2. What is involved in living up to our name?
2 Always Ready: Our name, Jehovah’s Witnesses, does not just describe what we do; it describes who we are. (Isa. 43:10-12) So we are always ready to make a defense of our hope, even when we are not going from house to house. (1 Pet. 3:15) Do you anticipate situations that may allow you to witness informally and then think about what you might say? Do you keep literature with you to share with those who show interest? (Prov. 21:5) Do you preach only from house to house, or do you also spread the good news to people in other settings if circumstances allow?
 3. Why is “alternative” not the best word to describe preaching on the street and in parking lots, parks, places of business, and so forth?
3 Not “Alternative” Witnessing: In the past we sometimes used the word “alternative” to refer to preaching on the street and in parking lots, parks, places of business, and so forth. However, “alternative” could seem to suggest that such efforts are out of the ordinary, unconventional, or optional. The apostle Paul said that he preached “publicly” and from house to house. (Acts 20:20) So “public” witnessing would be a more appropriate term than “alternative” witnessing. It is true that the house-to-house ministry continues to be our primary and most effective way of reaching people with the Kingdom message. However, first-century evangelizers focused on people, not houses. They took advantage of every opportunity to talk about the truth—publicly, informally, and from house to house. May we have the same mind-set in order to accomplish our ministry fully.—2 Tim. 4:5.

