The Order in the Universe​—from Where Does It Come?
TODAY many people do not believe in the existence of God. Some feel this way because they do not understand why there is wickedness and suffering. Others have been soured by the deplorable behavior and conflicting teachings of Christendom and her clergy throughout history.
For these and additional reasons, growing numbers of persons abandon belief in God and place their trust and hope in man and his accomplishments. Yet, it is becoming more evident each day that none of man’s schemes have been able to bring genuine peace and happiness. Instead, the human family sees increasing trouble in every sphere of human endeavor.
That is why some persons who study the material universe find one aspect of it so puzzling. What is that? That, while human affairs are so disorderly, the material universe is so orderly. All fields of science, such as astronomy, astrophysics, chemistry and others, disclose a marvelous harmony of design throughout the universe.
If we concentrate on the scientific data available and do not deliberately ignore the facts, universal order cannot be explained logically without referring to an intelligent, all-powerful First Cause, a Creator.
It follows that such a Creator, having the wisdom and power to create such universal orderliness, would also have the truthful and satisfying reasons as to why he has permitted disorder among humans. It would also be logical to believe that he would have the remedy.
Thus, if we consider the amazing pattern of order found in the universe, it will help us to appreciate that its Creator would not indefinitely permit disorder to exist.
Universal Order
From the infinitely small to the infinitely great, from atoms to galaxies, the universe is characterized by superb organization.
An atom is a marvel of order, a kind of miniature solar system. It is composed of a nucleus of protons and neutrons surrounded by revolving electrons. An atom is so small that a little toy balloon contains about 100 million million billion hydrogen atoms! If an atom were only as big as the head of a pin, all the atoms in just one grain of sand would make a box one cubic mile in size!
It has been thought that the protons, neutrons and electrons in atoms are the ultimate ‘building blocks’ of matter. But now some scientists believe that the protons and neutrons are themselves ‘solar systems.’ They may consist of a core surrounded by a fluctuating cloud of particles.
If true, this would compose another infinitesimal ‘planetary system’ within an already infinitesimal planetary system. All of this is so small that the inner core is said to occupy only a thousandth of a millionth of a millionth of the total space within the atom, according to one estimate.
The same orderly arrangement in the atom is found in the solar system​—the sun with its revolving planets and their moons. The book The World We Live In notes: “For all its complexity, the solar system also reveals an order and harmony that has ever impressed scientists contemplating the laws that govern the motions of the skies.”
On a still larger plane, there are the galaxies, those vast systems of heavenly bodies arranged as ‘island universes.’ Each galaxy is made up of millions, or hundreds of millions, of heavenly bodies such as stars and planets. This gigantic mass revolves around a central axis much the same as takes place within an atom or within the solar system.
But from where did all this amazing order come? Is superb organization ever brought about without a superb organizer?
Based on Laws
All of this universal order is based on universal laws. You may be familiar with some of them, such as the law of gravity and the law of inertia.
But there are many other laws governing physical phenomena in the universe. There are laws of heat, light, sound and others. All of these laws are likely interrelated.
In fact, in his later years Albert Einstein formulated his “Unified Field Theory.” Of it the book The Universe and Dr. Einstein says: “It promulgates a set of universal laws designed to encompass not only the boundless gravitational and electromagnetic fields of interstellar space but also the tiny, terrible field inside the atom.”
When we think of laws, we acknowledge that they came from a lawgiver. A sign “Keep Off the Grass” implies an agency that originated the law. Scientists speak of “Newton’s Law of Inertia,” associating it with its discoverer. But he did not make that physical law; he only discovered it. Who then did make it? Who made all such laws governing the material universe? Do such superior laws not demand a superior lawgiver?
Einstein wrote: “The scientist’s religious feelings take the form of rapturous amazement at the harmony of Natural law, which reveals an Intelligence of such superiority that, compared with it, all the systematic thinking and acting of human beings is an utterly insignificant reflection.”
Biologist Cecil Hamann concluded: “From the drop of water seen through the microscope to the distant star observed through the telescope I marvel at the exact orderliness that I observe​—so exact that laws have been formulated to express its consistency . . . Somewhere back of all this order must be a Supreme Being, for there can be no order and no laws without a Supreme Mind.”
Universal Mathematics
Physical laws can be expressed in mathematical equations. For instance, Einstein formulated what some have called the most famous equation in history: E=mc2. This states that the energy contained in any particle of matter is equal to the mass of that body multiplied by the square of the speed of light. This formula was the basis for the building of the atomic bomb.
When knowledgeable persons see that formula, they are reminded of Einstein’s work in connection with it. When they see other formulas expressing physical laws, they know that some scientist or mathematician put them down in writing. A mathematical equation requires a mathematician.
Then what of universal mathematics? All scientists recognize the following fact noted by P. Rousseau in the book De l’atome a l’etoile (From Atom to Star): “Governed by geometry from its smallest to its largest parts, the universe really reveals itself as a mathematical structure.”
All of this mathematical precision in the universe​—could it possibly have originated without a superior mathematician?
A professor of mathematics from the University of Cambridge, P. Dirac, wrote in Scientific American: “It seems to be one of the fundamental features of nature that fundamental physical laws are described in terms of a mathematical theory of great beauty and power, needing quite a high standard of mathematics for one to understand it. . . . One could perhaps describe the situation by saying that God is a mathematician of a very high order, and He used very advanced mathematics in constructing the universe.”
Order in Living World
Not only does order appear in the inanimate material universe; it also appears in the living world on earth. Sciences such as biology and ecology testify to this.
The fundamental unit of life on earth is the living cell. It is made up of an amazing array of different parts. In his book Les origines de la vie (Life’s Origins), French cytologist Joel de Rosnay says: “The cell is a factory furnished with proteins serving as raw building materials, while enzyme-proteins are busy catalyzing and controlling the myriads of simultaneous reactions happening in the cell.”
Remarkable enough is this coordination of all the myriads of different parts within a cell. But equally remarkable is each cell’s coordination with myriads of other different cells in an organism such as the human body. What controls all of this? How does each part know precisely what to become, how large to grow, what to do?
All of this, it is believed, is made possible by the substance which is an object of great admiration on the part of scientists. It is called DNA, short for deoxyribonucleic acid. This is said to be the key chemical compound of genes. Genes are the carriers of the heredity code in living things.
DNA is like a microscopic computer with a built-in memory, located in the nucleus of the cell. Evidently this ‘computer,’ or ‘blueprint,’ issues instructions at the right time and place for all the activities of the cell. This includes its growth, duplication and harmonious work with other cells.
The DNA molecule is long and threadlike, only about one ten-millionth of an inch in diameter. Its long, slender shape gives it a capacity, like magnetic recording tape, to store a vast amount of information. It has been estimated that the DNA instructions of a single human cell would fill a 1,000-volume English encyclopedia!
We can understand, then, why those who examine the cell call it a ‘miracle factory.’ And J. de Rosnay adds: “This miracle factory is not only able, as we have seen, to keep itself in good order, but also to produce both its own machines and their operators!”
What machine never had a maker? What operator never had a father?
Balance Among Living Things
The multitudes of life-forms on earth are subject to a strict interdependence that affects even their numbers and distribution. The living world of both animal and vegetable life behaves as a whole, as one living unit.
This ‘balance of nature’ can be seen in the tight interplay between plants and animals and man. Animals and humans breathe in oxygen and give off carbon dioxide. Plants take in that carbon dioxide and give off oxygen. One supplies the other with what is vital for the other’s existence.
All animals and humans are dependent on plants in another way: Plants supply them with their food. Without plants, there would be no conscious life on earth. Green plants are astonishing factories that do what no human factories can: They produce food from the air, water and elements of the soil. The energy needed for doing this they get from sunlight.
Plants accomplish these feats without having had any university training in chemistry. Is it not obvious that someone else has done their thinking for them?
Atheistic ‘Explanations’ Fail
All of this marvelous order and law found in creation had to have a cause, just as every house has a builder. Such things as law and order can originate only in a source able to conceive such things, that is, in a mind. Universal orderliness and law can have originated only in the legislative mind of a Supreme Being.
The atheistic theory according to which ‘necessity’ is responsible for universal orderliness has no value whatever. It utterly fails to explain anything satisfactorily. It is absolutely unable to account for such a stupendous organization as we observe throughout the universe. It amounts to saying: ‘It is like that because it is like that,’ which is unreasonable.
Besides, all the data of modern astrophysics indicate that the universe did have a start. Consequently it cannot have been its own cause, but needed a Causer, a Starter. Hence, the conclusion drawn by reasonable minds after examining the evidence is that of the inspired writer of the Bible book of Genesis who said: “In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.”​—Gen. 1:1.
Questions Raised
But, some will say, if as the Bible tells us “God is a God, not of disorder,” why does disorder exist in human ranks? (1 Cor. 14:33) Why has wickedness been permitted for so long? Does God have a purpose for this earth and man on it?
Such questions are legitimate. It is quite reasonable to ask them for an enlightened belief in God. And it is equally reasonable to expect that a Creator who could so well order an entire universe would also be able to provide satisfying answers to such questions.
The right answers do exist. The truth on these matters is available, although many have erred in their search for it. Particularly in our day does the Bible promise that God will “set matters straight respecting many peoples.”​—Isa. 2:4.
One result of God’s truths flowing to sincere inquirers would be that “they will have to beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears,” “coming into an orderly arrangement with one another.
That prophecy finds fulfillment in sincere truth seekers such as Jehovah’s witnesses are. The order and harmony in their ranks world wide regardless of race or national origin reflect the order and harmony throughout God’s creation. Such order must be a mark of those who do know the truth about God’s purposes and who have his direction. (John 13:34, 35) Is this really so? Examine the evidence for yourself. The next time Jehovah’s witnesses call at your home, ask them to show you why they so strongly believe in the existence of God and why they have such a confident hope for a future in a new order of God’s making. Attend some of their meetings and see for yourself how this belief affects their lives.
“The heavens are declaring the glory of God; and of the work of his hands the expanse is telling. One day after another day causes speech to bubble forth, and one night after another night shows forth knowledge. There is no speech, and there are no words; no voice on their part is being heard. Into all the earth their measuring line has gone out, and to the extremity of the productive land their utterances.”​—Ps. 19:1-4.
[Picture on page 4]
The fantastically small atom, with its revolving electrons, is a marvel of order
[Picture on page 5]
Our solar system, the sun with its orbiting planets and their moons, reflects an impressive order and harmony
[Picture on page 6]
The DNA molecule, long and threadlike, and located in the nucleus of a cell, is like a computer, issuing instructions for all cell activities
[Picture on page 7]
Humans and animals breathe in oxygen and give off carbon dioxide; plants take in carbon dioxide and give off oxygen​—a marvelous balance

