Announcements
▪ Literature offer for May: Individual copies of The Watchtower and Awake! June: Any of the following 192-page books that the congregation may have in stock: Happiness​—How to Find It, “Let Your Kingdom Come,” Listening to the Great Teacher, Survival Into a New Earth, True Peace and Security—​How Can You Find It?, United in Worship of the Only True God, Worldwide Security Under the “Prince of Peace,” and Your Youth​—Getting the Best Out Of It. A limited supply of the True Peace, United in Worship, Worldwide Security, and Youth books may be requested from Brooklyn. July and August: Any of the following 32-page brochures may be used: Does God Really Care About Us?, Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, Should You Believe in the Trinity?, The Government That Will Bring Paradise, What Is the Purpose of Life​—How Can You Find It?, and When Someone You Love Dies. The brochures A Book for All People, Our Problems​—Who Will Help Us Solve Them?, Spirits of the Dead​—Can They Help You or Harm You? Do They Really Exist?, and Will There Ever Be a World Without War? may be offered where appropriate.
▪ Starting the week of September 21, 1998, a series of brochures will be considered at the Congregation Book Study, beginning with What Does God Require of Us?
▪ With a letter addressed to all congregations in the United States dated February 20, 1997, the Society’s Legal Department provided revised health-care durable power of attorney (DPA) forms to each congregation. The congregation secretary should therefore make sure that the master copies of DPA forms on file with his congregation are dated 1/97. If these revised forms are not in the congregation file, the secretary should contact the Society’s Legal Department. Unused copies of the old DPA forms should be discarded.
▪ New Publications Available:
The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived​—Amharic
What Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Believe? (Tract No. 14)​—East Armenian
What Hope for Dead Loved Ones? (Tract No. 16)​—East Armenian
Why You Can Trust the Bible (Tract No. 13)​—East Armenian
▪ New Audiocassettes Available:
Keep Your Eye Simple (Drama, single cassette)​—English
Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life (five cassettes in an album)​—Dutch, Portuguese
The First to the Corinthians (single cassette)​—Portuguese
What Does God Require of Us? (single cassette)​—Punjabi
Why Respect Theocratic Arrangements? (Drama, single cassette)​—Dutch
▪ New Braille Publications Available:
A Book for All People (one volume)​—Grade-one and Grade-two French; Grade-two German; Grade-one Italian
Jehovah’s Witnesses and Education (one volume)​—Grade-two German
New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures (seven volumes) in grade-one Spanish. Bound in durable black vinyl covers. The volumes are arranged as follows:
Volume 1: Matthew
Volume 2: Mark through Luke chapter 12
Volume 3: Luke chapter 13 through John
Volume 4: Acts
Volume 5: Romans through 2 Corinthians
Volume 6: Galatians through Hebrews
Volume 7: James through Revelation
What Is the Purpose of Life​—How Can You Find It? (one volume)​—Grade-two German
When Someone You Love Dies (one volume)​—Grade-two German
Please mark requests for Braille publications ATTENTION: BRAILLE DESK. Include name and address of the person who will use the Braille material.

