From Our Readers
Haiku  Thank you for the article “Saying It in 17 Syllables.” (January 8, 1989) I am nine, and we were working on haiku [a form of Japanese poetry] in school. I brought in the article, and my teacher read it to the class and passed it around. Everyone enjoyed it, and then they looked through the whole Awake! My teacher thanked me for bringing it in.
R. K., United States
I have a keen interest in writing songs and poetic verses. I would have liked to have taken up a career in music but decided to dedicate myself to the Christian ministry. Recently my mind was plagued with thoughts about the career in composition I could have had. However, I came across the article on haiku. It made me realize that I could enjoy writing poetry just for pleasure!
D. M., Scotland
Grief  I was deeply moved by the articles on ‘Facing Loss.’ (August 8, 1987) At the end of 1988, my best friend was in a traffic accident and died. I felt a tremendous loss, and these articles have given me very great hope. I saw that I should not bottle up my sad feelings but let the grief out and that those of us grieving should help one another. Wouldn’t it be marvelous if the day comes when this kind of deep sorrow is no more?
H. O., Japan
The Bible promises just such a day at Revelation 21:3, 4, where it speaks of a time when “death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.” This hope does not entirely erase the pain of grief, but it certainly does ease it somewhat and provide great comfort to mourners.​—ED.
Geodes  What a wonderful article! (January 22, 1989) I collect minerals, having got the idea from Awake! of December 8, 1963. I now have a collection of some 2,000 specimens. However, I got the impression from the article that geodes develop only in sedimentary rock. Can that be correct?
P. K., Federal Republic of Germany
Yes. In fact, “The New Encyclopædia Britannica” (15th edition, 1987) defines a geode as a “hollow mineral body found in limestones and some shales”​—both forms of sedimentary rock.​—ED.
Chores  Sometimes I get jealous because my sisters don’t have to work in the house, but I do. But after reading your “Young People Ask . . .” article on chores (January 8, 1989), I felt better. In one of the paragraphs, it says: “Your loving cooperation can also relieve the pressure on your parents.” You know what? I think I’m going to vacuum the car now! And that’s the truth.
J. W., United States
“Young People Ask . . .”  I strayed from the way I was brought up, thinking my mother was too strict when she wouldn’t let me go out and enjoy myself like other young people. Having done what I wanted, I ended up committing the sin of [sexual] immorality; I now have to live with my conscience and regrets. Had I listened to my mother in the first place and taken the advice of the “Young People Ask . . .” articles, I wouldn’t have these troubles now. I would like to stress to other young people that the advice in the articles is truly for their own benefit and that it pays to take it.
L. J., England

