Part 8
Finding A Better Way
WOULD you like help to break free of a drug problem? Meet some who have succeeded:
Leona, now in her mid-20’s, used marijuana, “speed,” mescaline and cocaine. What helped her to turn around?
“I was amazed to learn that God has a purpose for the earth and the people on it. One of his promises is that the earth will be restored to a beautiful paradise.” Learning of these promises gave her hope for the future.
“I also learned the value of caring for our bodies and our lives. Since life came from God, he rightly owns everything we have, including ourselves.” This appreciation gave Leona an incentive to quit abusing her body with drugs. Something else helped, too.
“Psalm 83:18 pointed to Jehovah as God’s personal name. By using his name in earnest prayer, I felt I could really draw close to him. Here was someone powerful, mighty, who cared about me, and who was good, always sticking to what is right. Truly I had found someone whose authority was deserved.”
A Bible study with Jehovah’s Witnesses gave Leona the hope she needed to fight drug abuse. Her relationship with Jehovah gave her the strength to win the fight.
Charles, who started taking drugs such as LSD and hashish in college, acknowledges that his study of the Bible helped to make his mind over. “After only three weeks of study I flushed about $100 worth of hashish down the toilet and resolved never to use these drugs again,” he says. Bible study has helped his marriage as well.
Phillip started taking drugs when he was 11 or 12 years old. His life became “a living nightmare with no seeming escape except through death by suicide, which was a constant desire.” Phillip became a thief, a street fighter, an alcoholic and a drug pusher. He developed allergies, headaches and epilepsy from drug abuse, and hepatitis from unsanitary needles used to inject the drugs. Finally, Phillip asked Jehovah’s Witnesses for help.
“The person they sent convinced me that there was a God who cared,” he explains. “I learned that this Creator also had a purpose for man and held out everlasting life to those in his favor. You can’t imagine how good and happy I felt about this. Today I enjoy good health, peace of mind, a close relationship with God.”
Perhaps you don’t believe that there really could be anything in the Bible that would change your whole outlook on life​—but there is! If you haven’t found it in church, it’s because the churches are not telling people about Jehovah God’s wonderful purpose for this earth. Just knowing that God truly wants people to enjoy life on earth can begin to change the way you look at your life. Knowing that God will soon step in to eliminate the wars, pollution, crime and disease that make life miserable for millions is encouraging, is it not? Does the Bible really promise these things? See for yourself! Look up in your Bible and read Psalm 37:1-11, Isaiah 65:17-25 and Revelation 21:3-5.

