Part 7
Why Are People Turning To Drugs?
“SURPRISINGLY, various U.S. studies indicate that white, middle class housewives are prime candidates for tranquilizer abuse.”​—“Maclean’s.”
WHAT STARTS PEOPLE ON DRUGS?
Interestingly, animal studies indicate that “drug addiction is less a weakness of the flesh than a reaction to stress, isolation, and social deprivation . . . The loner, the misfit, the person who feels himself at the bottom of the social pile is much more likely to become a regular drug user and most likely to become addicted.”​—Editorial, Toronto “Star.”
Supporting this view, Dr. Stanton Peele, author of “Love and Addiction,” says that ‘the only alternative to addiction is to take responsibility for yourself; the only cure is a sense of self-worth.’
“Everybody is taking drugs, whether it’s Pop coming home after drinking a few beers, or Mom getting the doctor to give her a few Valiums ‘just to make it through the day’ . . . We don’t care as much as we used to 10 years ago. Parental apathy is really quite incredible right now.”​—Social worker.
PROTECT YOUR CHILDREN WITH A GOOD EXAMPLE
A Canadian survey of 14,000 Ontario students found a strong relationship between family life and drug abuse.
“If mother uses legal, prescribed tranquilizers every day, her children are: Three and a half times more likely to use marijuana; Five times more likely to use LSD or amphetamines; Seven times more likely to use illegal tranquilizers; and Ten times more likely to use opiates.”
On the other hand​—“The low-risk families [where few children had drug problems] . . . were not permissive, but enjoyed each other and laughed together. Father was strong and mother was affectionate but both were warm. The parents had a religion, knew what they believed and weren’t shy about letting the children know their values. The kids had chores, curfews, discipline, and parents who were interested in all their activities. Fathers were not alcoholics and mothers tended not to use tranquilizers. The parents were seen as good listeners who consulted their children but were clearly in charge.”​—Toronto “Star.”

