From Our Readers
Honey Heals
I truly thank you for the item “Honey Heals.” (November 8, 1984) I have been confined to a wheelchair for 18 years due to an auto accident. From time to time I get pressure sores and I am bedridden while being treated with different ointments. Along came your magazine, and having nothing to lose, I tried a little honey on a dry dressing. I am at a loss for words. What should have taken three to four weeks to heal was healed in eight to nine days. Why this treatment has remained hidden for so long I don’t know.
V. M., Mexico
Fight to the Finish
I simply cannot hold back from expressing how much I enjoyed your article “My Fight to the Finish.” (August 8, 1984) I am 18 years old and suffer from an ailment that has adversely affected my legs and lower back. At times the pain is very intense. When my legs buckle under me, I often fall to the floor in a crippled heap and have to crawl around on all fours. The doctors have been unsuccessful in finding the cause or the cure. I can identify with Monika Siebert​—who refused to accept pity and who was determined to fight her disease—​as I continue working toward my goal of the full-time ministry. Thanks so much for providing such encouraging and upbuilding articles. I hope that this letter will help to encourage other young people not to despair when confronted with hardship.
L. K., Denmark
Helped by a Kidney Machine
Your article “Alive! With the Help of a Kidney Machine” (January 8, 1985) was very timely. My mother-in-law had total kidney failure just a little more than two months ago. She is now learning to operate her home machine. The article helped us to understand better what she is going through. The paragraph on diet was very helpful too. Now we know some things to avoid when eating with her or when choosing gifts.
L. K., Montana
Thank you so much for the article “Alive! With the Help of a Kidney Machine.” When my wife and I got married (1979), we had the desire of continuing in the full-time ministry without letup. Seven months later, I was told I had chronic kidney disease. Eventually I had to have dialysis treatment. After two operations I was surgically fitted with a catheter to begin continual ambulatory peritoneal dialysis. To say the least, my wife and I have had some trying times. We have looked for articles in Awake! that would help us to deal with this disease. Then on returning home from our usual 160-mile (260-km) round trip to Lexington, Kentucky, for my two-month checkup, I received the issue of Awake!  with the article. If you only knew how I felt when I saw it. I didn’t feel so alone and different anymore. I felt that Dorothy Bull’s experience was written just for me. Reading about her endurance has strengthened my own determination to continue to serve Jehovah in spite of my physical limitations.
W. R., Kentucky

