Branch Letter
Can You Say: “Here I Am”?
There is a great amount of urgent work that needs to be done. Can you help?
Here at Brooklyn we have on hand orders for some 19 million bound books, and congregation orders for the publications released at the recent district assemblies have not yet even begun to arrive. To keep our brothers supplied with equipment for the vital ministry that they are performing, it is going to be necessary to have a second shift nights here at the factory during the months to come. But that is not all! There is much painting and other work that ought to be done at Bethel. Also, furniture and other items need to be made for the new residential and printing buildings that are under construction at Watchtower Farm. This is work that needs to be accomplished during the next twelve months.
Can you help out? Does your heart move you to say, “Here I am! Send me”?
We would like to bring in a hundred or more strong, single brothers, between 18 and 45 years of age, as temporary workers for one year. We need carpenters and painters, along with many to work in printing, in the book bindery and in mailing operations. It has been possible to obtain housing accommodations for one hundred additional workers, near or in Bethel and these will soon be ready for use.
Are you a single brother who is healthy and willing to work hard to advance Kingdom interests? Would you like to share in this special work for one year, not less? If so, please write a letter to the office of the President right away expressing that willingness to serve at Bethel for a full year. The letter should also include your name, address, date of baptism, your age, height and weight, and draft classification. State the kinds of secular work in which you have had experience, and the amount of experience in each. Also, tell us how soon you would be able to come, if invited. Please attach a photograph of yourself. Before the letter is mailed, you should give it to your congregation servant to sign if he recommends you for this service.
If you share in this special work, you will also benefit from the fine training that is enjoyed by all at Bethel, including the excellent evening program of reading, Bible research and lectures provided for all new members of the family. You will have the pleasure of associating with the Gilead students from many lands, as well as the rest of the Bethel family, some of whom have been in Jehovah’s service for forty years or more.
While here at Bethel you would live under the same arrangements as regular members of the family, but you would be a temporary worker.
Please give this matter prayerful consideration. If you qualify and desire to offer your services, let us know as soon as possible, because in September and October we would like to start calling in those who will be sharing in this special, urgent work.
We are looking forward to seeing you and your helping us out in this urgent work, but not on the night shift. We will have you work daytime. Be assured of my love and best wishes.
Your brother,
N. H. Knorr
[Blurb on page 1]
Pursue peace as men of God’s goodwill.

