Increasing Spirituality in the Congregation
1 How is the spirit of your congregation? If the individual members as a whole have a cooperative, warm and loving spirit, then the overall spirit or dominant feeling or attitude of the congregation will be very fine. It will be a real pleasure to be associated with the congregation, and there will be zeal and appreciation for the ministry.
2 At our recent district assemblies we were all impressed with the need to grow spiritually, but particularly were the overseers or “older men” admonished to ‘pay attention to themselves and all the flock, . . . to shepherd the congregation.’ (Acts 20:28) This applies to all the “older men” and is admonition that should be implemented right away, each “older man” feeling keenly the need to adjust his schedule in order to do his part in shepherding the flock. The congregation servant can give general coordination so that all will be reached with the needed help and encouragement, but the important thing is for each “older man” to be alert to the needs of the various members and to render this with loving concern.
3 The overseers in calling on members of the congregation are interested, not only in what is being done in the field ministry, but primarily in how the brothers are doing in keeping their appreciation for Jehovah strong, in building up love for one another, in seeing that they have joy in the ministry and in attending the meetings. None should feel that something must be wrong just because one of the overseers visits his home.
4 How should overseers go about making these shepherding visits? Why not go as one would visit a dear friend or fleshly brother. Go out of love to see and converse with them about the things you enjoy talking about most​—the good things in Jehovah’s word and his love for us. There is no need to bring up any known problem, unless this is serious and needs immediate attention. If a problem exists, usually this is mentioned by the brother or sister visited only after confidence is built up. If the servant is one who reads the Bible and the Society’s publications regularly, he will have his mind full of Scriptural things to talk about. Just taking the time to read over a portion of the Bible together (perhaps that assigned for the week in the ministry school) or an article in the magazines, will prove to be very encouraging and upbuilding.
5 Sometimes the spirit of complaint is encountered or a tendency to gossip about others of our brothers. Skillful and positive counsel from the Scriptures will help to set matters straight, and yet it is hoped that the ones visited will feel refreshed rather than scolded. One visit may not bring spirituality up to the desired level, but as various overseers keep calling much good will be accomplished, and as the spiritual health of each member keeps improving, the spirit of the whole congregation will remain at a good healthy level.
6 When can this shepherding work be done? Each “older man” must select the times he can best make visits to the homes of the publishers. He might choose to reduce his field service one Sunday a month in order to make several visits. Evenings are probably the best time. Saturday morning or afternoon may be convenient, or one call might be made after each period of field service. Each one’s circumstances are different, but with genuine concern and love for the brothers, the “older men” will arrange the time within their busy schedules to visit all in the flock because of their love for their brothers. They will do this even though at times they may not be able to spend quite as much time in the field ministry. And do we not appreciate what they do for us as shepherds of the flock? We certainly do!

