Presenting the Good News​—By Friendly Conversation
1 What is it about effective presentations that makes them effective? When you think about it, often it is not a matter of having some spectacular lineup of thoughts and scriptures, but merely using simple introductions and ideas with which we are all familiar and doing so with sincerity and adaptability. It involves getting the people to talk with us, rather than endeavoring to preach a sermon. We have the best message in the world, and the most attractive to honest-hearted ones. By just conversing with them, we are more apt to reach their heart. But there is no reason for concern when some do not show a favorable response. Just show a willingness to share the good news with all, letting each one decide whether he will accept or not.
2 In September we are presenting the Evolution book. You will find it easy to involve others in a conversation about the good things it contains and then present the book so that the details can be studied. One does not have to be a scientist and argue on on the level of the scholars in order to tell confidently how Jehovah created man and all other living things. How loving Jehovah has been in creating the earth as man’s home, with the climate, food, and other resources being just right for his survival and happiness! Rather than looking forward merely to death and nonexistence, which is the only future the evolution theory leaves for man, those acting with insight have the grand and trustworthy hope of living in a cleansed earth, and not just for a short time, but forever.
3 Do you have some difficulty getting the conversation started? Whether in the actual door-to-door work, or incidental witnessing, comments on crime, pollution, problems of youth, family, government, war, conditions in the churches or among church members, particularly anything of local interest that touches on a persons life, can be used to start conversations, even the weather. Questions can be used very effectively to get the opinion of the listener, and see how he is thinking and responding. This may lead to placing literature. You may be able to get a Bible study started. If this is not possible on the first occasion, perhaps arrangements can be made to return and further the discussion. If not, there is no reason to be discouraged, but there can be satisfaction that you were able to give the witness to another in an effort to locate, the Lord’s “sheep.” As you keep preaching, taking advantage of every opportunity, your skill in presenting the good news simply and yet effectively will increase, and your joy in Jehovah’s service will steadily increase too. And, if you do have success in getting a Bible study started, what thrill it will be to conduct this regularly.
4 So, in the final analysis, it is not a matter of mastering a complex sermon or having something spectacular to say at the doors, but simply and sincerely presenting the best of news involving God’s kingdom. How we love to talk about this! Of course, we want to have some definite ideas in mind in going to the people and that is why it is good to do some preparing in advance. Practice sessions will help. Talk over what you plan to say with others in the family or congregation. Get their suggestions. Practice with one another, having in mind local conditions in the territory. Then just thoroughly enjoy talking to others about the good things in your heart.
[Blurb on page 4]
Rejoice in the “varieties of ministries.”

