Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 12
Theme: Manifesting the Spirit of the Assemblies. (1 Thess. 5:23) Song 85.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
 8 min: Book study servant delivers “Kingdom Ministry” to infirm publisher and discusses Theocratic News and a few points from U.S.A. report for July, also local August report.
18 min: “Did You Capture the Spirit of the Assembly?” Discuss with audience by questions and answers.
14 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Friendly Conversation.” Chairman asks one or two questions on paragraph one, then demonstrates suggestions in paragraphs two and three. Concludes very briefly with high points of paragraph four.
15 min: Concluding comments. Discuss Branch Letter, emphasizing its contents. Include some comments on theme to close meeting on note of spirituality. Song 104.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 19
Theme: Increasing Our Spirituality. (1 Cor. 2:12, 13) Song 15.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
13 min: Our Conduct Reflects on God’s Name. (Discussion group of several servants and parents) We know Jehovah’s witnesses are all “letters” being observed by all men. They view all Jehovah’s witnesses according to the conduct of those they happen to observe. Thus God’s name is exalted or reproached by what we do. New ones at meetings or assemblies judge us by our courtesy, consideration, orderliness. How are we doing in our congregation meetings? It is good to be there at start, if possible, and beneficial and respectful to stay through closing song and prayer. God has high regard for spiritual food he has arranged for us at meetings, and his “eyes” are upon us for good. (1 Pet. 3:12) Disorderliness, restlessness, moving about and talking during meetings reflect thoughtlessness, may even be manifestations of disrespect. To help children have proper respect and viewpoint, parents should sit with them at meetings. Basically, proper training begins at home. Only way children will develop respect and realize way God views them is by being trained in proper conduct and deep respect for family and home. This every parent should do, for “a boy let on the loose will be causing his mother shame.” (Prov. 29:15) Jehovah’s people certainly want their children, rather, to bring honor to parents, thus honor to God. (Some points may be made as to recent district assembly, with ways we can make conduct even more respectful between now and coming circuit and district assemblies.)
15 min: “Why Have the Miraculous Gifts of the Spirit Ceased?” Talk based on article in August 15, 1971, “Watchtower.”
17 min: “Increasing Spirituality in the Congregation.” Questions and answers.
10 min: Concluding comments. Include Announcements from page three that apply to congregation. Song 9.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 26
Theme: “From Infancy You Have Known the Holy Writings.” (2 Tim. 3:15) Song 73.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
14 min: Do You Have a Training Program Specially Designed for Your Children? (Discussion between several servants and parents) Depending upon the ages of the children in the family, parents need to use discernment in ‘bringing up their children in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.’ (Eph. 6:4) Nevertheless, basic things are needed in any program, regardless of age. Discuss four basic ways education is imparted, as outlined under “Education” in “Aid to Bible Understanding,” page 487. Discuss how parental training in Israel provides parallels for today’s parents. See page 312 of “Aid,” paragraph six. Stress need to have regular study of the Bible with children at home, specially adapted to their needs. Use all provisions of Jehovah’s organization to give assistance.
13 min: Parents Help Children Starting School. (Demonstration)
(3 min.) Chairman: September is month most children start back to school. Often there will be new teachers, new classrooms, new situations to cope with in getting started back to school. Parents may find it advisable to accompany their children or arrange to speak with the teacher or principal at an early opportunity. Arrangements can be made to have children excused from participation in flag salute, holiday programs, etc.
(8 min.) Father goes with young son and daughter to see principal of school. Makes known that family are Jehovah’s witnesses. While children want to cooperate fully in school program of education, certain exercises may conflict with religious beliefs. Discusses flag salute, singing patriotic songs, holiday programs. Children share in discussion appropriately too, giving evidence of good training and conviction on these matters. Principal asks few questions to get clarification on certain matters. Father gives brief witness and places copies of “Evolution” and “Word of God” books with principal.
(2 min.) Chairman: Point out benefits of helping children in this way to get off to good start in school. Coaching them in advance on how to handle these delicate problems at school will help them to face issues courageously and be obedient as well as respectful servants of Jehovah. Even if school has already started, parents can still do this.
18 min: Presenting Subscriptions for “Awake!” in October. The special issue of “Awake!” will feature the subject “Relief from Today’s Pressures​—How?” There are so many pressures bearing down on people today, and thus it will not be difficult to get a conversation going about this common problem. All should be interested in finding relief, both now and in the future when God’s kingdom will fully remove the causes of these pressures. With this in mind, you may find the presentation used during the “Watchtower” campaign earlier this year to be effective. The theme of this was “The Government That Will Solve Man’s Problems.” (For a full review, see 12/70 “Kingdom Ministry,” page 2.)
Rev. 21:3, 4​—God’s kingdom to do away with sorrow, sickness and death.
Dan. 2:44​—God’s kingdom to crush all kingdoms that have oppressed mankind.
Ps. 37:10, 11​—God’s kingdom to destroy the wicked one and provide abundance of peace.
You need use only one of the above texts. The first could be applied to illness, pollution, or similar problems. The second, to oppression or injustice, etc. The third, to lawlessness or violence, both on the local as well as on the international scene. Make your presentation simple, yet meaningful and adaptable to the person with whom you are talking. It will be easy to tie in your presentation with the special “Awake!” and the offer of the year’s subscription for $1.50.
10 min: Concluding comments. Express appreciation for good work of children in congregation. In conclusion, chairman asks accounts servant to comment briefly, from his seat, on highlights of article “Helping the Office with Subscriptions.” Song 80.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 3
Theme: Make Known the God to Be Worshiped. (John 4:22) Song 57.
 7 min: Introduction, text and comments. Also include Question Box.
 8 min: Talk on theme for month. (See Nov. 15, 1970, issue of “The Watchtower.”)
10 min: Talking Points on Special Issue of “Awake!” Magazine-territory servant has group on platform and reviews with them brief but meaningful points from magazine which they will use in presenting it to the public.
25 min: “Perfection​—What Does it Really Mean?” (“Watchtower,” August 15, 1971) Audience discussion, using questions below. (Balance it out so that all parts receive the necessary coverage. Watch timing.) (a) What question often arises with regard to Adam and Eve as being perfect, yet sinning? (b) If, say, a shirt or a suit wore out after a reasonable length of time, would that mean it was imperfect? (c) What is the definition of “perfect,” and who sets the standards as to what is perfect, in the case of shirt? (d) What, then, does the word “perfection” mean? (e) Who is the final judge of what is perfect, as to mankind and the earth, and why? (f) Would it have been necessary for the first human pair to be incapable of sinning in order to be perfect? Why not? (g) Someone may say, ‘If Adam and Eve had been perfect, then they should have chosen only the right way. They should not have been able to choose the bad.’ What answer could be given? (Jas. 1:14, 15) (h) Will humans when perfect be able to perform any skillful work without learning and practicing it? (Compare Luke 2:52) (i) Will perfection eliminate all problems and the challenge of living? (j) What will perfection remove that troubles mankind today? (Rev. 21:3-5; 1 Cor. 15:25, 26)
10 min: Concluding comments. Comment on slogan at bottom of page 4. Song 72.

