Abortion! The Deadly Invasion
No one will ever hear the patter of these little feet​—aborted at 10 weeks
Suction Aspiration. A suction curette (hollow tube with sharp-edged tip) is inserted into the womb, and suction 28 times stronger than that of a vacuum cleaner shreds the baby and draws the pieces into a container. This method is used in most abortions up to the 12th week. By then the child is completely formed and sensitive to pain.
Dilation and Curettage (D & C). Similar to the suction method, except for the insertion of a loop-shaped knife that dismembers the baby and scrapes the pieces out through the womb opening.
Saline Solution. Fluid is drawn out of the amniotic sac where the baby is and a concentrated salt solution injected in its place. The baby breathes and swallows the solution, struggles, hemorrhages, goes into convulsions, and in a few hours dies. Thereafter the mother goes into hard labor and delivers a dead or dying baby. This method is used in advanced pregnancies, four to six months.
Prostaglandin Abortion. Birth hormones are injected into the amniotic sac to induce premature birth. Salt is often injected first to prevent live births.
Hysterotomy. Similar to a cesarean section. The abdomen and womb are opened surgically and the baby is removed. Nearly all these babies are lifted out alive, struggle for a while, cry and die. Used in very late abortions, when premature births could survive.
For the past few years more than two thirds of the world’s women have had access to legal abortions in their countries, a United Nations study reported. The reasons for allowing abortion are similar: the physical, mental, social and economic well-being of the woman concerned.
In the United States, by a 7-to-2 ruling in 1973, the U.S. Supreme Court said that “legal personhood does not exist prenatally” and the baby is not entitled to legal protection of his or her life. Until 1973, the unborn child’s life, even its ability to sue, inherit, and qualify for social security benefits, were protected by law regardless of its age.
Mother’s life endangered, fetus defective, pregnancy due to rape or incest. These reasons applicable in only a very small percentage of cases. Ninety-five percent or more of abortions, called “therapeutic abortions,” are for other reasons.
For “Health.” The mother might feel mental stress if pregnancy interfered with special schooling, or career, or social activities, or vacation​—almost any inconvenience that would “distress” her. She might plead it would cause financial hardship, and be legally qualified for an abortion. Or the family circle would be “disturbed.”
For Birth Control. Abortion is often used as a means of birth control or planned parenthood. Some couples do not wish to bother with contraceptives. Contrary to expectations, the pill has not turned back the rising tide of abortions. Many have repeat abortions.
For Sex Control. By obtaining fetal cells from the amniotic fluid doctors can test for genetic defects in the baby. They also can tell the sex of the baby. This is resorted to by some, and on the basis of this information they decide whether to have an abortion or not. If it’s a girl and they want a boy, or if it’s a boy and they want a girl, an abortion eliminates the unwanted child.
For Money. The doctor who specializes in abortions can get rich quick. The usual uncomplicated abortion takes 15 minutes, and one press report in 1974 tells of a doctor who did 40 to 50 a day at 55 dollars (U.S.) each. Under oath he is said to have testified that for the first half of 1971 his gross income was over $250,000.
Also, some doctors cash in on freshly aborted fetuses, selling them to drug companies, research hospitals and various government agencies. The more advanced the pregnancy, the more valuable the fetus. A scandal about this broke in Washington, D.C. Some doctors were suspected of encouraging both unnecessary abortions and abortions well beyond the three-month period.
It is practiced world wide, whether legal or not. As far back as 1975 and earlier, millions of abortions were performed yearly in the Soviet Union, according to estimates by the Population Council funded by the United Nations. Also yearly: over 2,000,000 in Japan, 2,000,000 in Brazil, more than 1,000,000 each in Italy and in the United States. Fifteen years ago a government study in India reported 3.8 million abortions performed annually.
In 1974 the Population Tribune forum, held in conjunction with the United Nations World Population Conference, said that in some countries half the pregnancies were ended by abortion, and cited studies showing that 55,000,000 women in the world had abortions in 1971 alone!
Who knows what the worldwide figure is now​—except Jehovah God, who notes even the fall of a sparrow.
[Diagram on pages 10, 11]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
HOW IT’S DONE
SUCTION TUBE
SALINE
IT’S LEGALLY DONE
WHY IT’S DONE
IT’S WIDELY DONE
1971
55 MILLION
1980
?

