From Our Readers
Land Mines  I was moved by the series “Land Mines—What Can Be Done?” (May 8, 2000) It is appalling that so many innocent civilians are being killed every year as a result of land mines.
E. U., Finland
I felt ashamed when I read about these fiendish devices that humans are using to harm their fellowmen. God has every reason to intervene and remove wickedness from our earth.
G. S., Brazil
This series was a landmark, making the public aware of a major issue. The cover photo had strong drawing power.
R. H., United States
Transfusion-Free Medical Treatment  The article “You Are Going to Die!” (May 8, 2000) reminded me of my father’s experience. Years ago he had a stroke while driving a car. His car rolled over, and when he regained consciousness, the doctor told him he had to have a blood transfusion. When my father refused, the doctor said: “If you don’t take this transfusion, you will die.” My father still refused. The next day the doctor came into his room and asked: “How are you?” My father said: “I’m alive!” My father is still alive and serving Jehovah to the best of his ability.
T. M., United States
I have a rare blood cancer, and when it was diagnosed, the doctor told me that I was going to die in six months if I did not immediately begin taking blood transfusions. That was back in 1991. I found a doctor who has respected my beliefs on blood, and I made a personal decision to take, under his direction, weekly injections of erythropoietin, which has helped raise my blood count.
E. G., United States
I read Leanne Karlinsky’s story, and as a physician, I was appalled by the inhumanity of those who neglected her postoperatively [because she refused blood transfusions]. It is hard to imagine such closed minds!
C. C., United States
Fighting Despair  Since I suffer from depression, I read the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: How to Cope With Despair” (May 8, 2000) as soon as I received it. As you said, talking with someone who will listen understandingly is very encouraging. I would like to express my thanks for your excellent articles.
A. D., Lithuania
Lactose Intolerant  My wife visited her doctor because she was experiencing severe symptoms. The doctor said that she might be lactose intolerant. I had never heard of that before, so we are grateful for the article “Are You Lactose Intolerant?” (May 8, 2000) This excellent information could not have come at a better time.
E. P., United States
Brazil  The article “The Pantanal—A Fascinating Sanctuary” (September 8, 1999) aroused my desire to see this part of Jehovah’s creation firsthand. My sister and I thus planned a visit to Brazil, and the article “The Dramatic History of a ‘Land of Contrasts’” (May 8, 2000) came two weeks before we arrived there. It served as an excellent guide to the best places to visit.
E. V., England
Birds and Prisoners  I have had the joy of raising—and releasing back into the wild—a number of birds. The article “What Can a Bird Teach a Prisoner?” (May 8, 2000) brought to mind how even a small creation of Jehovah can teach us so much.
E. D., United States

