VOL. XIII. APRIL 15, 1892. NO. 8. 

BE CAREFUL ABOUT SENDING MONEY. 

A number of letters containing money have 
recently been lost in the mails. Do not send 
us money. The postoffice clerks are not all 
honest, although many of them are so. Thieves 
can feel the money in the envelope and are 
tempted thereby to steal. Send Bank Drafts, 
Money Orders or Express Orders, if you would 
make sure of our receiving what you send. 

R1393: page 115 

WAS IT NOT NECESSARY? 


"And he said to them, "O thoughtless and slow of 
heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken. Was 
it not necessary for the Messiah to have suffered these 
things, and to enter his glory? And beginning at Moses, 
and through all the prophets, he explained to them in 
all the Scriptures the things concerning himself."— 
Luke 24:25-27. 

The occasion of this utterance will be remembered: 
our Lord thus addressed two of his disciples 
on the way from Jerusalem to Emmaus 
after his resurrection. They were discussing the 
strange and wonderful event of the few days 
previous, when a stranger suddenly drew near 
and, walking with them, said, "What manner of 
communications are these that ye have one to 
another as ye walk and are sad?" And, not 
recognizing the stranger as the Lord himself, 
one of them said, "Art thou only a stranger 
in Jerusalem, and hast not known the things 
which are come to pass there in these days?" 
And he said unto them, "What things?" And 
they said unto him, "Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, 
which was a prophet mighty in deed and 
word before God and all the people, and how 
the chief priests and our rulers delivered him 
to be condemned to death, and have crucified 
him. But we trusted that it had been he which 



should have redeemed Israel: and beside all 
this, to-day is the third day since these things 
were done. Yea, and certain women also of our 
company made us astonished, which were early 
at the sepulchre, and when they found not his 
body, they came saying that they had also seen 
a vision of angels who said that he was alive. 
And some of those with us went to the sepulchre 
and found it even as the women had said; 
but him they saw not." 

Then follow our Lord's words, "O thoughtless 
and slow of heart to believe all that the 
prophets have spoken. Was it not necessary 
for the Messiah to have suffered these things, 
and to enter his glory?" The necessity of those 
things was the great lesson which he endeavored 
to impart to these confused and bewildered, 
but earnest, disciples. 

From the standpoint of Christians to-day 
the necessity of those things is much more 
easily discerned than from the standpoint of 
the early disciples, in close proximity to those 
marvelous events. But, nevertheless, there are 
some to-day also who thoughtlessly stumble 
into very erroneous conclusions drawn from a 
reckless and heedless interpretation of the Master's 
plain teaching. They say, Yes, it was 
necessary for Christ to suffer because the path 
of suffering is the only path to glory. Christ 
had to suffer and so all must suffer; and the 
glory will follow as a natural consequence, as 
these words of the Lord teach. This is a very 
plausible argument to many who lean too much 
to their own understanding. A more reflective 
mind would say, No, that is not sound logic; 
for the glory of Jehovah was not attained 
through suffering; nor was that of the angels, 
nor was that of the Son of God in his pre-human 
existence thus attained. And a more attentive 
mind would say, No, that was not the 
ground of necessity for his sufferings to which 
the Lord referred; for he called attention to 

R1393 :page 116 

the divinely inspired prophecies which of necessity 

must be thus fulfilled. The suffering 

was necessary, because it was a feature of Jehovah's 

plan for human redemption, and was so 

expressed by the prophets; and we know that 

unless it were a feature of that plan, Jehovah 

would not have required it. The Apostle 

Paul tells why it was necessary to the plan, saying 

that it was in order to manifest Jehovah's 

righteousness in remitting the sins of the already 

condemned world, showing that he is just, and 



yet the justifier of the condemned ones who 
believe in Jesus, whom God set forth to be a 
propitiation, a satisfaction, a substitute for 
them— who also freely gave his life as a man, 
his humanity, a ransom for the many— for the 
numerous posterity of Adam who had inherited 
his sin and condemnation. 

Hear again the significant query of the Master, 
"Was it not necessary for the Messiah to 
have suffered these things?" The query is designed 
to awaken the thoughtless to a close 
observance of the justice and wisdom of Jehovah's 
course in this matter. Suppose for a 
moment that God had promised mankind salvation 
from death without this, which our 
Lord terms a "necessary" provision, what 
would have been the result? Thoughtful minds 
will at once see that such a course would have 
proved (1) That God is a changeable God, declaring 
at one time that the wages of sin is death, 
and afterwards reversing his decision and granting 
life to the condemned; (2) That either in the 
first or in the second case he was unjust— either 
that the penalty of death was too severe and therefore 
unjust, or else, if it were not unjust but a 
righteous penalty, that he was unjust in reversing 
such a righteous decision; (3) Such a variable 
course would unsettle all confidence in God. 
We would be continually led to question his 
righteousness and wisdom, and could never 
feel assured against a sudden and unaccountable 
change of his attitude and dealing toward 
us. If he promised us life and happiness today, 
we could not know that to-morrow he 
would not take back his word and consign us 
to misery or death. 

Such would have been our sad condition had 
not this necessity to which our Lord referred 
been fully met by the sufferings, even unto death, 
of "the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a 
ransom for all," in compliance with the wise 
and just plan of God for human redemption. 
(1 Tim. 2:6.) By this means mankind is 
justly released from the just penalty which God 
pronounced against us; for a loving, benevolent 
Redeemer took our human nature and 
then sacrificed it in our behalf— thus bearing, in 
our room and stead, the exact penalty due to 
Adam and inherited from him by all his posterity. 
Thus our debt was paid, and all who 
have faith to believe in the promise of life 
through Christ are now legally free from the 
condemnation under which they were born, 
though the appointed time for their actual release 
has not yet come. They hold in their 
possession a promissory note— the sure covenant 



of Jehovah— sealed with the precious blood of 
Christ, and payable at the "time appointed," 
the Millennial Age. Thus they are free men 
in Christ, they are saved by faith, though they 
still walk through the valley of the shadow 
of death. And, comforted by the rod of divine 
discipline and the staff of divine counsel and 
favor, they fear no evil, knowing that in due 
time the promise of lasting life shall be fully 
verified to them. 

But there was another feature of necessity in 
the divine plan, to which our Lord referred— 
"Was it not necessary" also "for the Messiah 
to enter his glory?" The question is to you 
and to me as well as to those early disciples; 
and the fact of its being propounded implies 
our ability to discern the necessity. Yes, it 
was necessary. Why? Because we needed, not 
only a redeemer to assume and cancel our past 
indebtedness, but also an able teacher and 
leader— a prophet and king— to break the fetters 
of sin and death and lead us out of our 
bondage. If the promise of life and liberty 
were given alone, without such help, we would 
still be in the same sad state; for the prison 
doors of death are strong and securely barred 
and bolted, and we cannot burst them open; 
and the fetters of sin and sickness, of mental, 
moral and physical imbecility, are firmly clasped 
about us, and we have not the power to shake 
them off. And so we feel the necessity of a 

R1393 :page 117 

mighty deliverer as well as of a loving redeemer. 
And, thank God, in his only begotten and 
well beloved Son we have both. He is our 
Deliverer as well as our Redeemer, our Savior, 

R1394:page 117 

our Prophet, our Priest and our King— strong to 

deliver and mighty to save; for though as a 

man he sacrificed all that he then had— his humanity 

—even unto death, God, accepting that 

sacrificed humanity as the price of our redemption, 

renewed his existence in a higher nature 

—even in his own divine likeness. And thus 

this second necessity of the divine plan is met 

in the provision of one who has "all power in 

heaven and in earth given unto him," and who 

is therefore abundantly able, not only to awaken 

the redeemed race from the silence of death, 

but also to fully establish all of them who desire 

and will accept of his favor in everlasting 

righteousness and consequent worthiness of 



eternal life. Thus, through the blessings of 
his kingly and priestly office, he will, in due 
time, present all the willing and obedient faultless 
before the presence of Jehovah's majesty, 
to receive his benediction and to enter fully 
into the eternal joys of his loving favor. In 
his presence is fulness of joy, and at his right 
hand— in his favor— there are pleasures forevermore. 
-Psa. 16:11. 

Consider then, O thoughtless ones, how 
necessary it was that the Messiah should both 
suffer death, and also enter his glory. Both 
the humiliation and the exaltation meet our 
necessities in such a marvelous way that we 
clearly recognize the fact that only divine wisdom 
and love and benevolence and grace could 
have planned the wondrous scheme. "Thanks 
be unto God who giveth us the victory, through 
our Lord Jesus Christ." 

Not only was the death and resurrection and 
exaltation of Christ thus necessary to God's 
plan of salvation as viewed from a philosophical 
standpoint, which the Lord would have us 
thoughtful enough to observe, but as viewed 
from the standpoint of prophecy the necessity 
is also clear; and we should not be slow of 
heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken. 

Beginning at Moses, the Lord traced this 
line of prophecies for the two with whom he 
conversed, showing how they had been fulfilled 
in himself; and though his words are not recorded 
we still have Moses and the prophets 
and can read them for ourselves. Moses said 
to Israel, "The Lord thy God will raise up 
unto thee a prophet from the midst of thee, of 
thy brethren, like unto me: unto him shall ye 
hearken." (Deut. 18:15.) And here, in the 
risen Christ, was the beginning of the fulfilment 
of that promise. Moses had also in the typical 
ceremonies of the Day of Atonement prefigured 
both the sacrificial sufferings and the 
subsequent glory of Christ. The sacrifice of 
the bullock (Lev. 16:11) prefigured the former, 
and Aaron— in his robes of typical glory and 
beauty coming out of the tabernacle after the 
sacrifice had been accomplished and the blood 
presented in the "Most Holy" as a typical 
propitiation for the sins of Israel, and lifting 
up his hands and blessing the people, till then 
lying prostrate on the ground to represent the 
whole human race in death— prefigured the 
resurrection glory of Christ and his coming 
out of the Most Holy presence of Jehovah to 
bless the whole world in the Millennial age. 
(See "Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices.") 
Was it not indeed necessary to the 



fulfilment of these divinely instituted types, 
says our Lord, for the Messiah to have suffered 
these things and to enter his glory? 

Again, Moses testifies of Christ in recording 
the incidents of the typical sacrifice of Isaac 
by his father Abraham, who received him again 
from the dead in a figure (Gen. 22:1-18; Heb. 11:19), 
thus prefiguring Jehovah's offering of 
his only begotten Son and receiving him again 
from the dead. 

Again, there were all those prophecies which 
so particularly described the circumstances of 
his death— "He is brought as a lamb to the 
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers 
is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth;" "He 
made his grave with the wicked [the sinful human 
race] and with the rich [in the tomb of 
the rich man, Joseph of Arimathea— Matt. 27:57] 
in his death" (Isa. 53:7,9); "He keepeth 
all his bones: not one of them is broken" 
(Psa. 34:20); "Thou wilt not leave my soul 
in hell [sheol, the grave], neither wilt thou suffer 
thine Holy One to see corruption" (Psa. 16:10); 

R1394:page 118 

"They pierced my hands and my 

feet;" "They part my garments among them, 

and cast lots upon my vesture;" "They gave 

me also gall for my meat, and in my thirst they 

gave me vinegar to drink." (Psa. 22:16,18; 

69:21.) How minutely all of these had been 

fulfilled. 

And Isaiah (53:5) said, "He was wounded 
[not for his own, but] for our transgressions, 
he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement 
for our peace was upon him, and with his 
stripes we are healed." And Daniel (9:26) 
said, "Messiah shall be cut off, but not for 
himself." And Zechariah (13:1) said, "There 
shall be a fountain opened to the house of 
David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for 
sin and uncleanness." Then they told of his 
glorious reign, saying— "When thou shalt 
make his soul an offering for sin,. ..the pleasure 
of the Lord shall prosper in his hand." 
"He will swallow up death in victory."— 
Isa. 53:10; 25:8. 

Yes, it was necessary to the fulfilment of all 
these prophecies that Christ should both suffer 
death and that he should also enter his glory; 
and in these blessed facts all thoughtful believers 
may rejoice. A little while and all the 
faithful, as members of his body, shall have 
filled up the measure of his sufferings and shall 
enter into his glory. Then shortly his glory 



will be revealed, and all flesh shall see it; for the 
mouth of the Lord hath spoken it— Isa. 40:5. 



R1398 :page 118 

THE METHODIST REVOLT. 



The Baltimore American says:— "Methodism 
appears to be passing through a crisis which 
threatens to extend to all conferences in the 
United States. It is a revolt against the bishops 
and the presiding elders. Professor L. T. 
Townsend, of the Boston University, is a leader 
of the movement, and the fiery cross which 
announced the war was his recent public statement 
that church politics dominated the councils 
of the Methodist Church, that its elections 
were controlled by rings, and that those 
not in the cliques were pretty much out of 
every thing else, as far as the Methodist 
Church was concerned. The professor was 
bitterly assailed by the leading divines and 
elders, and his honor and veracity questioned. 
He returned the defiant answer that, at the 
meeting of the Boston Methodists to-day, he 
would produce proofs. The result was that 
many of the leading Methodist ministers of 
New England came to Boston, and Wesleyan 
Hall was crowded. 

President Richardson presided, and opened 
the proceedings by announcing the hymn, 
"Rock of Ages," as they might feel the need of 
its influence before the meeting adjourned; and 
they did. For two hours there was an exciting 
discussion. The President and the more prominent 
clergymen were decidedly anti-Townsend, 
and lost their temper when the vast audience 
greeted the professor's appearance with a storm 
of applause. He had a manuscript of eighty-four 
type-written pages and a big stack of letters, 
which contained evidence backing up his 
statement with cited examples from Methodist 
clergymen all over the country, but he was 
not given a chance to read his documents. 

He started by saying he came not to retract, 
but to prove. Here he was interrupted by Mr. 
Rice, of Lominster, who said all the professor's 
correspondence was anonymous, and should 
not be submitted. He was upheld by the president, 
whereupon the audience yelled and hissed 
and said many unkind things. 

The president declared the meeting had been 



packed by Prof. Townsend, which the latter 

denied. The meeting was on the eve of being 

declared closed then and there, when the threatening 

attitude of the audience caused the chair 

to appeal to the clergy present to sustain the 

motion to debar the letters. The meeting did 

exactly the reverse and shouted for the letters 

to be read. Dr. Dearborn, of Roslindale, 

managed to get a hearing, and asked the professor 

if his letters and proofs were anonymous 

or not. The professor said none were, except 

some five letters of which he was not sure whether 

the writers wished their names used or not. 

He would write and ascertain. The rest he 

would name now. Mr. Dearborn suggested 

that he wait until he could produce all the evidence 

unrestricted, which he agreed to do. 

After a stormy discussion the majority, who 

wanted to hear the letters read at once, consented, 

and the president adjourned the meeting 

until this day three weeks, for the professor 

to hear from his correspondents. Then there 

promises to be a lively time. 



R2167 :page 119 
CALVARY 



Through many a lovely landscape 

My pilgrim-staff I've brought, 
From many a rocky em'nence 

My gaze the valley sought. 
But far above all mountains 

I've ever seen, give me 
The quiet, lonely hillock, 

The Mount of Calvary. 

It towers not with forehead 

Ice-crowned into the clouds. 
No sunny Alpine glacier 

Its shoulders bare enshrouds. 
But ne'er in all my wanderings 

Seemed heaven so near to me, 
And earth so lost in distance, 

As there on Calvary. 

On its bald summit never 
A crown of forest stood— 

No gently waving oak -tops, 
No precious cedar-wood. 

But all the royal cedars 

That Hermon once did see 



Their lofty heads are bowing 
Before Mount Calvary. 

Go thither, earth-worn pilgrim, 
There seek thy rest at last; 

And at the feet of Jesus 
Thy heavy burdens cast. 

Then come and praise with gladness- 
How much was done for thee! 

Know this: the road to glory 
Leads over Calvary. 

—From the German. 



R1394:page 119 

TRAVELS IN THE HOLY LAND. 

AUGUST, 1891. -EDITORIAL NOTES. -NO. II. 



We now enter the orphanage kept by the 
Sisters of Zion (Roman Catholic). It is a 
new and commodious building, but seems to 
have but few orphans. It interests us because 
there seems no room to doubt that it is built 
upon the site of Pilate's Judgment Hall. In 
the new building they have preserved quite a 
large area of the old Roman pavement, which 
had long been buried under rubbish, some 
seven feet below the present street level. How 
interesting to look at the very stones upon 
which our Master stood and walked! "Pilate 
therefore brought Jesus forth and sat down in 
the judgment seat, in a place that is called the 
Pavement." (John 19:13.) Here, too, remains 
a portion of the arch upon which it is 
said that Pilate exhibited Jesus to the people, 
saying, in his final effort to have them relent— 
"Behold the man!"— as though he meant, 
would you crucify such a man, like to whom 
there is not another in your nation? Here, 
too, Pilate washed his hands as indicating his 
innocence of the death of Christ— John 19:5; 
Matt. 27:24. 

Now let us enter the "Church of the Holy 
Sepulchre." The building is under the control 
of the (Mohammedan) Turkish government, 
which holds it to preserve the peace and 
to secure liberty of entrance and freedom of 
worship to the Christian sects represented— 
Roman, Greek, Armenian and Coptic Catholics 
—each of which has its own chapel for 
services under the one roof. Here are pointed 



out the place of the crucifixion, the sepulchre 
where our Lord was laid, also the place where 
the crosses of Christ and the two thieves, and 
the crown of thorns and the nails, etc., are 
said to have been found by Queen Helena's 
workmen. But we take but little interest in 
these things since, from the location in the city, 
it seems as improbable that this is the real site 
of the crucifixion and the tomb of our Lord 
as that his cross and crown of thorns were 
found there centuries after. 

Let us go outside the gates: let us seek the 
real Mt. Calvary. Ah! This is more like it. 
We see no holes such as the crosses were set 
into, nor should we expect to find them after 
so many centuries; yet here we see the face of 
the hill with hollows which in the distance 
resemble a skull, and which probably gave rise 
to the name, Golgotha— the place of a skull. 
(Matt. 27:33.) We linger for a moment on 
the spot made so sacred by him who died for 

R1394 : page 120 

our sins, and mentally behold the bleeding 
Lamb of God which taketh away the sins of 
the world. Gladly we accept of a share in 
his sacrifice once for all, and rejoice in spirit 
as we reflect that the hour is not far distant 
when, his Church having been selected, the 
Redeemer shall begin his great Millennial work 
of blessing all the families of the earth— for all 
of whom he had poured out his soul into death 
—a sin offering. 

Here we see a crevice in the rock— perhaps 
a result of the earthquake which occurred 
when our Lord died. (Matt. 27:51.) Below 
the top of the hill is a garden, and near the 
garden a tomb hewn in the rock. The place 
where our Lord was laid was somewhat like it, 
though the description of the door does not 
correspond with this. Doubtless, however, 
the tomb was near Calvary, as it was about 
sunset when the body was taken from the 
cross, and but little time remained for burial, 
as the next day was a Sabbath (holy day) and 
began at six o'clock the same evening. The 
garden, too, corresponds; for we remember 
that the Marys came to the garden and at first 
mistook the Lord for the gardener. What 
blessed memories cluster around that garden 
and that morning of the resurrection; for if 
Christ be not risen, all our hopes are vain! 
(1 Cor. 15:17.) (1) His resurrection is the 

R1395 :page 120 



evidence to us that in him was no sin, and 
therefore the Father raised him from death a 
new creature, with power to bless and restore 
those whom he redeemed by his death. (2) 
We can see how this one who sacrificed his 
life in the service of God and his plan for 
human salvation had a merit in God's sight, by 
reason of that sacrifice, which merit the Scriptures 
assure us he presented on our behalf when 
he ascended up on high (Heb. 9:24), a full 
equivalent and offset, in God's sight, for the 
penalty which came upon Adam and all his 
race because of his disobedience. (Rom. 5:19.) 
(3) Our Lord's resurrection becomes the 
pledge or assurance that in due time God will 
accomplish through him all the gracious promises 
of restitution, spoken by the mouth of all 
the holy prophets since the world began.— 
Compare Acts 17:31 and Acts 3:19-21. 

Next let us visit the Mount of Olives. Its 
olive trees are fewer and doubtless less cared 
for than in our Lord's day; yet no other place, 
probably, remains so much the same as then; and 
no other place, perhaps, was more frequented by 
his sacred feet. On the way, as we ascend the 
slope, is the Garden of Gethsemane. It is no 
longer an open garden: a Roman Catholic 
society controls it and preserves it by an enclosure. 
Visitors are welcome, however, and 
we enter and meditate. A gardener is watering 
the plants, to whom we thankfully give a 
small coin for a few flowers and a sprig from 
the oldest olive tree in the garden— centuries 
old, at least. 

Standing upon the Mount of Olives, we do 
not wonder that our Master oft resorted thither 
for meditation and prayer and to give instruction 
to his disciples. We recall that here our 
Lord sat when he uttered the great prophecy 
of Matt. 24:3-5 1 and the parables of Matt. 25, 
just two days before his crucifixion.— 
Matt. 26:1,2. 

Although two thousand six hundred and 
eighty-two feet above the sea, Olivet is but one 
hundred and fifty feet higher than the hills 
upon which Jerusalem is built, and four hundred 
feet above the intervening valley of Kedron. 
It affords a splendid panoramic view of 
the surrounding country for many miles, and 
from a tower erected upon its summit, to memorialize 
the spot of the Lord's ascension, 
one can see, far to the east, the Jordan valley 
and the Dead sea, and beyond these the mountains 
of Moab as well as the intervening village 
of Bethany, and to the south, Bethlehem and 



Hebron. 

Riding upon donkeys, we descend the farther 
slope of Olivet, passing over the old road— 
quite probably the same that our Lord and the 
disciples often took— going to the home of 
Martha and Mary and Lazarus. We recall 
that this is the way the Master journeyed on 
the ass just five days before his crucifixion, 
and yonder is the site of the village of Bethphage, 
where Jesus sent the disciples for the ass 
upon which he rode into Jerusalem as King. 
(Matt. 21:1.) We are upon the very ground 
where the multitude cried, "Hosanna to the 

R1395 :page 121 

son of David!" while they strewed his way 
with palm-branches and with their clothing. 

Here is Bethany, and near us, to the right, is 
the site of the house of that Simon whom 
Jesus healed of leprosy. Here they made the 
feast for our Lord at which Martha served and 
Mary anointed him with the precious ointment. 
(Matt. 26:6,7; John 11:1,2; 12:3.) 
Yonder is the traditional site of the home of 
Lazarus and his sisters. The town in Arabic 
is called El' Azireyeh, or the town of Lazarus. 
What thoughts these scenes and associations 
awaken ! 

Within the city of Jerusalem are several 
items of interest which we have not yet visited. 
We will go now to the Jew's "wailing place." 
Through by-ways littered with rubbish and 
garbage we pass, holding our breath to avoid 
the heavy odors and commenting that only the 
pure mountain air prevents pestilence from 
breaking out in a place so inviting it. We 
reach finally the "wailing place." It is what 
is supposed to be a fragment of the Temple 
wall, and near it is what is known as Robinson's 
Arch, a remnant of the arch or bridge which 
once connected the Temple (on Mt. Moriah) 
with the city (Mt. Zion). Here are some immense 
stones, one of them measuring 38 feet 
4 inches in length, 7 feet in height, and 3-1/2 
feet in width. Here Jews, both rich and poor 
(especially the latter), and speaking various 
languages, are coming and going. Some kiss 
the stones while praying; others touch the 
stones with their fingers and then kiss their 
fingers; they chant in a plaintive tone some 
prayer or prophecy which we could not understand, 
and occasionally a group gathers around 
one who leads in a sort of litany. We give below 
what purport to be translations of two of these— 
Leader. For the place that lies desolate, 



Response. We sit in solitude. 
Leader. For the place that is destroyed, 

Response. We sit in solitude. 
Leader. For the walls that are overthrown, 

Response. We sit in solitude. 
Leader. For our majesty that is departed, 

Response. We sit in solitude. 
Leader. For our great men that lie dead, 

Response. We sit in solitude. 
Leader. For the precious stones that are buried, 

Response. We sit in solitude. 
Leader. For the priests who have stumbled, 

Response. We sit in solitude. 
Leader. For our Kings who have despised Him, 

Response. We sit in solitude. 

Another form runs as follows:— 

Leader. We pray Thee have mercy on Zion. 

Response. Gather the children of Jerusalem. 
Leader. Haste, haste, Redeemer of Zion. 

Response. Speak to the heart of Jerusalem. 
Leader. May beauty and majesty surround Zion. 

Response. Ah! turn thyself mercifully to 
Jerusalem. 
Leader. May the Kingdom soon return to Zion. 

Response. Comfort those who mourn over 
Jerusalem. 
Leader. May peace and joy abide with Zion. 

Response. And the branch (of Jesse) spring 
up at Jerusalem. 

Our hearts are touched, especially for the 
poorer classes of Jews, who seem to be very 
sincere. We visit several of their synagogues 
on their Sabbath, and wish that we had the 
knowledge of their language, which would 
enable us to tell them the good tidings of 
great joy. Beginning with Israel's double and 
showing when and why it began and that already 
the due time has come to "Cry unto 
her that her appointed time is accomplished 
and her iniquity is pardoned, because she hath 
received of the Lord's hands double for all her 
sin" (Isa. 40:2), we feel sure we should have 
close attention. As we pass into the synagogue 
many of the faces of the poorer ones seem 
to ask inquiringly, Have you no message for us ! 

Ah! were it not that the Lord has favored 
us with a share in the work of gathering out 
the Bride and helping to make her ready for 
the marriage of the Lamb, we would be here 
in Jerusalem and, by the grace of God, would 
do a part in the great work now due of turning 
away blindness from Jacob. (Rom. 11:25.) 
We must surely write to John and Peter, the 



sons of Brother Joseph Rabinowitsch, and urge 
them to lose no time in getting into this fruitful 
field, so ripe for the true gospel of the 
Kingdom, which none here seem either able 
or willing or worthy to give to them. 

Next we will visit the site of the Temple on 
Mount Moriah. The Mosque of Omar and 
its court now cover the site. It is surrounded 
by a wall, and the space enclosed is nearly 

R1395 :page 122 

twice the size of Solomon's Temple and courts. 
The mosque is a fine one and is surmounted by 
a most graceful dome. The building has fifty-six 
elegant windows in Mosaic glass. At one time 
none but favored Mohammedans were permitted 
to enter this mosque, but now it is accessible 
to all nations, though with some formality 
and at a trifling expense for guards, etc. 

This is a remarkable spot. Here it was 
that Abraham proved his faith in God and 
showed his obedience by offering his son Isaac 
—whom he received again from the dead in 
a figure. Here it was, too, that, when the 
plague was among the Israelites, King David 
purchased of Oman the Jebusite a threshing-floor 
as a place for an altar of sacrifice. (2 Sam. 24:18-25.) 
And it is written, "Solomon began 
to build the house of the Lord at Jerusalem 
in Mt. Moriah, where the Lord appeared 
unto David his father, in the place that David 
had prepared in the threshingfloor of Oman 
the Jebusite."— 2 Chron. 3:1. 

The original rock-top of Mt. Moriah is to be 
seen in the mosque, and a cave under it may 
be entered. A hole connects the top rock with 
the cave, and an aqueduct thence leads to the 
brook Kedron. Hence it is supposed that upon 
this rock the sacrifices were killed and that 
the aqueduct or sewer connected by the hole 
and the cave was used for carrying off the blood, 
and the water used in flushing and cleansing 
the altar. When we remember that the brook 
Kedron is in the valley of Jehoshaphat, "the 
valley of dry bones" (the general burying 
ground of the city), and then reflect that this 
valley was typical, as well as the blood of the 
sacrifices, we may read it thus— The blood of 
Christ the antitypical sin-offering, in a way 
unseen by the world in general, reaches unto 
all that are in their graves and secures for all 
mankind an awakening from death and an opportunity 
for life everlasting.— Rom. 5:9. 

"Solomon's Stables" were under the Temple 
courts, and were vast ones indeed. Probably 



R1396 : page 122 

one-half of the space has been appropriated to 
use as cisterns, but the remainder would still 
accommodate twelve hundred or more horses. 
Thus was the natural slope on one side of the 
mountain utilized by the wise man when he desired 
a surface on the level of the mountain top 
for the Temple and its courts. 

Passing what is termed the Golden Gate, believed 
to be the location of the "Beautiful 
Gate," where Peter and John healed the cripple, 
we gather a few wild flowers as mementoes 
and proceed to the reputed Pool of Bethesda, 
where the blind man, whose eyes were washed 
and anointed with the spittle and clay, received 
sight. Our hearts instinctively remember that 
this, like our Lord's other miracles, was to show 
forth in advance the coming glorious work of 
his Millennial Kingdom. As we think of the 
multitudes morally and spiritually blind, we rejoice 
in spirit at the remembrance of the anti-type, 
the opening of the eyes of the understanding 
foretold by the Prophet.— Isa. 35:4,5; 
42:7. 

There! see! we have a practical exemplification 
of the Lord's remark about the measure 
being pressed down, shaken together, 
heaped full, etc. (Luke 6:38.) Such an effort 
to give good measure we never before saw. 
The salesman fills the bushel, then jars or 
shakes it down solid and fills to the top, then 
puts in his hands and presses it, then spreads 
out the top so as to pile on as much as possible 
and then, running over, empties it to his customer. 

(To be Continued.) 

R1396 : page 122 

"WE HAVE NO KING BUT CAESAR." 

"There is no Jewish race,' is the somewhat 
startling declaration of 'The Jewish Tidings.' 
'We insist that in this declaration we fairly 
represent the great majority of the intelligent 
Jews of America. They do not wish to be 
separated from the rest of the citizenship of the 
countries in which they abide by such distinctions 
as 'Jewish race' or 'Hebrew nation.' 
The Jews are a religious community, having 
the same hopes and aspirations possessed by 
Christians, and differing from them only in 
their belief. The Jews of to-day believe there 
is but one God, and no other. They repudiate 
the doctrine that a Messiah has come or is 



coming, but they accord to every one freedom 
of conscience. They want to be treated upon 
equal terms with their neighbors— no better, no 
worse. The only evil which now remains to be 
fought is the popular idea that Jews are a separate 
body of people, of different manners, customs, 
minds and character from other people." 



page 123 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1396 : page 123 

THE LORD MY SHEPHERD. 



LESSON IV., APRIL 24, PSALM 23:1-6. 

Golden Text— "The Lord is my shepherd: I shall not 
want." 

In the precious and true sentiments of this 
Psalm, David doubtless took great consolation 
in the midst of his temptations and trials, and 
of the realization of his own infirmities and 
short-comings. As he looked back to his early 
shepherd life and remembered his own care for 
the dependent sheep of his flock, the thought 
of the Lord's similar care over his people came 
to mind. And, doubtless, with this realization 
of the Lord's goodness and care, came also a 
renewed determination on David's part to be 
henceforth a true sheep, that he might always 
remain under the shepherd's care. 

While such was the significance of these words 
to David, to us, the Church under the care of 
the Anointed Jesus, our Good Shepherd, they 
mean more; for, as the Lord's inspired prophet, 
David puts these words into the mouth of all of 
the Lord's "little flock" of consecrated followers 
who obediently hearken to his voice and 
who in meek humility take comfort both in 



his chastening rod and in his blessed staff of 
promise and hope. 

To those who are not in this attitude these 
words do not apply. The Lord is not a shepherd 
of wayward goats (however, he may permit 
the common blessings of sun and rain to 
come to all): the proud and the self-willed have 
no part in his tender care; and those who are 
truly his sheep and who can therefore claim 
his care and leading are, as he tells us (Luke 12:32), 
only a "little flock," to whom "it is 
the Father's good pleasure to give the kingdom." 
And it is to the kingdom— the Millennial Kingdom 
of God, to be established over all the 
earth— that the Good Shepherd is thus leading 
his consecrated flock. Such may truly say- 
Verse 1. "The Lord is my shepherd: I shall 
not want." They shall have all needful instruction, 
all needful grace and comfort and discipline 
and training and care, and such measure 
of temporal good as will be most conducive to 
their highest spiritual and everlasting blessing. 
In fact, all things shall work together for good 
to the sheep of the Lord's pasture— to the 
called according to his purpose.— Rom. 8:28. 

Verse 2 assures us that our hunger and thirst 
after truth and righteousness shall be satisfied— 
that we shall be bountifully fed and sweetly refreshed 
with the meat in due season and the 
water of life. 

Verse 3— "He restoreth my soul," etc., refers 
to our present justification through faith in the 
atoning sacrifice of Christ; for we are therefore 
now reckoned as having passed from death unto 
life, although the times of restitution have not 
yet begun. And being thus reckoned righteous, 
we are led by the Good Shepherd in the paths 
of righteousness and peace "for his name's 
sake"— because we are his, and because we 
trust in his name, in his merit, the merit of his 
sacrifice freely given for our sins. 

Verse 4— "Yea, [although I am not actually 
so restored, yet by faith in the promise, through 
Christ, I do so reckon myself, even] though 
[like all the rest of the dying world] I [still] 
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, 
[I was born in this valley and shall die in it, 
yet] I will fear no evil [no failure of thy sure 
covenant]; for thou art with me, [even here, 
and] thy [chastening] rod and thy [faithful] staff 
[of promise and hope], they comfort me." 
Verse 5 refers to the bountiful supply of 
soul-satisfying truth— the meat in due season, 
and the full cup of joy and gladness— prepared 
and spread before the household of faith even 
here in the midst of this valley of the shadow 



of death and in the presence of our enemies- 
Satan and his messengers, who vainly seek to 
stumble the feet of Christ and to subvert our 
faith. It refers also to our anointing with the 
holy spirit as members of the body of Christ. 

Verse 6. In view of such present bounty and 
blessing, well may we rest in the assurance 
that goodness and mercy shall follow us all the 
days of our life— both of this present life and 
also of that which is to come; and that if, as 
obedient sheep, we continue to follow the leading 
of the Good Shepherd we shall eventually 
dwell in the house of the Lord forever, as members 
of the royal, divine family, as the bride 
and joint-heir of Jehovah's dear Son. 

R1396 : page 123 

THE PRAYER OF THE PENITENT. 



LESSON V., MAY 1, PSALM 51:1-13. 

Golden Text— "Create in me a new heart, O God, and 
renew a right spirit within me." 

This draws our attention to the darkest stain 

R1396 : page 124 

upon the history of the Prophet David— the 
matter of the murder of Uriah and the taking 
of his wife. Skeptics are wont to point to 
that great, double sin and to sneer: "And that 
was the 'man after God's own heart,' according 
to the Bible's grand standard of morality." 
But the fact is that it was when David was a 
young shepherd just coming to manhood that 
he was after God's own heart. And yet in 
connection with this very matter of this, David's 
greatest sin, there is something which shows 
forth his better character which was "after 
God's heart:" and this is brought before us 
by this lesson. The commendable features are: 
(1) He did not attempt to justify his course by 
saying that all the kings around about did such 
things and worse, and that it was generally conceded 
by their subjects that a king had a right 
to do as he pleased; (2) he not only did not 
deny the wrong, but he did not even try 
to see what he could say in self-defense; he 
did not plead his peculiar temptation nor that 
it was above that of others, from the power he 
exercised as king; but he confessed fully and 
heartily in such a manner as convinces all that 



his heart was really better than his evil conduct 
had seemed to indicate. We have no right to 

R1397 :page 124 

condone David's crimes, but we have the privilege 
of noting those other qualities in him 
which to some extent were an offset to his 
weaknesses. 

And it is well, too, that the Bible attests 
its own truthfulness in thus faithfully preserving 
the record of the sins of its great characters 
alongside the records of their faith and service. 
Of no other book which stands as the foundation 
of a religion is this true. Others tell only 
the good and leave the evil untold; but the 
Bible tells of the weaknesses of its greatest 
heroes except our Lord Jesus: of Paul's persecutions; 
of Peter's denial and blasphemy; of 
David's sins; of Abraham's errors, etc. 

Yet this, which worldly wisdom would consider 
a serious drawback, God saw to be the 
proper thing; and many of God's people have 
been greatly blessed by these very records of 
human weakness and sin. They but corroborate 
God's testimony that all have sinned; that 
there is none righteous; that all need the grace 
of God to forgive the past and to lift them out 
of the miry pit of sin and its consequences. 
And many a sinner has thus been taught to have 
hope toward God for forgiveness and to realize 
that God who offers him his grace has had 
compassion upon others who were out of the 
way when they turned to him with true 
repentance. 

Verses 1-3. "Have mercy upon me, O God, 
according to thy loving kindness: according 
unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot 
out my transgressions. Wash me thoroughly 
from mine iniquity and cleanse me from my sin. 
For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my 
sin is continually before me." 

David thus plead for mercy; and although 
he realized finally that God's favor was restored 
to him, he knew nothing of the real philosophy 
of the matter— how God could be just and yet 
be the justifier of those whose sins merited 
wrath. Ah, yes! the standpoint of the sons of 
God, during this Gospel age, is much more 
blessed. Our Father in heaven not only tells 
us of our forgiveness and reconciliation to his 
favor, but he gives us the particulars so that we 
may see how he has done it without sanctioning 
our sins or excusing them and without violating 
his own just law on the subject. He 
shows us that Christ our Lord was the Lamb of 



God whose death as our substitute and sin offering 

taketh away the sins of the world; that 

by his stripes pardon and healing may be 

granted to whosoever accepts the grace offered 

through him. Indeed, David's sins were 

not blotted out nor forgiven; for although the 

Lord restored to him divine favor and communion, 

he punished him severely for his sin, 

as he had foretold by Nathan the Prophet 

(2 Sam. 12:11,12), Absolom's rebellion being 

the means employed. 

True, the penalty exacted was not the full 
penalty of sin, for that would have been lasting 
death. God showed mercy on David (as to all 
Jews under the Law Covenant established upon 
the basis of the typical sacrifices) in that he 
made allowance for his fallen condition and 
hence punished his sin, not with everlasting 
death, but with trouble, etc., in connection 
with Absolom's rebellion, as above stated. 

And as with David and others under the typical 
Law Covenant, so, too, it is with God's 
children under the New Covenant in Christ. 
The death of Christ as our ransom-price cancels 
the original sin of Adam, and also such portion 
or degree of our sins and shortcomings as 
are involuntary and contrary to our real sentiments. 
But whatever proportion of a sin is 
wilful, designed and agreed to by us, has a 
penalty attached to be inflicted in either the 
present or the future life. And in the case of 
all who shall be members in the Anointed body, 
God declares that such sins shall be punished 
in the present life— saying through the Apostle 
"Some men's sins go before to judgment [during 
the present life], others they follow after" 
into the next life, when some shall be beaten 
with many and some with a few stripes. And 
again it is specified that in the cases of all accounted 
worthy to be of the glorified Church, 

R1397 : page 125 

they are chastened now in order that they may 
not have part with the world in the condemnation 
(trial) of the world in the next age.— 
1 Tim. 5:24; Luke 12:48; 1 Cor. 11:32. 

Verses 4 and 5. David's confession here is 
to God— the wronged Uriah was dead. Anyway, 
in that day it was esteemed a king's privilege 
to have the bodies and lives of his people 
subject to his will; and doubtless other kings 
habitually did as bad. But David had been 
enlightened and knew better, and although his 
offenses would have been lightly passed over by 
others, David realized his guilt before God and 



besought his mercy. He confessed his sin that 
others might know, when the chastisements of 
the Lord should come, that God's judgments 
and the king's troubles were just punishments 
and not violations of God's covenant promises. 

Verses 5-12. After confessing in verse 5 his 
original sin— his impairment through the fall- 
he shows in verse 6 his clear appreciation of the 
divine plan. Although fallen and weak in the 
flesh, and therefore unable to do perfectly, God 
looks for and demands purity of heart (purity of 
motive or intention) and this David realized 
he had not manifested. Hence his prayer in 
succeeding verses is not that the Lord shall excuse 
him in sin, but that his heart may be 
cleansed and brought into harmony with God's 
character and plan. Alas! how strange that 
some living under the still clearer light of the 
Gospel dispensation fail to see what David so 
clearly expresses, and instead some even charge 
God with inspiring and causing all sin and 
crime and wickedness. But David was right, 
and these would-be wise ones have become 
darkened and foolish in their vain imaginations. 

Verse 13. What a grand principle is here 
set forth. It is eminently proper that those 
who would be used of the Lord as teachers to 
instruct transgressors, whether in this or the 
coming age, should be fully consecrated to 
God— clean— pure in heart. And the only way 
to get to this condition is to lay hold by faith 
upon the merits of the Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sin of the world, and to have 
our sins blotted out by him, and then, too, to 
be renewed in spirit, sanctified through the truth. 



R1397 : page 125 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 



page 125 



New Hampshire. 
DEAR BROTHER:-I herewith enclose one 
dollar in payment of ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
for this year. Was sick last year, and have 
earned no money since last June, but I wish 
the TOWER continued. I rejoice that God is 
raising up everywhere some to help in this work. 
We have entered the time of trouble, pestilence, 
famine, and, in time, war will ensue. The 
people of God are fast approaching the final 



conflict; and I think small shot, grape and 
canister, as brought to view in your S.S. Lessons, 
are very telling at this time, and will be 
in the future, when we come at short range 
with the enemy ! 

In other words, theological paragraphs, explaining 
at a glance the true significance of the 
doctrines of election and free grace, and kindred 
subjects, as we understand them, are very 
convincing to new readers. May health and 
prosperity attend you and yours. Your brother 
in Christ, L. J. HARPER. 



Iowa. 
DEAR BRETHREN:-Enclosed please find 
$3.25 subscription to the Tract Fund for the 
quarter ending April 1, 1892. From what I 
have learned of the truth, and from facts stated 
from your office, I know of no place where I 
could send this, and accomplish as much good 
as it will in your hands. The last few numbers 
of the TOWER seem to be par excellence. If 
you are sending out any food, or bread, newly 
made, I would like to scatter a few crumbs 
to my neighbors. It will be better than my 
own talk. Yours, joyful in the promises, 
C. M. RICE. 



Nebraska. 

MY DEAREST BRO. RUSSELL:-I have been 
a long way from you in distance, but always 
near in love and thought. Last April I was at 
the Memorial Meeting at Allegheny, and you, 
dear brother in Christ, immersed me; and I 
was so very happy. It symbolized my death 
to self, my burial to the world and my resurrection 
in Christ— to walk with Christ and 
Christ with me. Dear Jesus has been and is 
now with me. Oh, joy complete! it is Christ 
in me the hope of glory. 

Dear Brother Russell, I do love you and all 
so much, and will do all I can for my precious 
Saviour. I pray God that I may be so kept 
that I will meet you with the elect, to help in 
the Millennial work and now in the "harvest" 
work. I have read Vols. 1, 2 and 3 of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN through four times, and will read 
them again. I would love to be there at the 
next Passover Supper, but do not expect to 
now. My sister writes me she will attend. 

I pray God that you may all be kept by the 
power divine. Yours in Christ, A. C. BEACH. 



page 126 

West Virginia. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-Enclosed 
please find postal-note for one dollar for 
the TOWER. I can not tell you how much mother 
and myself enjoy the TOWER; and we are so 
glad that its visits will be more frequent in 
future. To those in Allegheny, who are privileged 
to attend the weekly meetings, the TOWER 
may not be so much of a necessity; but to us 
who cannot meet with those of like precious 
faith, or hear the words of comfort and instruction 
the church at Allegheny feasts upon, the 
coming of the TOWER is looked forward to, and 
its contents devoured, with a pleasure you can 
scarcely imagine. 

We are so glad of your safe return from 
Europe, and of the good accomplished by your 
going, and, feeling sure you are led of the Lord, 
we believe it will prove an increasing good. 
How any one can read the different volumes of 
DAWN and not see the truth is a mystery; but 
so we find it: "their eyes are holden." We 
have enjoyed Vol. III. so much and in some 
respects think it better than either of the others. 
I can do so very little in the harvest work. 
Would gladly respond to the "Good Hope" 
invitation, but do not see that I can do so at 
present. May God's blessing be upon you 
both, and upon each one who makes an effort 
for the spread of the truth. Yours in the 
one hope, MRS. W. H. FULLER. 



R1397 : page 126 

Boston. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have been thinking 
whether I could afford to attend your annual 
meeting, and also whether I could afford to 
stay away: and have concluded that (D.V.) 
I will attend. 

Last year I stayed with my aunt in Pittsburgh, 
but she will not be able to accommodate me 
this time, so that I will have to place myself at 
your disposal. I will be thankful for even a 
floor-bed. I hope and pray that the meeting 
will prove as interesting as the last one. How 
grand it will be when we shall meet to part no 
more in His glorious kingdom. 

The dear old WATCH TOWER in its semi-monthly 



visits is very refreshing indeed. I 
watch for it as eagerly as I would, when 
hungry, for a good meal. I have enjoyed 
very much "Views Abroad" from Sister Russell's 
pen, and anticipate something equally 
good in "Travels in the Holy Land" from 
yours. May the dear Lord's richest blessings 
rest upon you as you labor so earnestly in the 
Master's vineyard. With Christian love to 
yourself and Sister Russell, 

Your humble servant and brother, 
W. J. THORNE. 



page 126 



Arkansas. 
DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:-Enclosed please 
find $1.55, which please appropriate to the 
spread of the glad tidings as the Lord may 
direct you. It is my savings of three Mondays. 
I am glad that you suggested this way of serving 
the Lord, for all can do something; and I 
am sure all true servants are always glad to 
have an opportunity to assist in the harvest work. 
I pray that the Lord may accept and bless this 
mite. Your brother, J. K. CONNER. 



Pennsylvania 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The brethren here 
are very much delighted to have the TOWER 
semi-monthly, and we all think that the treating 
of the S.S. Lessons is one of the strongest 
weapons against error and the nominal system 
that could be brought forth. While most of 
the readers here are out of the systems, a number 
are holding on, and these lessons will show 
them the errors so plainly that they cannot 
help seeing the importance of coming out. I 
rejoice that we are allowed to eat from a clean 
table. Yours in the Lord, C. ARNER. 



Connecticut. 
DEAR SIR:— I sent you some money sometime 
ago to pay up arrears, and now I take the 
opportunity of sending you the remainder of 
the subscription price for this year. Before 
closing, I wish to say that I am still a firm 
believer in the truth. The trials of which you 
gave warning have come to me overwhelmingly; 
and although they have taken strange and 



unexpected forms, I thank God that they did 
not find me unprepared. I know in whom I 
have put my trust. Very sincerely yours, 
MRS. H. BULLIS. 



R1397 : page 126 

Maryland. 

DEAR SISTER AND BROTHER:-I have read 
with great interest and delight your three volumes 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN, and think that your 
interpretations of prophecies are excellent. The 
prophecies have always been a favorite part of 
divine revelation with me; and I have been 
unable to understand why people in general 
give so little attention to them. I am fifty-four 
years old to-day, and have been in the 
ministry of the Episcopal Church nearly thirty 
years. It seems to me that Daniel's prediction 
of the "seventy weeks" is enough of itself to 
establish the faith of any reasonable man in the 
supernatural authorship of the Bible. 

I would be glad to have you send the three 
volumes of your able and instructive work to 
my sister, and also to a friend of mine in a 
former parish. I enclose the money and their 
addresses. Sincerely yours, H. VANDYNE. 



page 127 

Nebraska. 
DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I 

know that you have not much time to read letters; 
but I must tell you that I receive more joy 
and real happiness from the Bible teachings of the 
TOWER than from all other sources combined. 
I used to be weighed down with sorrow, but I 
quite forget my troubles now, for the shepherd 
is with his fold. Yours in love through Christ, 
MRS. S. SHINKARD. 



Kansas. 
GENTLEMEN:-"The Plan of the Ages" 
came this morning. Have been reading it and 
your "Tracts" considerable of the time for 
the last forty-eight hours, and believe I have 
gotten more knowledge— that I understand— 
of the teachings of the Bible, out of them in 
that length of time, than I have learned in all 
my life put together before, and I am forty-three 



years old. I was taught to read the Bible 
as soon as I learned to read anything. When 
I was a boy I used to compete for prizes, given 
at Sunday School, by committing to memory 
whole chapters, not understanding a word I 
learned, but given to understand by my teacher 
and parents, that, if I were not good, I would 
be tormented in unquenchable fire forever 
and ever, and, knowing that I was not good, 
the thoughts of this future "torment" kept 
me in constant fear and dread, until I was 
grown and began to think for myself. Years 
ago I discarded the belief that there was such 
a thing as "Eternal Torment," but with my 
weak understanding I could not post myself 
from the Bible, so that I could explain my belief 
satisfactorily to others. 

Now your "Old Theology Tracts" have 
come to give me new light. I have given some 
of them to my friends, and want more. Please 
send one copy of "The Plan of the Ages" to 
my Sister, and to me one copy of the "Wonderful 
Story," also please send me sample copy 
"ZION'S WATCH TOWER." Yours Truly, 
A. A. POST. 



R1397 : page 127 

New York. 

DEAR BROTHER:— I ship to you to-day, by express, 
a box containing some mottoes for your 
place of meeting. You are indebted to Sisters 
Erlenmyer and Clark for the materials, which 
they kindly furnished. I regret that I could 
not give sufficient time to finish them as they 
might be, but trust they may be accepted by 
the dear saints as a slight token of our love 
for the brethren and the Master, whose servants 
we are. It has indeed been a labor of love 
to do them, and I trust the good taste of the 
sisters will hang and arrange them in a better 
manner than I can suggest. 

Sister G. and I consider ourselves fortunate 
in having met Sisters Erlenmyer and Clark 

early in their canvass of O and vicinity. 

They are the first ones (in the Truth) whom 
we have met, and we have enjoyed many pleasant 
and profitable hours with them. My dear 
brother, I can not tell how much we would 
like to join you all at the Anniversary, believing 
it would be of great benefit to us; but as 
it is impossible, we have decided to hold it 
ourselves, with faith and trust that the good 
Lord will be present with us. Remember us, 



will you not, dear brother, when you approach 

R1398 : page 127 

the throne of grace? Oh, how often have I 

longed to write you, but, feeling my own unworthiness 

and knowing how very busy you 

are in the Master's cause, I have hesitated to 

trespass on your time. But we have appreciated, 

and do appreciate, how much we can not 

tell, the gratitude we owe to God and to you 

and Sister Russell, that through you we have 

been able to learn what the "Gospel of the 

Kingdom" really is. Although we have read 

the TOWER for over eight years, we feel that we 

have grown more in grace and the knowledge 

of the truth in the past year than in the seven 

preceding; and we pray that we will be led 

into all truth. I have striven for several years, 

as the Master alone knows, to lead others into 

the truth, but apparently without success until 

recently, when I found some interested ones. 

I thank the Lord for so much. 

I must say, before closing, that, while we 
have always thought each number of the TOWER 
could not be improved, each succeeding number 
is still better. With a prayer that you may 
be so filled and moved by the Holy Spirit, 
throughout the meetings, as never before, joined 
by Sister G., with much love to all the saints, I 
am your unworthy brother in the faith, 
HIRAM P. GANOUNG. 

[The mottoes were received in good order and 
are very beautiful. "I shall be satisfied when I 
awake in thy likeness," "Rejoice that your 
names are written in Heaven," and "I must work 
the works of Him that sent me while it is day." 
All appreciate them greatly. We extend to the 
donors thanks on behalf of all.— ED.] 



page 127 

Michigan. 
DEAR BROTHER IN CHRISTr-Enclosed find 
Money Order to renew my subscription for the 
WATCH TOWER. I can never express the gladness 
I feel that the TOWER and the MILLENNIAL 
DAWNS ever came to my notice. I am sixty 
years old, and have been groping since a little 
child amid the shadows of the sects, thirsting, 
but never satisfied, until I purchased of a Colporteur 
Volume I., and secured the WATCH 
TOWER. Since then I have read all the DAWNS. 



page 128 

This is the greatest blessing that I ever received; 
for a great flood of light has not only illumined 
my own soul, but my children and some of my 
friends to whom I have loaned books and papers 
have been brought to a knowledge of the 
truth. Respectfully yours, 

MRS. C. W. GARDNER. 



Texas. 
DEAR BRETHREN:-I send you herewith 80 
cents, for I don't want to miss a single number 
of the TOWER. It and the DAWNS together 
have made the Bible an intelligible book to me 
and have lifted me from the level of a rank 
skeptic to that of a firm believer in the atonement 
of our Lord and Savior. May the Lord 
bless you. Truly Yours, B. F. BANKS. 



R1398 :page 128 

Massachusetts. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your esteemed 
favor was duly received; also the DAWN and 
tracts. 

I have not had a doubt for several years 
that we are in the "harvest" of the Gospel 
age. I have been studying the Scriptures, especially 
upon this point, for some time; and 
in a quiet way have been teaching the same as 
I have had opportunity. But never until I 
commenced your publications did I see that 
the principal object of this age is to select the 
Church, and the distinction between the nominal 
and the real Church. I have also been 
led to see that my mission is chiefly to the 
Church, to emphasize the importance of entire 
consecration and holiness to the Lord; and I 
am happy to be able to say that while it has 
been positively offensive to the larger portion 
of the Church, I have found some prepared 
ground in which the seed has taken root, and 
is bringing forth fruit unto holiness. I invariably 
preach the speedy coming of the Lord, 
and that we are already in the last days, the 
transition period between the departure of the 
old and the coming of the new; the closing of 
the Gospel age, and the establishment of Christ's 
Kingdom. 

The Methodist Church here, in which I have 
preached for twenty-five years, occasionally has 



virtually been closed to me, because I have 
preached these truths so plainly and earnestly. 
But I have held a week-day service in the vestry 
and we have had some glorious meetings. 
We have a number of precious souls who have 
come out fully on the Lord's side, and are 
looking with joy to the coming of the Lord. 
Recently I have been preaching in the Advent 
church here, which has been opened to me, 
through the sickness of their pastor; but I 
found them as dead and formal as our own 
church, though, bless God, some have been 
quickened. Their pastor is a good man, but 
has been away from them for years and but 
recently returned. 

I had you send him Vol. I. of DAWN about 
two years ago, and I find it has borne fruit. He 
is converted, and I have been permitted to lead 
him out more clearly. I want you to send me, 
for him, volumes Two and Three, and I enclose 
you $5 in payment of mine and these. 

God bless you and yours. In Christ, 
W. H. FORMOSA. 



Canada. 

DEAR MR. RUSSELL:-I have been favored 
with the loan of the volumes on "MILLENNIAL 
DAWN," and the reading has been indeed profitable. 
I thank God for having seen them. They 
have made clear to my mind many difficult 
passages of Scripture. The Word of God is 
precious to me, and I can appreciate and drink 
in greedily anything that helps me to understand 
it, persuaded as I am that God has 
more light to break forth from his blessed Word. 

The Lord has been preparing me for years 
for these Millennial truths. In 1874 I left (resigned) 
the Primitive Methodist ministry in 
England, where I had been for nine years, on 
account of sympathy with the doctrines of the 
Kingdom and conditional immortality. Since 
then I have been led to the study of prophecy; 
and your volumes afford me a richness, a fulness, 
in this branch of study, beyond anything 
I have before seen. Reading them is indeed 
to me as sitting down to a banquet of "meat 
in due season"— predicted truths on becoming 
due being just this to the household of faith. 
The Lord must be invisibly present, as you say, 
being proven by the time prophecies and emphasized 
by the Master when he said, "The 
Kingdom cometh not with observation or outward 
show," and referred to the days of Noah 
before the flood as a type of the day of the 



presence of the Son of Man. 

I wish I could be of help to the watchful, 
consecrated ones; but here in the bush am 
afraid I cannot do much. I would like to know 
what the arrangements of the Tower Tract Society 
is with Colporteurs and whether they know 
of any field where there is urgent need of 
such. Yours in the love of revealed truth. 
JOHN L. LAWSON. 



page 130 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



THOSE MEMENTOES OF THE HOLY LAND. 



In our issue of April 1st we mentioned that 
Brother and Sister Russell had purchased, while 
in Jerusalem, a lot of olive-wood articles (Napkin-rings, 
Egg-cups, Pen-holders and Paperweights) 
designed to be mementoes for TOWER 
readers. They could not, of course, purchase 
sufficient to send one to each reader, and so 
concluded to let the Tract Fund have the charge 
and benefit, and donated them to you through 
it. A moderate price was put upon each article, 
and, after paying the freight and customs 
duty and postage, any profit remaining will go 



to augment the general fund for the spread of 
the Truth. Thus the articles will not only be 
mementoes of the Holy Land and of Brother 
and Sister Russell's visit to it last year, but also, 
indirectly, gifts from them. 

Not content with this, they purchased also a 
quantity of Flower Cards (cards upon which 
some of the wild flowers and grasses of Palestine 
are pasted in pretty designs), and these 
they insist shall not be sold, but given gratis, 
post-paid, to TOWER subscribers, as special mementoes 
of their love, which may go to those 
unable to afford even the small price to secure 
the olive-wood articles; although one card goes 
with each order of olive-wood articles also. 

Several have sent money for extra Flower 
Cards, saying that they would like them for 
their friends; but none will be offered for sale 
until all the Tower readers who will accept 
them as love-tokens have had full opportunity 
to secure them. After that, if any remain, 
they will be supplied at ten cents each or three 
for 25 cents; and the proceeds, after paying 
postage, etc., will go to the Tract Fund. 

Please take notice that the Pen-holders are 
all gone; of the other olive-wood articles and 
cards we still have a supply; especially of the 
Napkin-rings, of which a larger quantity came 
than of others, they being considered very 
desirable. Watch Tower Tract Society. 



THE SYRIAC NEW TESTAMENT. 



Murdoch's Translation of the Syriac-Peshito 
manuscript is sometimes inquired for. 

We can supply it in substantial half-leather 
binding, post paid for $2. 



BE CAREFUL ABOUT SENDING MONEY. 



A number of letters containing money have 
recently been lost in the mails. Do not send 
us money. The postoffice clerks are not all 
honest, although many of them are so. Thieves 
can feel the money in the envelope and are 
tempted thereby to steal. Send Bank Drafts, 
Money Orders or Express Orders, if you would 
make sure of our receiving what you send. 



R1398 :page 131 
