Announcements
LOVING IN DEED AS WELL AS IN WORD—1 John 3:18, NW.
Love is shown by the manner in which we speak and do things. Our tongues, supported by good deeds, can be the means of bringing words of life to others, for Colossians 4:6, NW, tells us: “Let your utterance be always with graciousness, seasoned with salt, so as to know how you ought to give an answer to each one.” To engage in the ministry is loving in deed as well as in word and aids people to see the reason for world distress and to appreciate the divine remedy. Jehovah’s witnesses will be calling on people during May to bring them timely Bible study helps in the form of a book and a booklet on a contribution of 50c. Contributions received are used to print more Bible literature for the benefit of still other persons of good will in all parts of the world. For more information about this blessed work and how you may share in it write the Society or inquire of any of Jehovah’s witnesses.
WHOM DO YOU FEAR?
‘The fear of man brings a snare,’ say the Proverbs. It creates jealousies, foments bitter envies and sows seeds of doubt and discontent. It is stirring today’s nations to the most stupendous armaments race ever conceived of. It destroys neighbor love. It is the way of death. According to Matthew Jesus said: “Whoever wants to save his life will lose it,” because he is following the defense measures of this system of things. But another proverb says: “The fear of Jehovah is a fountain of life, that one may depart from the snares of death.” Which is your fear? Can you distinguish between them? The book You May Survive Armageddon into God’s New World provides you with real protection against the false fears of mankind. It will point you to the proper fear of God and the way to waters of life. It will guide you into the safe refuge of God’s holy Word and the hiding place from the impending storm that is found only in his name. It is yours for only 50c. Send today and receive free a short sermon on another timely subject.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
June 10: Accurate Knowledge to Please Jehovah. Page 273.
June 17: Your Personal Study. Page 279.

