Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Love, the “Perfect Bond of Union”
LOVE among Christians is “a perfect bond of union,” and when displayed it results in a worldwide brotherhood. (Colossians 3:14) This “perfect bond of union” is manifested by our brothers in Africa as they show love for one another and for Jehovah, the Giver and Sustainer of Life.​—Psalm 36:9; Acts 17:28.
□ Because of the recent three-year drought in Zimbabwe, many areas were in a desperate condition. This, of course, affected our brothers who live in those areas. However, fellow Witnesses responded wonderfully to the call for help. In fact, so much clothing was donated that it was necessary to inform the brothers not to donate more until further notice. This, plus the aid given by the government, provided most of our brothers with the help they needed. “Those still in need are also being cared for,” reports the Society’s branch office.
This loving aid on the part of our brothers has not gone unnoticed. One unbelieving husband told his wife, who is a Witness: “While others are draining the people of all they have, you [Witnesses] are providing them with food and clothing.” Favorable comments have been made by others also.
Love among Jehovah’s Witnesses serves as “a perfect bond of union,” and identifies them as true Christians.​—John 13:35.
□ Another example of the love and unity among Jehovah’s people was seen at the “Kingdom Unity” District Convention held in Freetown, Sierra Leone. Delegates came to this convention from Guinea and Liberia, as well as from different parts of Sierra Leone. Two sessions ran simultaneously​—one in English and Krio, the other in Kisi and French. The branch report describes the love and unity manifest on this occasion. It says:
“It was a thrilling moment when the Kisi- and French-speaking brothers joined the English session for the final song and prayer. Many shed tears of joy as they watched more than 400 delegates walk across the field to join them in unitedly worshiping Jehovah in song and prayer.” It quotes one observer as saying: “Jehovah knows how to organize his people. What a clear demonstration of unity!”
This unity is emphasized when we consider that the ones gathered were from different tribes, and yet they met together in peace. It requires Jehovah’s spirit to accomplish this. This unity was foretold in Revelation 7:9: “After these things I saw, and, look! a great crowd, which no man was able to number, out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, dressed in white robes; and there were palm branches in their hands.” Re 7 Verse 10 of this same chapter shows the secret of this unity: “And they keep on crying with a loud voice, saying: ‘Salvation we owe to our God, who is seated on the throne, and to the Lamb.’”

