





SECTION 2
Be Loyal to Each Other

“What God has yoked together, let no man put apart.”​—Mark 10:9



Jehovah requires us to “cherish loyalty.” (Micah 6:8) This is especially important in your marriage because without loyalty, there is no trust. And trust is essential for love to flourish.
Today, loyalty in marriage is under attack. To protect your marriage, you must be determined to do two things.



1 MAKE YOUR MARRIAGE A PRIORITY

WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “Make sure of the more important things.” (Philippians 1:10) Your marriage is one of the most important things in your life. It deserves priority.
Jehovah wants you to focus on your mate and “enjoy life” together. (Ecclesiastes 9:9) He makes it clear that you should never neglect your mate but, rather, you both should look for ways to make each other happy. (1 Corinthians 10:24) Make your mate feel needed and appreciated.





WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Make sure that you regularly spend time together, giving your mate your undivided attention

Think of “we” instead of “me”










2 SAFEGUARD YOUR HEART

WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “Everyone who keeps on looking at a woman so as to have a passion for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.” (Matthew 5:28) If someone keeps thinking about immoral things, in a sense, he is being unfaithful to his mate.
Jehovah says that you need to “safeguard your heart.” (Proverbs 4:23; Jeremiah 17:9) To do this, you must guard your eyes. (Matthew 5:29, 30) Follow the example of the patriarch Job, who made a covenant with his eyes never to look with desire at another woman. (Job 31:1) Be determined never to view pornography. And be resolved to avoid any romantic attachment to a person other than your mate.





WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Make it obvious to others that you are completely committed to your mate

Consider your mate’s feelings, and immediately end any relationship that would make your mate uncomfortable





DO YOUR PART
Be honest with yourself, and identify your weaknesses. (Psalm 15:2) Do not be embarrassed to ask for help. (Proverbs 1:5) If you have immoral thoughts, keep on fighting them. Do not be discouraged. (Proverbs 24:16) Jehovah will bless your efforts to remain loyal to your mate.


ASK YOURSELF . . .
How can I make more time for my mate?

Is my mate my best friend?




