





SECTION 4
How to Manage Money

“By consultation, plans will succeed.”​—Proverbs 20:18



We all need money to provide our families with the things they need. (Proverbs 30:8) After all, “money is a protection.” (Ecclesiastes 7:12) As a couple, it may be difficult to talk about money, but do not let money cause problems in your marriage. (Ephesians 4:32) A couple should trust each other and work together when deciding how money will be spent.



1 PLAN CAREFULLY

WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “Who of you wanting to build a tower does not first sit down and calculate the expense to see if he has enough to complete it?” (Luke 14:28) It is essential that you plan together how you will use your money. (Amos 3:3) Decide what you need to buy and how much you can afford to spend. (Proverbs 31:16) Just because you have the money to buy something does not necessarily mean that you should. Try to avoid debt. Spend only the money you have.​—Proverbs 21:5; 22:7.
WHAT YOU CAN DO:
If you have extra money at the end of the month, decide together what you are going to do with it

If you have a deficit, make specific plans to reduce your expenses. For example, you could prepare your own meals instead of eating out










2 BE OPEN AND REALISTIC

WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “Care for everything honestly, not only in the sight of Jehovah but also in the sight of men.” (2 Corinthians 8:21) Be honest with your mate about how much you earn and spend.
Always consult your mate when making major decisions about your finances. (Proverbs 13:10) Communicating about money will help to maintain peace in your marriage. View your income, not as your personal money, but as family money.​—1 Timothy 5:8.





WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Agree on an amount that each of you can spend without having to consult the other

Do not wait until a problem arises before you talk about money





YOUR VIEW OF MONEY
Although money is important, do not allow it to disrupt your marriage or cause unnecessary anxiety. (Matthew 6:25-34) You do not need a lot of money to enjoy life. The Bible says: “Guard against every sort of greed.” (Luke 12:15) Nothing that money can buy is more precious than your marriage. So be content with what you have, and never neglect your relationship with God. If you do this, your family will be happy and you will have Jehovah’s approval.​—Hebrews 13:5.


ASK YOURSELF . . .
What can we do as a family to stay out of debt?

When was the last time my mate and I openly discussed our finances?




