From Our Readers
Color  Thank you for the article “Add Some Color to Your Life.” (October 8, 1990) The guidance given therein was excellent and helped me a great deal in my choice of clothing. I have difficulty matching colors, and I tended to wear only black and white. Now things will be different!
D. M. D., Brazil
Immune System  I am writing in appreciation for your articles on the immune system. (November 22, 1990) I studied immunology some time ago as part of my graduate studies requirements. How I wish my professor had been as explicit and graphic as you were. Truly a refresher course! Thanks for putting immunology in a nutshell.
O. O. O., United States
I just wanted to congratulate you for the best scientific article I’ve ever read on the immune system. I especially enjoyed “A Spiritual Immunity to the Moral Breakdown.” What insight!
R. K., United States
Afterschool Jobs  I am 17 years old and was glad to receive the article “Young People Ask . . . Will an Afterschool Job Help Me Grow Up?” (November 22, 1990) I took a job during summer vacation this year, as I wanted to learn about the adult world. I had to deal with an arrogant boss, unpleasant problems with fellow workers, and so on. If I had read this article earlier, I think I would have chosen to learn about life in a less painful way. I am so glad that you understand the needs of young people.
T. F., Japan
Eating Disorders  For seven years I’ve battled bulimia. I told my mother, and she said it was just a phase I would grow out of. Six months later I hadn’t grown out of it. So I confided in a couple of Christian women, and they checked up on me from time to time. I’ve had but one relapse since then. Having other persons for support is a major help, but the real motivation is the fear of displeasing my Friend, Jehovah. I’ve read many books on the subject, but your articles (December 22, 1990) were the clearest and dealt head-on with the disorder.
E. S., United States
By the time I was 13 years old, I had developed the habit of eating and vomiting. In less than an hour, I would eat an amount that would normally satisfy ten people. With the help of a professional counselor who specializes in eating disorders, I made changes. Now I am a baptized Witness of Jehovah. Thank you so much for giving us such well-researched and balanced articles regarding such complicated problems.
N. I., Japan
Global Brotherhood  At the beginning of November, my teacher asked us to write an essay on the subject “Should one civilization be judged superior to another?” The articles on global brotherhood (December 8, 1990) came just at the right time! My teacher asked me where I found my information, and I gave her the Awake! articles. I got a score of 18 points (out of 20) for this essay!
L. Q., France
Glaucoma  My mother-in-law came to see me and told me she was seeing blue and yellow colours and a halo round people’s faces. I found the article “Glaucoma​—Insidious Stealer of Sight!” (May 8, 1988) Because of this information, an early diagnosis was made, and my mother-in-law is now about to have treatment. How thankful I am for Awake!
G. S., England

