From Our Readers
Staying Chaste
Regarding your article “Young People Ask . . . Staying Chaste​—Is It Really Best?” (November 8, 1985), I give a profound yes to that question. In the past, I’ve been involved in a live-in arrangement because we both thought that we were in love. As a result, I have children born out of wedlock, and we have long since broken up. I totally agree with the Bible’s advice to flee from fornication. But I think that you are implying that in order to have a happy, successful marriage, you have to be a virgin. What about those of us who have made this awful mistake in the past but are willing to make our hearts and minds over according to Jehovah’s standards?
W. D., New York
There is no doubt that following God’s law on chastity before marriage is one of the best ways to ensure a successful marriage. However, this does not mean that those who have lost their chastity before marriage can never enjoy a happy marriage. It may be more difficult, involve more problems and sorrow, and require greater effort. Though God’s forgiveness does not remove the natural consequences of a person’s wrong actions, his forgiveness and blessing can help one to attain happiness. Read Psalm 103:8-14; 1 Corinthians 6:9-11.​—ED.
Regarding your article “Young People Ask . . . Staying Chaste​—Is It Really Best?” I sincerely hope single persons, especially younger ones, take it to heart. I have been married five years and though my husband considers me a wonderful wife, I secretly regret not having been a virgin for him. The opinion was ‘experience is best.’ My wanting to be so experienced resulted in four abortions, one miscarriage, all in four years, and several boyfriends. Needless to say, it was not a happy period in my life. Now I am happily married, but the loss of self-control in those younger years still plagues me. Believe it! Staying chaste is best.
S. M., Minnesota
Stanley Theater Restoration
I am amazed and discouraged at the article “A Historic Landmark Becomes an Assembly Hall for Jehovah’s Witnesses.” (October 22, 1985) Christ has told us to be lowly in mind and keep our eyes on simple things. I am disturbed to see the Witnesses spending their time and resources on such a project. Does this serve as an example to congregations around the world that they too should strive for stained glass, chandeliers, and adorned columns?
J. W., Tennessee
In order to use the building for assemblies, it had to be restored. What was done was to restore what was there, and this effort has created much goodwill in the community and support for our use of this building. Jehovah’s Witnesses do not design new meeting places or assembly halls to be so elaborate. As a matter of fact, in a general instruction to all congregations, it is stated: “It is recommended that Kingdom Halls be modest, suitable houses of worship, not extravagant in size or style, not wasteful of dedicated resources.” The same principle would apply to the building of assembly halls.​—ED.

