Are You Making Your Return Visits?
1 What a thrilling report of dynamic activity is presented in the 1989 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses! Millions of people have been hearing the good news and millions of pieces of literature have been placed with interested people. The report indicates a keen awareness of the need to call back where seeds of truth have been sown. (1 Cor. 3:6, 7) Further care is essential. Sharing fully in this work has brought great joy to Jehovah’s people, who made a total of 288,017,474 return visits last year.
WHEN?
2 When you locate interested people, do you make return visits before the initial interest cools off? Calling back within a few days often brings good results. Keep an accurate and complete record of all placements and the interest you find. Regularly review these records to see that all your return visits are made promptly. Your diligence and persistence will be blessed by Jehovah and will greatly benefit those who have shown interest.
3 Inclement weather in your area may make it more difficult to be out in the ministry in February. If so, why not spend more time making return visits and starting Bible studies? Are there people who have taken the magazines regularly and who may now be willing to study? One brother placed two magazines with a man but did not make a return visit, thinking he was not really interested. The man wrote a letter to the local congregation, asking for spiritual assistance. Many pioneers report that fine studies have resulted from following up magazine placements. Are there individuals who have attended the Memorial or other meetings on occasion who would like to study?
STARTING A STUDY
4 The Live Forever book has proved to be an effective instrument in our ministry. Placing it, however, is only the first step toward starting a study. On the initial call or when making a return visit, ask: “Have you ever thought about living forever? [Allow response.] Of course, many would not relish having to endure forever the suffering, violence, and hunger that plague so many at this time.” While turning to pages 11-13, you might ask: “But suppose you could live forever under conditions like these. Would that not be pleasurable? [Allow response.] Living forever under such perfect conditions requires something of us. Notice what paragraph 19 says. [Read.] Let me demonstrate how this book is designed to help you to take in such knowledge.”
5 Publishers are encouraged to leave tracts with individuals who may not accept the regular literature offer or where no one is at home. These can be effectively used on return visits to demonstrate our study method. Each tract discusses two or three points. Read one paragraph at a time with the householder. When a question is asked, stop and invite the householder to express himself. Look up and apply the scriptures cited.
6 Experience has shown that it is best to schedule set times for making return visits and developing and conducting studies. Having a definite time for this work will help us to follow up interest promptly. Perhaps time can be set aside in the evening, on the weekend, or after completing our house-to-house work. Determine the time that is best for you and for the territory. Then endeavor to share in this work regularly, so as to make disciples.​—Matt. 28:19, 20.

