Demonstrating Love for God and Neighbor
1 When answering one who asked: “Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the Law?” Jesus said: “‘You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind.’ This is the greatest and first commandment. The second, like it, is this, ‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’”​—Matt. 22:36-39.
2 Jesus’ deep love for God was evident in the way he lived his life. He said: “My food is for me to do the will of him that sent me and to finish his work.” (John 4:34) His genuine love for neighbor moved him to preach the good news of Jehovah’s Kingdom with zeal. He also performed acts of healing. And what a superlative display of love was seen in the giving of his life as a ransom in behalf of mankind! How can we imitate Jesus in demonstrating our love for God and neighbor?
HOW TO DEMONSTRATE LOVE
3 Telling others the good news of the Kingdom is a major way for us to do this. People need to be given a basis for hope and information to help them deal with these critical times. (2 Tim. 3:1) Our faith in God’s Kingdom should motivate us to speak about it with an earnest desire to give all an opportunity to hear the truth. Speaking the truth about God’s Kingdom and his purpose toward the earth honors him. Do we have such love for God and neighbor? Are we sharing fully in the work of Kingdom preaching? Do we take advantage of opportunities to witness informally to relatives, neighbors, and others? All of us must give such genuine evidence of our love for God and neighbor.
4 Some may have felt that only those who are skilled and well educated are really qualified to bear such an important message. Rather, it is our reliance on Jehovah that is important. (Luke 11:13; 1 Cor. 1:26, 29, 31) Love for God and neighbor will enable us to overcome negative feelings and find real joy in the ministry. When we realize that we are helping people described as being “skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd,” we no longer are overly concerned about ourselves.​—Matt. 9:35, 36.
HOW TO SHARE IN FEBRUARY
5 During the month of February, we have a fine opportunity to express our love for God and neighbor by offering some of the Society’s older books for a contribution of 50¢ each. These older publications feature a variety of subjects, some of which will no doubt appeal to various ones in our territory. These publications have already proved their worth in helping many people to respond to the good news. So if we have any of these books left in stock, we are encouraged to put forth a concerted effort to get them into the hands of interested people who can be helped onto the way of life.
6 Congregations that do not have older books in stock will be offering any other 192-page book. Special effort should be made to use all the older books that are on hand locally.
7 Be sure to keep good house-to-house records. As we cover our territory more frequently, this becomes more important. When interest is found, try to get the person’s name. Take note of all placements as well as interest shown when the literature offer was not accepted. Make note of what you talked about, what seemed to interest the individual, and the time he would most likely be at home. Also, keep a careful record of addresses where no one was at home. Good organization in this regard will contribute toward being more productive in the ministry.
8 Observing the two greatest commandments is no less important for Christians today than it was in the first century. May we strive to demonstrate our love for God and neighbor by announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom at every opportunity during the month of February!

