Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 6
Song 72
10 min: Local announcements. Include appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage all to share in magazine witnessing on Saturday. Suggest talking points from current magazines.
20 min: “Demonstrating Love for God and Neighbor.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Include brief demonstration featuring an appropriate subject from one of the older books. Or demonstrate how to offer one of the 192-page books being offered for the regular contribution of $1.
15 min: Help Youths Defend Their Faith. Two well-prepared demonstrations showing practical value and use of Reasoning book. Comment briefly on need to be prepared to meet objections and to answer sincere questions. (1) Have exemplary youth demonstrate use of material under “What is the origin of Valentine’s Day?” when speaking to a teacher. (pp. 181-2; g82 1/22 12) (2) Have parent reason with child on “What scriptures have always had a bearing on the attitude of true Christians toward ceremonies involving flags and national anthems?” (pp. 274-5) Emphasize need to be pleasing to Jehovah in all aspects of life and to preserve a good conscience.
Song 37 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 13
Song 49
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Theocratic News. Call attention to “Our Identification as Jehovah’s Witnesses.”
20 min: “Are You Making Your Return Visits?” Question-and-answer discussion of article. When considering paragraph 4, include demonstration of how to start a study using the Live Forever book.
15 min: “Into All the Earth Their Sound Went Out.” Enthusiastic talk based on pages 3-7 of the January 1, 1989, Watchtower. Show how we benefit from reports from other places.
Song 192 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 20
Song 39
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage support of magazine witnessing activity Saturday. Include brief magazine presentation featuring an article from The Watchtower or Awake!
20 min: “Prepare Now for Increased Activity Ahead.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Encourage setting goals and families’ working together to enjoy increased activity in the field ministry during March and April.
15 min: Question Box. Apply information to local needs and circumstances.
Song 44 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 27
Song 84
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to obtain adequate supply of Revelation Climax books and share in field ministry the first Sunday in March.
23 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With the New Offer.” Question-and-answer discussion. Read paragraphs as time permits. Feature a demonstration on both paragraphs 5 and 6. Use well-prepared publishers to make clear and simple presentations.
12 min: “Do You Remember?” Consider article in the December 15, 1988, Watchtower by audience participation. Give preference to questions that are field oriented.
Song 6 and concluding prayer.

