Prepare Now for Increased Activity Ahead
1 During harvesttime, those involved are busier than usual. And during a time of urgency, people exert themselves and move about more vigorously than usual. We are living in a harvesttime and a time of urgency. There is much to do. Have you been preparing to accomplish all that is required?​—Matt. 9:37, 38; 13:39; Luke 13:24; 1 Tim. 4:10.
THE MEMORIAL
2 The Memorial season is the most important time of the year for Jehovah’s people. This year the Memorial celebration will be held on Wednesday evening, March 22. Are you making necessary arrangements so that nothing will prevent you and your family from being in attendance? Have you been extending invitations to relatives and acquaintances so that they too can be in attendance? What about interested ones in your territory, your Bible students, and former Bible students?​—Luke 22:19; Rev. 22:17.
3 The elders usually arrange for a thorough cleaning of the Kingdom Hall before the Memorial so that all will be in readiness. Have arrangements been made for the Memorial speaker, the emblems and those who will serve them, as well as extra seating and sufficient attendants for this special occasion?
AN INCREASED SHARE IN THE FIELD SERVICE
4 The Memorial season reminds us of Jesus’ sacrifice in our behalf. Thus, it is an especially appropriate time for us to consider how to increase our activity in the field ministry. This is one of the ways to express our appreciation for Jehovah’s undeserved kindness through his Son.
5 Can you serve as an auxiliary pioneer during March or April, or during both months? These months, and also May, will feature an all-out campaign to publicize the powerful message of Revelation. March will mark our initial campaign with the Revelation Climax book, and surely all Kingdom publishers will want to expend themselves in this activity. The more favorable weather will be conducive to this. April has five weekends. What a grand opportunity to make magazine days of five Saturdays in succession, offering the colorful Watchtower issues on Babylon the Great! Of these, the April 15 Watchtower will contain the complete text of the forceful talk on “The Infamous Harlot” and the stirring resolution that followed at our “Divine Justice” conventions. What more incentive could we want to be busy on those five weekends, if possible as auxiliary pioneers, in giving this dynamic message the widest possible distribution! And to supplement this rousing message, the April 8 Awake! will set forth eye-opening articles on the Holocaust of the Nazi era.
6 Extra effort is needed in order to have an increased share in the field ministry. Even if you cannot pioneer, it would be appropriate to set a personal goal of hours for March and April. Could you arrange to have more time for the field ministry by cutting back on personal pursuits and recreation? Put forth the effort. Ask Jehovah to strengthen you and bless you. Those who have physical limitations may find that with the help of others, they too can have an added share in this campaign.
7 For all of us, March and April should be a very busy time in Jehovah’s service. The elders will be diligent to have everything well organized. Literature needs should be determined and orders placed well in advance. Make sure extra magazines, especially the April 15 Watchtower, are available. Arrange for territory, and make plans to cover it thoroughly. Have appropriate arrangements for field service, including evening witnessing. As we earnestly pray for Jehovah’s blessing, let us make wise use of the time to his praise.

