Presenting the Good News​—With the New Offer
1 Sincere Bible students have for centuries desired to understand the book of Revelation. Since 1917, when The Finished Mystery was released, several books have been published by the Society to help God-fearing people understand this Bible book. Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand! provides the clearest and most comprehensive explanation to date of the inspired Bible book of Revelation.
2 Jehovah’s people especially have a keen interest in Revelation, with its fascinating visions of “things that must shortly take place.” (Rev. 1:1) So it was with great joy and appreciation that we received the new Revelation Climax book at the “Divine Justice” District Convention. Have you been reading your copy? During the month of March, we will have opportunity to present this new book to all we meet.
FEATURES APPRECIATED
3 Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand! is especially appreciated because it gives a verse-by-verse discussion of the entire book of Revelation. This will prove to be invaluable for personal study and in teaching others.
4 No doubt your attention was captured by the book’s striking illustrations. They are a great aid in visualizing the symbolisms described by John. Use these illustrations effectively when presenting the book in the field service. Although we want to feature the Kingdom blessings in presenting the good news, we also need to help interested people appreciate the urgent message from Jesus Christ found in the book of Revelation. As the speaker at the district convention urged: “Use this new book . . . in announcing to the world that Babylon the Great is doomed, that the nations now face Armageddon, and that the grand climax will be reached in Jehovah’s magnificent Kingdom rule by Christ and his bride.”
WHAT WILL YOU SAY?
5 After introducing yourself, you might say: “Many have wished they could understand the book of Revelation. Of great consequence is ‘the hour of the judgment’ mentioned at Revelation 14:7. [Read.] It may greatly surprise you to find out who it is that has received an adverse judgment by God. [Read Revelation 18:2a, 4.] Have you ever heard the expression ‘Babylon the Great’? [Allow for reply.] What is it referring to, and what is it that we need to get out of? [Display Revelation Climax book.] What makes this book so interesting and so helpful is that it provides enlightening comments on each verse in the Bible book of Revelation. The information presented in chapters 33-38 identifies Babylon the Great and tells of its imminent destruction. [Highlight a specific reference or picture in the publication.] This information will be of great value in helping you and your loved ones to take steps to gain God’s favor, thus avoiding the fate of Babylon the Great. I encourage you to accept a copy of this book, Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand!, for just $3.”
6 To make a brief presentation, some may choose to read Revelation 18:4 and then turn to the picture on page 241, stating that the book explains what Babylon the Great pictures, what the beast pictures, and why it is so important for us to heed God’s warning concerning them. Newer or less experienced publishers could explain the picture on page 302, using Revelation 21:4 as quoted on page 303.
7 Your introduction and the points you feature can be varied according to circumstances and by using the scriptures and information under “Babylon the Great,” on pages 49, 52, and 53 of the Reasoning book.
8 We love Jehovah and we love our neighbor. This moves us to declare God’s judgment message. While Babylon the Great must be exposed further, honesthearted ones must be given the opportunity to ‘come out of her’ and take a firm stand for the truth. To that end we raise our voices in unison, saying “Come!” to those who are thirsting for “life’s water.”​—Rev. 22:17.

