Question Box
● How should meetings for field service be conducted?
The meeting for field service is an established congregation arrangement. It should be orderly and conducted with dignity. The attitude and decorum of those attending should be the same as when attending other congregation meetings. The meeting should start on time even when it is known that others will be coming later. The one assigned to conduct the meeting should be prepared to present something practical that can be used that day in service. Our Kingdom Ministry provides useful information and suggestions for this meeting.
It is not necessary to discuss the daily text at each meeting. If the text for that day obviously provides a basis for giving encouragement in field service, it may be considered briefly. The meeting should be held early enough to allow spending the full scheduled time in the field. It should be only 10 to 15 minutes in length. However, it may be shorter if it follows a regular congregation meeting. The schedule of the pioneers should be taken into consideration, since prolonged or late meetings for field service may place a burden on those who have to hold closely to a time schedule.
Arrangements should be made for everyone present to have an assigned place to work. Of course, some may have made personal arrangements to engage in return-visit or Bible-study activity and will not need to be given an assignment of territory to work.
All present should be attentive and cooperate throughout the meeting until the field groups have been made up and prayer has been offered. Those who have already made arrangements can make this known. Specific assignments of groups and territories should be completed before concluding the meeting for field service​—not in the parking lot or at some other public place. The meeting for field service should be closed with prayer. We can confidently expect Jehovah’s greater blessing on the preaching work for that day if all concerned adhere to these suggestions.

