Follow Through
1 No doubt during the current subscription campaign you have accumulated the names and addresses of a number of persons who indicated a willingness to accept the Watchtower subscription at some future time. Why not gather these names together and set aside some time to call before the end of April so those who have expressed interest will be receiving The Watchtower for the coming year?
2 When making such calls you can rekindle the interest by means of a brief presentation such as the following: “When I called previously inviting you to receive the Watchtower magazine regularly through the mail, you indicated you would like to subscribe at a later time. In view of the important information contained in each issue of The Watchtower for yourself and your family, I made a special effort to return. At Matthew 4:4 Jesus indicated that man must not live on bread alone, thus emphasizing that the spiritual food found in Jehovah’s Word is vital. The Watchtower magazine is especially designed to fill that need, and I will be happy to see that you begin receiving it through the mail. You may recall that you will receive 24 copies during the year for only $1.”
3 There are many others who obtained subscriptions last year and who have not renewed. The congregation has received subscription-expiration slips for these. Prompt follow-through can cause them to renew their interest and their subscription. It is well to tell them that you are calling on former subscribers because you believe that they have appreciation for spiritual values. Generally you can discuss with them the current sermon and show them articles they will enjoy if they will renew their subscription now. Whether they renew or not, try to upbuild them spiritually and, if possible, encourage them to have a home Bible study.
4 In following through, help people to see the advantage of having something faith-strengthening from Jehovah’s Word coming into their homes on a regular basis. Let’s take advantage of every opportunity to obtain subscriptions in this final month of the campaign.

