From Our Readers
Abortion
I am a ten-year-old deaf boy. I saw in Awake! a picture of a doctor and a lady, and the doctor said: ‘You must have an abortion’ (to kill a baby). When I was in my mother’s tummy a doctor also wanted to kill me because my mother had German measles. My mother said, “No, no, no!” I am so happy I am not dead. I am only deaf. God is also happy. I pray to Jehovah to help me to be good so that I can live in the “new earth.” Then I will throw my hearing aids in the water.
C. H., South Africa
Depression
I was just given a copy of Awake! I found the articles on depression extremely well done and would like either your permission to duplicate them or opportunity to purchase some of these reprints so I may distribute them to some of my patients.
K. P., MD, Florida
I very much appreciate your articles on major depression. I asked the head of the Psychiatric Unit of our hospital to read them. He said: “These articles on depression are excellent​—very broad coverage and well researched. It’s rare to see such clear explanation.”
M. W. L., Canada
Young People Ask
The “Young People Ask . . . ” articles hold my attention from start to finish and have strengthened my faith in God. I like this series very much and I encourage you to continue to publish more of them.
P. P., Italy
Teaches About God
Though I am not a member of your congregation, I am much interested in reading Awake! because it teaches about God and man, plants and birds, and things happening in different parts of the world. I will not cease to say that it is very helpful and teaches the truth about human error.
F. U., Nigeria
20th-Century Woman
I have just finished reading “The 20th-Century Woman​—Her Problems, Her Prospects.” For the first time in my life I can truly say I understand some of the problems men put women through. I only wish I could have had this knowledge earlier. It would have saved my marriage. There are many women that I have wronged in my life. And at this time I am serving a fifteen-year prison sentence for being involved in the “world’s oldest profession.” I can only pray that God will forgive me.
D. L. S., State Prison, Arizona
Crossword Puzzles
My name is Sandra and I am eleven years old. I would like to thank you for the instructive crossword puzzles. They remind a person of Bible names and expressions that otherwise are easily forgotten. Also, I am always filled with enthusiasm by articles about animals.
S. S., Germany

