A Special Announcement
AT THE conclusion of the annual meeting of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania on October 7, 2000, a special announcement was made by the chairman, John E. Barr of the Governing Body. This announcement built further on discourses given earlier that day by Theodore Jaracz and Daniel Sydlik.​—See pages 12-16 and 28-31 of this magazine.
Making a very significant point, Brother Barr stated: “‘The faithful and discreet slave’ and its Governing Body have had entrusted to them interests that are higher and far more encompassing than those granted to legal corporations. Set out in the chartered purposes of each of such entities are matters that are limited in their scope. Our Master, Jesus Christ, however, has appointed the faithful slave class over all his ‘belongings,’ or Kingdom interests here on earth.”​—Matthew 24:45-47.
Concerning the Pennsylvania corporation, Brother Barr added: “Ever since its incorporation in 1884, the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania has played an important role in our modern-day history. Still, it is merely a legal instrument available for use by ‘the faithful and discreet slave’ when it is necessary.”
In their discourses, Brothers Sydlik and Jaracz had explained that the fact that “the faithful and discreet slave” has been entrusted with all of the Lord’s earthly belongings does not prevent the slave class from allowing qualified men from among the “other sheep” to care for certain routine administrative responsibilities. (John 10:16) Nor is there any Scriptural reason to insist that all or any of the directors of the legal entities used by Jehovah’s Witnesses be anointed Christians.
Brother Barr told the audience that recently certain members of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses who had been serving as directors and officers voluntarily stepped aside from the boards of directors of all the corporations used by “the faithful and discreet slave” in the United States. Responsible brothers of the other sheep class were elected as replacements.
This decision is beneficial indeed. It allows members of the Governing Body to spend more time in preparing spiritual food and in otherwise caring for the spiritual needs of the worldwide brotherhood.
In conclusion, the chairman told his delighted audience: “While various legal and administrative duties have been assigned to experienced overseers, . . . all of them serve under the spiritual direction of the Governing Body. . . . All of us prayerfully look to Jehovah for his blessing upon our united efforts in doing his will, to the honor and glory of his great name.”

