Doers of God’s Word Find Happiness
“We recognize this convention as another of Jehovah’s provisions to prepare us for further Kingdom activity,” said one of the speakers early in the “Doers of God’s Word” District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses. He continued: “We have prepared ourselves to be instructed about happy family life, to be encouraged to stay close to Jehovah’s organization, to be motivated to maintain our zeal in Kingdom service, and to be reminded of the need to keep on the watch.”
SINCE late May 2000, millions of doers of God’s word and their friends flocked to thousands of locations around the world to receive vital Bible education. What did they learn during the three-day convention?
Day One​—Not Forgetting Jehovah’s Doings
In the opening talk, the chairman invited the audience to experience the blessings that come from unified worship of Jehovah at conventions. All in attendance were assured that their faith would be increased and that their personal relationship with Jehovah would be strengthened.
“The happy God” knows what we need for our individual happiness. (1 Timothy 1:11) Thus, the talk “Doing God’s Will Brings Happiness” stressed that Jehovah’s Word, the Bible, outlines the best way of living. (John 13:17) A number of interviews with longtime Witnesses of Jehovah showed how doing God’s will under varied circumstances adds meaning to our lives. The next talk, “Become Radiant Over the Goodness of Jehovah,” emphasized that, as “imitators of God,” Christians want to produce “every sort of goodness” in their lives. (Ephesians 5:1, 9) One outstanding way to do this is by preaching the good news and making disciples.​—Psalm 145:7.
The discussion “Continue Steadfast as Seeing the One Who Is Invisible” showed how strong faith helps us to “see” the invisible God. The speaker described how spiritual people are aware of God’s qualities, including his ability to know even what we think. (Proverbs 5:21) Those interviewed related the steps they have taken in order to develop stronger faith and put spiritual interests first in their lives.
The morning session ended with the keynote address, “Praise Jehovah​—The Doer of Wonderful Things.” It helped the audience appreciate that the more we learn about Jehovah, the more reasons we find to praise him as the Doer of wonderful things. The speaker said: “As we contemplate God’s marvelous works of creation along with all the wonderful things he is doing for us right now, heartfelt appreciation moves us to praise him. As we meditate on the miraculous things he has done in behalf of his people in times past, we want to praise him. And as we contemplate the promises of wonderful things Jehovah will yet do, we also search for ways to express appreciation.”
The afternoon session began with the talk “Do Not Give Up in Doing What Is Fine,” which reminded all in the audience that the pressures of this world confirm that the end is near. (2 Timothy 3:1) By not giving up, however, we can prove that we are “the sort that have faith to the preserving alive of the soul.”​—Hebrews 10:39.
What Bible counsel was offered regarding family life? The first symposium of the convention​—“Be Obedient to God’s Word”—​began with the part “In Selecting a Marriage Mate.” Selection of a marriage mate is one of the most serious decisions people make. Thus, Christians want to wait to get married until they are mature, and they are to marry “only in the Lord.” (1 Corinthians 7:39) The next part of the symposium discussed Jehovah’s desire that all Christian families succeed as strong spiritual units, and it offered practical ways in which this can be accomplished. The final part reminded parents that teaching their children to love God begins with the parents’ love for him.
The points presented in the talk “Beware of Rumors and Gossip” helped all to see that although amazing things do happen, we should react wisely, not gullibly, when we hear sensational reports. Christians are better off speaking about what they know to be true​—the Kingdom good news. Many found the next talk, “Coping With ‘a Thorn in the Flesh,’” very comforting and uplifting. It helped them see that despite the ongoing trials we may face, Jehovah can strengthen us by means of his holy spirit, his Word, and our Christian brotherhood. Much encouragement was derived from the personal experience of the apostle Paul in this regard.​—2 Corinthians 12:7-10; Philippians 4:11, 13.
The first day ended with the talk “Keeping in Step With Jehovah’s Organization.” Three areas in which God’s organization has particularly moved ahead were considered: (1) the increasing comprehension of spiritual light from Jehovah, (2) the ministry that God has entrusted to us, and (3) the timely adjustments in organizational procedures. Then the speaker confidently stated: “We are excited about the prospects ahead.” He asked: “Can there be any doubt that we have every reason to keep the confidence we had at first firm right down to the end?” (Hebrews 3:14) The answer was obvious. That led to the release of a new brochure entitled You Can Be God’s Friend! It will serve as a powerful teaching aid to help individuals with limited education or reading ability to learn about Jehovah.
Day Two​—Keep Telling About God’s Wonderful Works
After a consideration of the daily text, the second day of the convention continued with the symposium “Ministers of God’s Word.” The first part drew attention to the present success of our global preaching work. Our endurance in this work, however, is challenged by the majority, who reject the Kingdom message. A number of longtime publishers explained how they have maintained their joy in the ministry by fortifying their mind and heart to meet the challenge of apathy or opposition. The second part reminded the conventioners that Jehovah’s Witnesses strive to reach people everywhere, both formally and informally. And the last part described the broad spectrum of ways in which all Christians can expand their personal ministry. The speaker stressed that in order to do this, we should give God’s Kingdom top priority, even if doing so involves inconvenience and self-denial.​—Matthew 6:19-21.
Since we live in an ungodly world saturated with an insatiable craving for material things, the talk “Cultivate Godly Devotion With Self-Sufficiency” was very timely. Basing some of his comments on 1 Timothy 6:6-10, 18, 19, the speaker showed how godly devotion helps Christians to avoid the love of money, which can lead them astray and cause many pains. He stressed that whatever our economic situation, happiness depends on our relationship with Jehovah and on our spiritual well-being. Many were deeply moved by the points presented in the talk “Giving God No Cause for Shame.” The fact that Jehovah never forgets his faithful Witnesses was emphasized. The peerless example of Jesus Christ​—who “is the same yesterday and today, and forever”—​will help many to continue running the race for life with endurance.​—Hebrews 13:8.
Closing the morning session was the baptism talk​—always a highlight at large gatherings of Jehovah’s Witnesses. What a joy to see newly dedicated ones follow in Jesus’ footsteps by submitting to water baptism! (Matthew 3:13-17) All who take this step have already accomplished much as doers of God’s word. Moreover, when baptized they become ordained ministers of the good news, deriving much joy from knowing that they are sharing in sanctifying Jehovah’s name.​—Proverbs 27:11.
Pointed counsel was given in the talk “Maturity Needed ‘to Distinguish Both Right and Wrong.’” Worldly standards of right and wrong are woefully inadequate. We therefore need to rely on Jehovah’s standards. (Romans 12:2) All were encouraged to work hard to gain an accurate understanding of God’s ways and to grow to maturity. Then, with practice our perceptive powers will be trained “to distinguish both right and wrong.”​—Hebrews 5:11-14.
Next came the symposium “Work Hard at Cultivating Spirituality.” True Christians recognize the importance of developing and maintaining spirituality. This involves hard work​—reading, studying, and meditating. (Matthew 7:13, 14; Luke 13:24) Spiritual people also carry on “every form of prayer and supplication.” (Ephesians 6:18) We realize that our prayers reveal the depth of our faith and devotion, the level of our spirituality, as well as what we view as “the more important things.” (Philippians 1:10) The importance of developing a warm, loving relationship with Jehovah like that enjoyed by an obedient child with a kind father was also stressed. We do not simply have a religion​—although it is the true one—​but we want to build strong faith, ‘as seeing God.’​—Hebrews 11:6, 27.
The subject of spiritual progress was further discussed in the talk “Make Your Advancement Manifest.” Three areas of such advancement were considered: (1) increasing in knowledge, understanding, and wisdom, (2) producing the fruitage of God’s spirit, and (3) discharging our responsibilities as family members.
At the close of the day’s final talk, “Walking in the Progressive Light of God’s Word,” conventioners were delighted to receive a new book, Isaiah’s Prophecy​—Light for All Mankind I. This is the first of two volumes treating the Bible book of Isaiah chapter by chapter. “The book of Isaiah has a message for us today,” noted the speaker. He continued: “Yes, many of its prophecies were fulfilled back in the days of Isaiah. . . . However, many of Isaiah’s prophecies are undergoing fulfillment today, and some will be fulfilled in God’s promised new world.”
Day Three​—Be Doers of Jehovah’s Word
The final day of the convention started with a discussion of the day’s text. Then came the symposium “Zephaniah’s Meaningful Prophecy for Those Doing God’s Will.” The three talks of this symposium showed that, as he did in the days of wayward Judah, Jehovah will bring distress upon those who now refuse to heed his warning. Because they sin against God, they will walk about as helpless as blind men, unable to find deliverance. True Christians, however, faithfully keep seeking Jehovah, and they will be concealed in the day of God’s anger. Moreover, they enjoy many blessings even now. They have the blessed opportunity to speak the “pure language” of Bible truth. (Zephaniah 3:9) The speaker noted: “Speaking the pure language involves not only believing the truth and teaching it to others but also harmonizing our conduct with God’s laws and principles.”
Conventioners eagerly awaited the drama “Warning Examples for Our Day.” This full-costume drama showed how thousands of Israelites lost their lives at the border of the Promised Land because they forgot Jehovah and were seduced by pagan women into fornication and false worship. One of the main characters​—Jamin—​was initially torn between the allure of the Moabite women and his devotion to Jehovah. The false reasoning and deceptive thinking of ungodly Zimri came prominently to the fore, as did the faith and devotion of Phinehas. The danger of becoming involved with those who do not love Jehovah was vividly portrayed.
The drama set the tone for the follow-up talk, “Do Not Become Forgetful Hearers.” An analysis of 1 Corinthians 10:1-10 showed that Jehovah tests our obedience to determine our worthiness to receive an inheritance in the new world. For some, fleshly desires crowd out spiritual goals even now, close to our entry into the new system. All were encouraged not to forfeit the opportunity to ‘enter into Jehovah’s rest.’​—Hebrews 4:1.
The public discourse was on the subject “Why Be Attentive to God’s Wonderful Works.” Jehovah’s “wonderful works” demonstrate his wisdom and his authority over the physical creation all around us. (Job 37:14) A number of searching questions from Jehovah were enough to impress Job with the power of the almighty Creator. Jehovah will also do future “wonderful works” in behalf of his faithful servants. The speaker concluded: “We have abundant reason to give attention to Jehovah’s wonderful works​—what he has done in the past, what he is doing around us in creation today, and what he promises to do in the near future.”
Following a summary of the Watchtower study article for the week, the final talk of the convention was presented. Entitled “Highly Esteem Your Privilege as a Doer of God’s Word,” this stirring discourse stressed that it is an honor to be doers of God’s word. (James 1:22) The audience was reminded that our privilege as doers of God’s word is unique, and the longer we exercise it, the more highly we will esteem it. All in attendance were encouraged to reflect the beneficial stimulation of this district convention in their desire to be doers of God’s word to the fullest extent. That is the only way to experience the greatest happiness possible.
[Box/​Picture on page 25]
You Can Be God’s Friend!
  On Friday afternoon a new brochure entitled You Can Be God’s Friend! was released. There is a great need for simplified Bible education in many parts of the world, and this brochure will be used to fill that need. It will be a great blessing to people with limited education or reading ability.
[Box/​Pictures on page 26]
Isaiah’s Prophecy​—Light for All Mankind
  Conventioners were thrilled to receive Volume I of the two-volume set Isaiah’s Prophecy​—Light for All Mankind. In this publication, emphasis has been placed on the practical value of Isaiah’s prophecy for our day.

