How Do You View the “Field”?
1 Jesus said, “The field is the world.” It is a tremendous area in which the preaching of the Kingdom good news is being done. From a small beginning in 1919, the faithful anointed remnant has worked vigorously during this harvest period and has not passed up any opportunity to spread the preaching into more remote parts of the field. Now the people in 207 lands have the good news readily available to them.​—Matt. 13:38.
2 To you, the individual Kingdom publisher, your part of the “field” is your congregation territory, or more specifically, the small section assigned to you. How do you view it? As a “territory” on a map, to be covered or worked? Or do you view it as a community of people, living souls who have their individual affections, hopes, desires, sorrows and needs, and who want to live, not die? Do you view them as creations of God, sprung from one made originally in God’s image and likeness, creatures whom He dearly loves and to whom even in this late hour he is still holding out the opportunity of salvation?​—John 3:16.
3 Do you have the feeling that God and his Son have toward the people in your community? God said of Nineveh: “Ought I not to feel sorry for Nineveh the great city, in which there exist more than one hundred and twenty thousand men who do not at all know the difference between their right hand and their left?” And of Jesus’ attitude toward the people of Israel to whom he preached it is recorded: “On seeing the crowds he felt pity for them, because they were skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd.” His love for them prompted him to express the need of prayer for more workers in the field.​—Jonah 4:11; Matt. 9:36-38.
4 Even though you often meet indifference, and sometimes rebuffs or opposition, do you appreciate that these people are often ignorantly working against their best interests? Do you maintain your good spirit, knowing that you are looking for sheeplike ones and that Jehovah will ‘open wide the hearts of such ones to pay attention’ to the good news you bring, just as he opened the heart of Lydia of Philippi?​—Acts 16:14.
5 If you have the proper motive and spirit, people will see it or sense it, and it will attract persons with right hearts. Even some who oppose will ‘soften’ in heart as you are observed sincerely and consistently calling on all in the neighborhood.
6 If you do everything you can to give the good news the widest possible proclamation you will find results you never expected. For often, persons who have not given you a favorable ear will hear the good news through neighbors, friends or relatives who have granted you a reception when you visited their homes. You will experience the truth of the proverb: “Send out your bread upon the surface of the waters, for in the course of many days you will find it again,” and of Jesus’ words: “Practice giving, and people will give to you. They will pour into your laps a fine measure, pressed down, shaken together and overflowing.”​—Eccl. 11:1; Luke 6:38.
7 Above all, if you show diligence, real earnestness and interest in people by preaching the good news everywhere, Jehovah, who loves mankind, will love you for your interest in his “sheep” and will bless your good work. Perhaps you will not see the fullness of his blessing immediately. But keep in mind that the promises of Jehovah are sure. “Let us not give up in doing what is fine, for in due season we shall reap if we do not tire out.”​—Gal. 6:9.

