Presenting the Good News​—A Bible Society
1 Do the people on whom you call know that you represent a Bible society? There might be times when it would be beneficial to mention it. It could provide you with a fine opportunity to give an additional witness.
2 This month, for example, we are offering the New World Translation and the Great Teacher book for $1.25. So, this is really a Bible month. But suppose the householder, for some reason, is not interested in this offer but still indicates an interest in the Bible, possibly even one of the older translations. Why not mention that we might have what he wants? We have the King James Version for $1.00 per copy and the American Standard Version for $1.50. We also provide the Kingdom Interlinear Translation and the Diaglott at $2.00 each, either of which can be of great help to one who wishes to examine more closely the Christian Greek Scriptures in the original language. Then, not to overlooked is the excellent large-print New World Translation for $5.00.
3 If we keep these thoughts in mind it will provide an opportunity to render a service that undoubtedly will be appreciated. Also a further discussion might result when delivery is made. If a person wants a Bible, no matter what version he prefers, it is an indication of interest in God’s Word of truth. Thus an opening is presented for cultivating that interest in the right direction, helping the person really to understand the Bible.
4 In some instances you might find it appropriate to mention that we have the book Aid to Bible Understanding. In this case you could take along your own copy on return visits and Bible studies, showing the interested ones the helpful features of this book. As mentioned in the March Kingdom Ministry, it would be good for congregations to have one copy of each of these large volumes, the large-print Bible and the book Aid to Bible Understanding, on their bookshelves, even though these books are cash items. There is no reason to carry more than one or two copies, depending on the size of the congregation and the rate of placement. If someone gets an order, delivery can be made the following week by getting the copy that is on hand at the literature counter. Then the literature servant can order another one to replace it. In that way the Bible student would not have to wait so long for the new publication.
5 While we have different literature offers during the year, we can keep alert to what householders and interested persons say and in what they indicate an interest. Then we can mention these different Bibles and study aids as the occasion suggests. Let the people know that you represent a Bible society and that you want to help them in any way you can to get acquainted with the “sayings of everlasting life.”​—John 6:68.

