Showing Thankfulness for Truth
1 Where can truth be found? Jesus said, “You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” We, as Jehovah’s witnesses and disciples of Jesus, know that the vital truth Jesus was talking about can be found only in God’s Word. It contains the sayings of everlasting life. “Your word is truth,” was the testimony of Jesus in prayer to his heavenly Father. Yet, we also know that the vast majority of people living in the world have not been set free by the truth. They are yet in bondage to this world and the “ruler of the world,” Satan the Devil, despite the fact that the Bible has the greatest circulation of any book in the world. In Christendom, practically every home has at least one copy. But understanding it is a different matter. We want people to understand it and find the truth that leads to life.​—John 8:32; 17:3, 17.
2 During June Jehovah’s people will appropriately be featuring copies of God’s Word as they present the good news. Even if some have older translations of the Bible, perhaps we can rekindle their interest in the Bible’s message by placing the modern New World Translation with them; and, if they have children, or have relatives or friends who have children, we will give them the opportunity to obtain copies of Listening to the Great Teacher. They will be placed together for $1.25. Don’t you agree that it is a very fine privilege to be bringing God’s Word to the people, and this at such a small cost? No one has a really valid excuse for not reading it and learning the truth that gives real freedom and puts him on the road that leads to life.
3 In nearly every home there are children. Even if parents have not taken too much interest in Bible-related matters in recent years, perhaps we can reach them through their children by means of the Great Teacher book. Most will recognize the importance of imparting to their children some training and background knowledge rooted in the Bible. Let’s take advantage of this and show them how to study with their children, as we skillfully use this approach to encourage the parents to join the study. In starting a study, we will keep things simple so the children will understand, but always directing things in such a way as to kindle the interest and curiosity of the parents. Later we may be able to start a study in the Truth book with the parents.
4 While we will be quite busy during June preparing for the district assemblies, most of which will be in July and August, we want to keep busy in the preaching work, too. Did it not make you happy to learn that close to 150,000 throughout the world were baptized last year? There are still sheeplike persons in our territory. Jehovah has not yet closed the door of opportunity. Many are fleeing from Babylon the Great and some of these are “sighing and groaning” because of what they have seen in Christendom, which claims to represent God. If we are out preaching and are alert to start studies in order to teach these sincere ones, we can be assured that Jehovah will bless our efforts to share in the ingathering work.
5 You young publishers of God’s truth will soon be finishing your current school term, and you will have more time for other things. Now, what will you be doing with this extra time? Really, this is a marvelous opportunity to show how much you appreciate the truth. It is something to think about, for how many summers are left before the “great tribulation” strikes? Not many. So why not use some of the extra time in a way that shows God how deeply you appreciate his truth? There is opportunity to do more personal Bible study and to share more fully in the field service. Could you vacation pioneer during at least part of the vacation period?
6 How thankful we are that we have found the truth! Do you feel like Andrew, who exclaimed to his brother Peter, “We have found the Messiah,” and led him to Jesus? (John 1:41 ) Do you feel as do “the twenty-four elders” who say to Jehovah, ‘We thank you because you have taken your great power and begun ruling as king’? (Rev. 11:16, 17) Then you will want to tell out the truth to all who will hear.
[Blurb on page 1]
Vindicate God by integrity to him.

