Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JUNE 11
Theme: Let Men Know the Truth.​—John 8:32. Song 95.
13 min: Introduction, text and comments. Discuss Branch Letter and Theocratic News.
20 min: “Showing Thankfulness for the Truth.” Question-and-answer discussion. In discussing paragraph 2, demonstrate presentation of offer. Publishers may want to build presentation of “New World Translation” around a Scripture text such as John 17:3 or 2 Timothy 3:14-17. Another presentation can feature “Great Teacher” book.
10 min: “Presenting the Good News.” Talk and discussion with audience. Receive suggestions from audience as to how the various Bibles and special aids can be used to help interested ones in the congregation’s territory.
17 min: Concluding comments. (Include how congregation did in field ministry during May.) Discuss article in June 15, 1972, “Watchtower” on “How Does Your Status with God Affect Your Children?” Song 97.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 18
Theme: Let Faith Move You to Obedient Action. Song 78.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
12 min: “Generosity Begets Generosity.” Talk on article in May 15, 1972, issue of “The Watchtower.” Include appropriate comments on how the congregation is doing in meeting its financial obligations.
13 min: “Assembly Time Is Here!” Questions and answers. As time permits, include practical points from June 15, 1970, issue of “The Watchtower,” pages 380-382. Emphasize importance of letting love govern our conduct and relations with others.
17 min: Placing and Using the “Great Teacher” Book.
(12 min.) Demonstrate starting of study in “Great Teacher” book after placement on first call. Publisher has just placed book with parents of three children. He now offers to show parents how to study “Great Teacher” book with children. They read together pages 5 and 6 and discuss the procedure employed in the book for involving the children by means of questions. Then the study is demonstrated by going into Chapter 1, mentioning that it is just a short four pages. At the end of the study they read from the “New World Translation” the Scripture texts cited at the end of the chapter. Arrangements are made to return for further discussion next week.
(5 min.) Chairman briefly discusses other ways “Great Teacher” book can be featured: Grandparents and others can give copies of it as gifts to child relatives, if no children are now in home; or gifts can be made to children of close friends. This may be just the way to reach a certain family you know. If person has poor education, book can be used to help him learn truth, as well as to improve his reading and comprehension. Sometimes might show book to young person if parents are not at home, and then return to see parents later. Offering book in street witnessing is also effective. Take advantage of all opportunities to place the “Great Teacher” book and the “New World Translation.”
13 min: Concluding comments. Discuss “Question Box,” also “Questions from Readers” in June 1, 1972, “Watchtower.” Song 92.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 25
Theme: “Become Kind to One Another.”​—Eph. 4:32. Song 37.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: Offer the “Truth” Book in July. Has everyone in your territory had the opportunity to get the “Truth” book? To make sure, we will make a special effort to cover all the territory in July with this fine Bible study aid. Where you find that individuals already have it, you might want to offer either the “Great Teacher” or “Evolution” book. Of course, you will want to be alert to start studies in the “Truth” book where they have it already. The important thing is that they have in their hands an instrument that will hold their attention and help them to learn the truth. One publication may interest them more than another. Hence, in addition to taking along with you a good supply of the “Truth” book, take along several copies of the other two books as alternative offers.
30 min: The Godly Quality of Kindness. (“Aid,” pp. 993-995) By means of the following questions, help the audience to see why it is important to cultivate kindness. It will not be necessary to have all the scriptures read. Be sure, however, that the key points in the texts used are made clear. Time the discussion so that each question gets a fair share of the time allotted. (a) What is kindness? (“Aid,” p. 993, par. 12) (b) What is undeserved kindness? (Rom. 4:4; “Aid,” pp. 994, 995) (c) Why should those wanting God’s approval reflect kindness? (Job 6:14; Mic. 6:8; Gal. 5:22) (d) What should motivate us to express kindness? (Matt. 6:1-4; 1 Cor. 13:4) (e) How can kindness help us in our attitude toward our own family members who may offend us? (Eph. 4:32; Col. 3:12, 13) (f) What reasoning respecting Jehovah’s undeserved kindness can help us to resist temptation? (Gal. 2:20, 21; Eph. 1:7; 2 Cor. 6:1) (g) Why is it foolish to presume on God’s undeserved kindness by engaging in loose conduct? (Jude 4-7) (h) How do young folks in the world often show a lack of kindness toward others of their own age? In what way can Christian youths show kindness to those of their age group? to older persons? (Rom. 3:13, 14; 1 Tim. 5:1, 2) (i) Why will appreciation of Jehovah’s undeserved kindness move us to be diligent in declaring the good news? (Acts 20:24; 1 Cor. 15:10) (j) Why is kindness so very important within one’s own family? How can a husband show it toward his wife? a wife toward her husband? (Prov. 31:26; 1 Pet. 3:1-7)
10 min: Concluding comments. Song 56.
WEEK STARTING JULY 2
Theme: Heartily Praise Jehovah in Assemblies. Song 82.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: “Singapore Suppresses Christian Minority.” Talk based on article in June 1, 1972, “Watchtower.” Discuss what has happened in Singapore and outline arrangements for brothers to write letters in behalf of our brothers in Singapore. With this being assembly season, all have busy schedule. In addition to publishers making individual arrangements, perhaps servants can make arrangements for several group efforts to get letters written and sent to the officials named in the article.​—1 Cor. 12:26.
15 min: “Have You Taught Your Children to Work?” Talk and interviews based on article in May 8, 1972, “Awake!” In making practical points, interview parents and children who have been applying these in a home training schedule regularly with good results.
15 min: “How Do You View the ‘Field’?” Questions and answers. Invite audience to look up Scripture texts cited and quoted in article and to comment on them.
10 min: Concluding comments. Include few comments on theme for month of July, “Heartily Praise Jehovah in Assemblies.” Song 64.

