VOL. XXXV MAY 15 No. 10 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Giants In These Days 147 

A Show of Great Strength 148 



The Death Struggle Near 148 

Trials Essential to Development of Character 149 

A Word of Warning 150 

Causes Inducing a Fall 150 

"The Israel of God" 151 

The Church's Two-Fold Office 151 

What Constitute Good Works 152 

Expiation of Sin— Adamic and Partially 
Wilful 153 

Jewish Age Reckoning 153 

Legal Expiation by Scape-Goat Class 154 

Jesus Alone the Ransomer 154 

The Friend of Sinners 155 

Two Salvations— One Savior 156 

Difficulties of the Rich 157 

A Camel Through a Needle's Eye 157 

An Interesting Question 158 

Some Interesting Letters 159 

Berean Bible Studies, Vol. II 159 

page 146 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



LITERATURE FOR THE BLIND 

Requests for Bible literature for the Blind should be sent 
direct to Gould Free Library for the Blind, South Boston, 
Mass. It has for loaning the six volumes of STUDIES in 



English Braille; also Vols. I. and II. in New York Point, and 
Vol. I. in American Braille. Besides this, there are translated, 
and ready to loan, many of the booklets issued by our Society, 
as well as special sermons. 

When returning books or pamphlets for the Blind, please 
return them direct to the Gould Library. The Post-Office will 
handle them without postage if the package is plainly marked, 
"Literature for the Blind, Postage Free." 



RE CLIPPINGS 

We wish to express thanks for interesting clippings, and 
also for clippings containing attacks upon us. We request 
that you give name and date of paper each time, or, preferably, 
the whole page. If the whole paper be sent, please 
mark the article plainly and address WATCH TOWER BIBLE 
AND TRACT SOCIETY, File H, 17 Hicks Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 



RE REMITTANCES 

When sending remittances to the Society, please remember 
to make them payable in all cases to the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, No. 17 Hicks Street, Brooklyn, 

N.Y. 



R5457 : page 147 

GIANTS IN THESE DAYS 

READERS of these columns, and especially 

such as are familiar with the presentations 

of the volume entitled "Armageddon," 

know quite well that it is our opinion 

that there is a correspondency to be noted 

between the conditions which will prevail in the 

days of Noah, prior to the Deluge, and 

the conditions which will prevail in the 

days of the Son of Man, prior to the great 

Time of Trouble, which the Bible declares 

will symbolically melt, or dissolve, as in a furnace of fire, 

the social elements of today. We have called attention 

to the fact that the Giants of Noah's day, according to 

the Bible, endangered the lives and the happiness of humanity; 

and that it was our thought that a counterpart 

of these Giants is to be found in the great institutions 

and trusts of our day, which have the power to throttle, 

to strangle humanity. 

We have pointed out that much could be said in favor 
of aggregations of wealth and intellect in mighty combinations, 
if properly used, not selfishly, but in the interests 



of the people. We have pointed out that although 
these Giant corporations have accomplished great good, 
which could not have been accomplished without their aid 
or without some Divine interposition, nevertheless, under 
present selfish conditions, they are a menace to the people. 

We should not be misunderstood. We do not mean 
even to hint that the men at the head of these Giant corporations 
are inferior to their fellows in sympathy and in 
wisdom. On the contrary, we believe that they are generally 
superior, and that had brutish men been at the 
head of these Giant corporations they long ago would 
have sought to squeeze the very life out of the people. 
But, as we have pointed out, there is continually a tendency 
on the part of all imperfect people toward selfishness, 
acquisitiveness. That "Eternal vigilance is the price 
of liberty" is as true today as ever it was. The people 
must watch the Giants lest they become autocratic. 

APPEARANCES SOMETIMES DECEITFUL 

But, say some, The Editor of THE WATCH TOWER 
must be behind the times. Does he not know that the 
trusts are being throttled, and that these Giants have been 
made the slaves of the people? 

R5458 : page 147 

The Editor is well aware that apparently much has 
been done to bind these Giants; and he well knows that 
they have apparently submitted and apparently acknowledge 
themselves the creatures, the servants of the people. 
But he also takes note that this transformation is merely 
an appearance. This docility is merely affected. The 
Giants of intellectual and monetary strength have not 
really surrendered, nor is it in harmony with the laws of 
human nature to suppose that they would ever capitulate. 
Instead, they have seemingly acquiesced to the laws and 
regulations while merely transforming themselves and retaining 
their power. In several instances they have demonstrated 
that they are as powerful today as they ever 
were. And in their behalf it should be acknowledged 
that much of the legislation enacted against them is mere 
demagoguery— the work of politicians, intended to curry 
favor with the people and not for practical use. 

We have no sympathy with those who make tirades 
against the courageous and brainy men who have, along 
purely commercial lines, done so much to help forward 
the world's condition— so much to prepare for the Millennium. 
Instead of being tantalized and hampered, these 
financial and engineering princes should be appreciated, 
honored. Then, while honoring them, we should insist 
upon their reasonable control and supervision by the 
people through their governmental representatives. If 
these Giants are necessary and useful, they can be better 
ruled by love and justice than by nagging and pin-pricking. 
No doubt it is this very nagging that is producing 



more and more a spirit of bitterness in the Giants— a 
feeling that they are not appreciated by some, a feeling 
that they must teach the people a lesson. 

CONDITIONS AS THEY ARE 

We are not especially finding fault with anybody. We 
are merely pointing out conditions as they are, and showing 
how these are shaping themselves and preparing for 
a great struggle between the Giants and the people— a 
struggle in which the people will suffer more than will 
the Giants. The fault is not with humanity at all. The 
fault is with the sin, the selfishness, the meanness, which 
for centuries has had a firm foothold in humanity— rich 
and poor. All are selfish. Each according to his opportunity 
seems disposed to take advantage. The Giant corporations, 
we believe, are much more lenient than they 
would be if they were in the hands of naturally smaller 
men of lower class. 

These Giants are realizing that they have opponents 
on every hand. They have long contended with the labor 
unions, and more or less have been compelled to submit. 
Now, in addition to the unions, they are obliged to contend 
with the people in governmental legislation, and 
with new ideas in respect to corporation rights and liberties. 
These Giants are saying to themselves, The people 
do not realize how much good we have done, nor what 
important factors in their welfare we are. 

R5458 : page 148 

Few of the people realize that the managers and the 
presidents of our great railroads and large business enterprises 
are men of powerful mind, any of them well qualified 
for the highest stations of life, and many of them are 
earning salaries as great as that of the President of the 
United States, and solving problems as difficult as those 
which the President must handle. Few people realize 
that next to the farming element in importance come 
the railroads, as respects numbers of employees. And the 
latter are an increasing army, while the farmers are a 
decreasing army, because of labor-saving machinery. 

Whoever supposes that these long-headed business men 
intend to sit down and quietly submit to every kind of 
legislation is deluding himself. The Giants know their 
own strength. They prefer to hide it rather than to boast 
of it; but when it comes to a life-and-death struggle they 
will use it, and terrible will be the effects. The very fact 
that the people are seeking to bind them arouses them to 
a more arbitrary exercise of their power. If legislation, 
for instance, affects to hinder railroads from monopolizing 
the anthracite and other coal interests, the coal-owning 
railroads with a snarl of defiance raise the price of 
coal, and thus give a hint to the consumers that they 
will need to be thankful if permitted to purchase at all 
and to keep from freezing. 



A SHOW OF GIANT STRENGTH 

A more or less preconcerted action has begun on the 
part of the great railroads and affiliated interests. They 
have determined that unless they are granted permission 
to raise their freight rates they will make the restrainers 
of their liberties pay dearly for it by bringing upon the 
country financial disaster, reaching losses a thousand 
times greater than the five per cent, which they demand. 
It would surely in many respects be wise to placate these 
Giants with the increase they ask, merely requiring them 
to render more prompt and efficient service in return. 

But will this course of wisdom prevail? Possibly not. 
If not, we have before us already an illustration and 
prophecy of what may be expected. Already the railroads 
have laid off thousands of workmen who have been employed 
in road construction and repairs. Already they 
have canceled orders for rails and equipment, which in 
turn has rendered idle many of the large mills, throwing 
other thousands out of employment. Already they are 
cutting down their office forces. All this is done with a 
certain amount of justification in the fact that they have 
not been making as much money as formerly. For instance, 
a great steel corporation's recent report showed 
a "sad" falling off of revenue and profit, "leaving only 
$18,000,000 of profit for the quarter;" whereas they had 
for some time been accustomed to more. In accord with 
this policy, there has for some time been a gradual curtailing 
of train service, which is really a safe and sane 
policy. 

We are not complaining, we are not finding fault even; 
we are merely recording facts, in supporting our contention 
that these great institutions are really Giants which, 
if they ever become angry and malicious, may accomplish 
incalculable injury. Their power and dissatisfaction have 
already been hinted to the government, which is more or 
less fearful of the industrial suspension threatened. 

On the other hand we have trades unionism, which is 
only beginning to realize its great power at the polls, and 
also its physical power through strikes. The threat of 
the railroad managers partially to suspend business until 
their demands are met may any day be duplicated by the 
Giants of labor with their threat of suspension of labor, 
stoppage of fuel supply, walk-outs, etc. It may be said 
that these Giants of labor are blind and unwise; but 
nevertheless it is manifest that they, like the blind Samson 
of old, are feeling for the pillars which support our 
present social structure; and that they have in view its 
wreck and ruin, even though this means also the destruction 
of their own interests. 

THE DEATH STRUGGLE NEAR 

How soon these great Giants will enter upon their 
death struggle, each confident of victory, yet both doomed 



to destruction, no one can tell. Sure we may be, however, 
that in the battle of these Giants the masses of 
mankind will suffer with them in the ordeal. 

Looking from the Bible viewpoint, we perceive that 
these Giants have reached their present size and strength 
through the light and blessings of the Millennial Morning. 
Had the veil of gross darkness been lifted a thousand 
years sooner, these Giants would have developed that 
much sooner; and their death struggle would have come 
that much sooner, with its resultant overthrow of present 
institutions in anarchy. But God would not permit this. 
It is no part of His Plan to allow human passion utterly 
to desolate the earth. Hence, He withheld the Morning 
Light until the Morning time, so that the struggle and its 
disastrous effects upon human institutions will occur just 
in advance of the time for the establishment of Messiah's 
Kingdom, for the control of the world by its spiritual, 
invisible, but all-powerful King, who is so soon to take 
unto Himself His great power and reign.— Rev. 11:17. 

How soon this great catastrophe will engulf the world 
none is wise enough to say, yet the trouble is discerned 
and feared by all persons of intelligence, but more particularly 
by those whose intelligence is guided by the Word 
of God. The catastrophe may be put off for months or 
years, but it is sure to come. And we can see how it 
might be suddenly precipitated. Even as we write, the 
newspapers are echoing the mutterings and threats of 
the labor Giants, while the capitalistic Giants are admittedly 
feeling sour, and are half inclined to give the 
public a pinch as a mere suggestion of what they could 
do. It is these hints, suggestions and threats which are 
likely to lead from bad to worse, producing anger, malice, 
hatred, strife, and various works of the flesh and of the 
Devil, as St. Paul intimated. 

"SEEK PEACE AND PURSUE IT" 

Whether this great trouble be very near or further 
afield, the proper course of God's consecrated people is 
the same— "Seek peace and pursue it." And not only so, 
but we are to be peace-makers and not strife-breeders. 
When all around men's souls give way, a special opportunity 
comes to the people of God for pointing their 
distressed fellow-creatures to the grand blessing which 
God has provided for the near future, and for re-establishing 
faith in the Creator and in the future life, and 
for pointing out that it is to be attained only by those 
who learn the true lesson of life and who come to love 
righteousness and to hate iniquity. 

We would be inclined to expect this great trouble to 
break out very soon were it not that the Scriptures apparently 
indicate that it will be preceded by a very powerful 

R5459 : page 148 

Church Federation, which will flourish outwardly in 



unrighteousness and be the first to succumb. 



page 148 

"I can see His coming judgments, as they circle all the 

earth, 
The signs and groanings promised, to precede a second 

birth; 
I read His righteous sentence in the crumbling thrones of 

earth: 
Our King is marching on." 



R5459 : page 149 

TRIALS ESSENTIAL TO CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 

"My brethren, count it all joy when ye 
fall into divers temptations."— James 1:2. 

ALL those who have been called of the Lord 

during this Gospel Age are called with what 

the Apostle Paul styles the High Calling 

(Philippians 3:14), the Heavenly Calling 

(Hebrews 3:1), which is a call to share 

with Jesus in His glory, honor and immortality. 

But the call is not the decision in 

the matter; it is merely an invitation with 

certain definite conditions. We are called, 

not only to righteousness, but to walk in the 

Master's footsteps of suffering and self-sacrifice. These 

are the only terms on which any are received as disciples 

of Christ. We understand the Scriptures to teach that 

during the Millennial Age there will be other terms of 

acceptance with God, offered the world. But there are 

no conditions offered now other than those of becoming 

followers and disciples of Jesus, to walk as He walked. 

The Apostle James intimates that temptations may 
overtake these followers of Christ, into which they will 
fall as into a snare. As for an army, traps are set by the 
enemy, so the great Adversary sets traps and snares for 
us. He endeavors to misguide our minds and to lead us 
away from proper conceptions of truth and righteousness. 
We should be very careful to avoid his snares. 
Nevertheless, in spite of diligence, we may fall into a trap. 

The Apostle says we are to rejoice when we fall into 
various temptations— not that we are to rejoice if we fall 
into sin when tempted, but that we may rejoice if we 
find ourselves suddenly precipitated into temptation. 
Temptation is not sin. If we could but keep in mind the 
fact that every temptation, every trial, every persecution, 
every difficulty in life, permitted to come upon us who 
have made the covenant of sacrifice with the Lord, is intended 



to prove us, to test our love, to see whether or 
not our characters are fixed, rooted and grounded in 
righteousness and being built up in love, it would put all 
these trials, difficulties and temptations in a new light before 
us, and greatly assist us in fighting a good fight and 
overcoming. When we find ourselves suddenly in temptation, 
trial, we should say, If by these temptations, or 
trials, the Lord is proving my love and devotion to Him, 
then, however trifling they may be or however important, 
I will diligently use them as favorable opportunities to 
demonstrate to my Lord the fulness of my love and devotion 
to Him and His cause. I must fight a good fight 
against this thing— the world, the flesh or the Adversary 
—whatever it might be that had brought the snare. 

Thus viewed and thus met we can rejoice in every 
such experience; every trial and every difficulty will 
prove a blessing; for we shall, first of all, have an opportunity 
to show the Lord that we will endure, and not compromise 
His cause or our own position as His servants. 
We can rejoice also because we know that under such 
trials our characters will make advancement toward crystallization, 
if we overcome; and because we know that 
the Lord would not let us fall into any temptation which 
He would not cause to work out for us a blessing if we 
are wholly loyal. Let us dwell often upon the words of 
the Apostles: "Beloved, count it all joy when ye fall into 
divers temptations." "Greatly rejoice, though now for a 
season ye are in manifold temptation, that the trial of 
your faith, being more precious than of gold that perisheth, 
though it be tried by fire, might be found unto 
praise and honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus 
Christ." "Blessed is the man that endureth [faithfully 
under] temptation; for after his trials he will receive the 
crown of life which the Lord hath promised to them that 
love Him." "These light afflictions, which are but for a 
moment, work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory"— if rightly utilized; if we are rightly 
exercised by them.— 1 Peter 1:7; James 1:2,12. 

"HE THAT ENDURETH" 

We are assured that those who love the Lord, and 
who because of this will receive the Kingdom, will be 
those whose love will have been tested by trials and 
temptations on the way. Those who do not love the Lord 
with all their hearts— in whom self or some other idol 
has first place— will be seduced by the world, the flesh or 
the Adversary, into some form of rebellion against the 
Divine Word or Divine providences. They will have 
schemes and theories which they will prefer to the Lord's 
Plan. These when analyzed will usually be found to be 
based either upon selfishness or upon ambition or an evil 
spirit of envy, hatred, etc. The Lord's leading and the 
Lord's words lose their attraction to such, and they lose 
their interest correspondingly. Like those who turned 
away from the Lord at the First Advent, declaring, "This 



is a hard saying," they walk no more with Him. 

As there are some substances which are short and 
brittle, so are there some which have fibre, strength, endurance. 
The Lord chooses for Himself such characters 
as have the strong, enduring qualities— fortitude, patience, 
long-suffering, etc. Some there are who walk 
close to the Lord, who will not be driven from Him by 
any of the arts and wiles of the Adversary. They are 
such as are at heart fully the Lord's— not their own; 
they follow wherever the Lord may lead, because they 
have no will except the will of God. These will follow 
the Lord in the narrow way of trial, discipline and testings 
during the present life, and by and by, as He has 
declared, "They shall walk with Me in white; for they 
are worthy."— Revelation 3:4. 

He who escapes all trials and temptations and difficulties 
has every reason to doubt that he is really in relationship 
to God as a son. If he were a son, the Lord 
would surely find it necessary to give him trials and difficulties. 
If he does not have these he should go to the 
Father and make sure that there is no impediment on his 
part— make sure that he has put himself in the proper 
place where he can be prepared for the Kingdom. "Whom 
the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son 
whom He receiveth."— Hebrews 12:6. 

FAILURES AS "STEPPING-STONES" 

All will rejoice when the testings are over and we are 
accepted as overcomers, to share with the Lord in His 
Throne. But patience, trust and love must first do a refining 
work in our hearts, making us mellow, submissive 
and obedient to God. Let the good work go on! Let us 
rejoice if our trials have made us stronger in character, 
more humble and Christlike, more aware of our blemishes 
and imperfections, more watchful and earnest in our endeavors 
to correct them so far as possible. 

Even the conflicts in which we have had only partial 
victory may have resulted in blessings to us. Even in 
those experiences where we have suffered absolute failure, 
there may be, through the humiliation and the pain 
of defeat, a strengthening of our character, a firm determination 
for greater watchfulness in that direction, 
and a more fervent prayer for the Lord's sustaining 
grace, the need of which has been more deeply impressed 
upon our hearts. Thus even failures may become "stepping-stones" 
by which we rise toward God and Heaven. 
Only through much tribulation shall we enter the Kingdom 
of Heaven at all. If, therefore, the Lord's people 

R5459 : page 150 

find themselves involved in temptations, tribulations, instead 
of feeling downcast they are to rejoice and say, 
These are evidences that the Lord is preparing me for a 
place in the Kingdom. This should give one courage to 



fight the good fight against the world, the flesh and the 
Adversary. The flesh is suffering; but the new mind, 
the new will, has this joy; and the New Creature can 
rejoice, knowing that these trials are not for his harm, 
but for his good.— 1 Peter 4:13. 

A WAY OF ESCAPE PROVIDED 

The Heavenly Father will with every temptation provide 
a way of escape. Hence when we find ourselves in 
difficulty we are to say, The Heavenly Father is permitting 
this trial— the Lord Jesus will help me, and so I 
will rejoice in the fact that the Lord will not allow me to 
be overthrown; for He has promised that all things shall 
work out for my good. 

As our text expressly says: We are to count it all 
joy when we fall into temptations— not when we walk 
into them. We are not to seek temptation. In our own 
fallen condition and that of those around us, with the 
Adversary alert to harm us, we know that there will be 
plenty of temptations without our walking into them. But 
if we fall into temptation we are to say, I have been 
striving against this thing, but the Lord has permitted 
it; and there must, therefore, come some blessing out of 
it for me. Even temptations that come through negligence 
are not to be disesteemed. Some of our greatest 
lessons in carefulness have resulted from the effect of 
our own carelessness. 

R5460 : page 150 

Our joy is largely dependent upon our study of the 
Word and our knowledge of the precious promises contained 
therein for those who overcome. The Lord wants 
those who will endure a great fight of afflictions, who will 
endure patiently, though the temptations continue long 
and the tribulations become more and more severe. But 
if they should lose faith, all their previous good resolutions 
and standing for what is right would not make them 
overcomers. 

These trials are intended to develop in us patience— 
that this quality may be deeply ingrained. We are building 
character for all eternity; and patience could not be 
thus developed and maintained except by repeated difficulties, 
tests— by our resolving again and again to be 
stronger and firmer in building the character-likeness of 
our Heavenly Father and our Lord Jesus Christ. 

A WORD OF WARNING 

To those who are of this anointed company and who 
are striving to attain the glory promised to the faithful 
followers of Christ, the Apostle Peter issues a word of 
warning. In the first chapter of his second Epistle, he 
urges the Church to add quality after quality of character-preparation, 
that thus they may be fitted for the glorious 



things that God has promised to the faithful. He 
specifies faith as the primary qualification. To this he 
says that we are to add fortitude, knowledge, patience, 
self-control, godliness, brotherly kindness and a broad, 
generous love for all mankind. The reason why the 
Scriptures declare that our judgment will be according 
to our faith is that while in the flesh we shall never be 
able to perform works such as God could approve. 

What God approves is the New Creature. By exercising 
faith and by demonstrating loyalty these New 
Creatures will be able to please Him, and to work out 
the proper character as enjoined in His Word, developing 
the fruits and graces of the Holy Spirit. "If ye do 
these things," says the Apostle, "ye shall never fall; for 
so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly 
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior, 
Jesus Christ." 

Faith is necessary all along the line. Without faith 
we could not have courage to go on. If we did not have 
faith what would be our source of encouragement? The 
fall mentioned in the text above quoted (2 Peter 1:10), 
is evidently a fall from the position to which we have 
been invited and to which invitation we respond. We 
were called to be joint-heirs with our Lord. If we are 
obedient to the Word of the Lord and are properly exercised 
by the experiences which are given us in the School 
of Christ, we shall gain His approval; for "Faithful is 
He that hath called us." If there is a fall in our case, 
it will be due to failure to do our part. If we fail to cultivate 
character, we shall fail to gain the Kingdom. 

CAUSES INDUCING A FALL 

Among those who fall some will fall more seriously 
than others. Those who fail to go on will receive certain 
tests which will determine whether they will turn back to 
the world or will continue in the narrow way. Some will 
fail in that they will not manifest sufficient zeal. These 
will come through great tribulations. If by these experiences 
they are brought to a full loyalty to the Lord, they 
will be granted everlasting life, but not on so high a 
plane as if they had not failed in their manifestation of 
zeal for the Lord, and of faith, energy and perseverance 
in doing the Lord's will. 

Again, from lack of zeal in the Lord's service or from 
cultivating a spirit of bitterness, one may deteriorate until 
he becomes an enemy of the Lord, loving sin rather 
than righteousness. As an opponent of God such a one 
would suffer a complete fall. But those who have a temporary 
fall, but who afterwards overcome in the trials 
which the Lord will allow to come upon them, thus showing 
their loyalty to Him, will be fully recovered. Those 
who fall utterly can never be recovered. Such will lose 
everything. They had sacrificed their human hopes before 
they could be accepted at first; therefore their falling 
away from this condition of a New Creature will be 



a hopeless fall. 

The fall of such will be far worse than the fall of 
Adam, whose fall resulted from having only limited 
knowledge and from lack of experience in the results of 
evil, for these have come to a clear knowledge of the 
Truth and have experienced a share in the redemption. 
The falling away of such would mean a fearful looking 
for of judgment and fiery indignation— of destruction 
as enemies of God. Adam had only a small knowledge 
of the grace of God, and therefore is to be redeemed 
and ultimately restored, if he shall come into harmony 
with God. 

Dear brethren, let us take heed to our ways. Let us 
earnestly cultivate the fruits of the Spirit, that we may 
indeed be presented "faultless before the presence of His 
glory with exceeding joy." 



'"From glory unto glory' that ever lies before, 
Still wondering, adoring, rejoicing more and more; 
Still following where He leadeth, from shining field to 

field, 
Himself the goal of glory, Revealer and revealed! 

"Then let our hearts be surely fixed where truest joys are 

found, 
And let our burning, loving praise yet more and more 

abound; 
And gazing on the 'things not seen' eternal in the skies, 
'From glory unto glory,' O Savior, let us rise!" 



R5460 :page 151 

"THE ISRAEL OF GOD" 

"Ye are a chosen generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy nation, 
a peculiar people; that ye should show forth the praises of 
Him who hath called you out of darkness 
into His marvelous light."— 1 PET. 2:9. 

IN OUR text the Apostle Peter is pointing out 
the fact that the Church of Christ is separate 
and distinct from all other people. For 
many centuries before our Lord came, the 
Jews had understood that they were God's 
people. He had made a special Covenant 
with them through Moses, which constituted 
them His people. He had also made certain 
promises to them dependent on their keeping 
of the Law. Thus they were His chosen- 
heirs of certain special promises that were conditioned 
upon their obedience, and of certain other promises that 
were stated without specified conditions. God had also 



promised to make a New Covenant with them, to give them 
a new heart, to take away their stoniness of heart, etc. 
But after the First Advent a different arrangement began. 

The Apostle is directing attention to the new feature 
of God's Plan— that during the Gospel Age He is calling 
out a special people. There will be no competition between 
the two classes— the new nation and the nation of 
Israel— for the promises given to Israel after the flesh 
were earthly, and the promises given to Israel after the 
spirit are spiritual. The Jews were a "peculiar people" 
(Deut. 14:2), a special people whom God had separated 
from the world; they were a chosen generation, or race. 
They were the generation, or race, of Abraham through 
Isaac and Jacob. This special generation was recognized 
of God as His people, Jews, Israelites, through the Law 
Covenant, as well as through the preceding promises God 
had made to Abraham. 

But since Pentecost God has started this other work 
in the world— another generation— peculiar, separate, 
selected for a particular purpose. And this generation 
will all be holy— there will be none but holy ones in it! 
The other nation had a priesthood, but this new people is 
a whole nation of priests. We see how this description 
applies to the Church. The Apostle Paul points out that 
while Aaron and his sons were typical in some respects, 
yet they did not typify all the features of God's Plan. 
They typified how Jesus would die— as a Sacrifice— how 
all His associates would be sacrificers. But Aaron and 
his sons did not typify the still higher priesthood which 
God had in mind when He established the Levitical priesthood. 
This higher Order of Priests was typified by Melchizedek, 
the king-priest— Hebrews 6:20. 

CHURCH'S FUTURE TWO-FOLD OFFICE 

Jesus is this great antitypical Royal, or Kingly, Priest, 
and His Church is the Body of this antitypical Melchizedek. 
Before the new Order can reign as kings, and 
before they can serve as Priests, they must go through a 
certain process. The members of this Body of Christ 
must be first generated. It is a new race— all are begotten 
of the Holy Spirit. As Jesus was begotten of the 
Holy Spirit at the time of His consecration, and there 
became a New Creature, spirit-begotten, so also the 
Church, those who are to walk in His steps, must first 
make a full consecration before this new generative power 
will begin to operate in them. 

This power began to operate in Jesus at His begetting, 
and completed its work in His resurrection. And so with 
us: This power will complete its work in us when we 
have proven our loyalty even unto death. When this 

R5461 :page 151 

work has been accomplished in all of the Priesthood class, 
then they will be of the Royal Priesthood indeed, on the 



Heavenly plane. This power of the Holy Spirit is not 
only a generating, or begetting, power, but an anointing 
power. And the anointing is not only to a priestly office, 
but also to a kingly office. This New Creation are a holy 
nation in the sense that they are representatives of a 
special Government, a Divine Government. 

THE HOLY NATION-TYPE AND ANTITYPE 

Israel purposed to be a holy nation, and in a typical 
way they were a holy nation. But in a broad sense, the 
Church constitutes the holy nation— separate and distinct 
from humanity. We are a separate nation in every sense 
of the word— living in the midst of people of the world. 
We keep our laws and also their laws. We are obedient 
to the "powers that be," realizing that the Lord has permitted 
these and wishes us to be subject to them, 
wherever our consciences will not be sacrificed. The 
Lord tells us that as representatives of His Kingdom we 
are to make known His Message. He tells us that the 
world is in a rebellious condition because they have become 
blinded by the Adversary. 

And so He sends us as His ambassadors to tell men of 
His goodness, His Plan, which He purposes to work out, 
that the hearts of those who have an ear to hear His 
Message may turn to the Lord. He tells us not to expect 
many to hear this Message; for they will be so deaf and 
blind that they cannot understand. But He assures us 
that by and by their blindness will be taken away, and 
they will be ready for what He has for them. 

The world does not understand us— they do not know 
that we belong to a different Kingdom; but we understand 
them. As the Apostle points out, "He that is spiritual 
judgeth all things." But they cannot understand, because 
no man can understand beyond his mental status, so to 
speak. We who have been begotten of the Holy Spirit 
still understand the natural things, but the natural man 
does not understand the spiritual things— "neither can he 
know them, because they are spiritually discerned"; "they 
are foolishness unto him." So we dwell in the midst of a 
perverse race, or generation, fallen into sin for six thousand 
years. As our Lord declared, "Ye are not of the 
world, even as I am not of the world. " —John 17:16. 

OUR PRESENT GLORIOUS PRIVILEGE 

And we are a peculiar people in the sight of the Lord. 
This word peculiar signifies a separate people— implying 
that God had done something special for us. The Lord 
Jesus has purchased us. His merit— the purchase-price— 
has been applied on our behalf. The only ones for whom 
this purchase-price has as yet been applied are the spirit-begotten 
ones. The Apostle's Message is to these. What 
object had God in selecting this peculiar people? It was 
that we might "show forth the praises of Him who hath 
called us out of darkness into His marvelous light." Is 



God proud, or vain, that He wishes His praises to be 
shown forth? Oh, no! God wishes His praises to be 
known because His praises will show to His creatures the 
great blessings He has provided for them. 

If we go out and tell men that "God so loved the world 
that He gave His Only Begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth on Him should not perish, but have everlasting 
life," we are showing forth His praises. We are not 
making God happy by so doing— He was already happy. 
But we are in this doing a great favor to the people who 
hear: we are telling them that God will bring them back 
again into His favor; that He will remove the curse. So, 
then, it is a great privilege now to tell forth the praises 
of God! But alas! not very many have the ear to hear; 
yet by our zeal in showing forth the Master's praises, we 
are doing all that we can to help men back to God. 

R5461 :page 152 

The greater work by and by will be the work of the 
Kingdom in ruling mankind, in overthrowing sin, in instructing 
and healing the people, bringing them into 
harmony with their Creator. And this will require a 
thousand years for its accomplishment. This glorious 
work will be ours! How wonderful it will be to be heirs 
of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord— to be 
higher than angels! We shall be next to Jesus, as He 
will be next to the Father— "far above angels, principalities 
and powers and every name that is named." 

"BE THOU FAITHFUL UNTO DEATH" 

But it is not only the honor that we should seek, but 
also the privilege of service God is pleased to give this 
class; the privilege of opening all the deaf ears, of 
awakening the whole world, to see, to know, to understand 
our God, to realize that the knowledge of the Lord 
is to fill the whole world— "for the earth shall be full of 
the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea" 
—ocean deep! (Isa. 1 1:9.) That glorious work of the 
future shall be done only by those who have proved themselves 
wholly loyal to God. If we are careless or indifferent 
about telling forth the good Message and showing 
forth His praises, we shall show that we are not 
worthy of the Kingdom. Those who prove loyal and 
faithful to the end will be the ones whom the Lord will 
exalt by and by. 

And in doing this, God has been merely carrying out 
a course which men have imitated. God laid His plans 
long before men were born; nevertheless, wise men instinctively 
follow certain great principles. Napoleon is 
said to have directed that the various men who were faithful 
to him be made princes in the countries he conquered. 
Our Lord says, "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will 
give thee a crown of life." (Rev. 2:10.) So we have 
from every standpoint the greatest encouragement to 



"show forth the praises of Him who hath called us out of 
darkness into His marvelous light." This Scripture implies 
that we realize we were once in darkness, and that 
we know we are now in the light. 

Comparatively few have had this experience. Those 
who have been raised out of ignorance and sin into a 
heart appreciation of God's Plan are the ones referred to 
here. They could not get this light, except by being begotten 
of the Holy Spirit and becoming members of this 
holy nation, this peculiar people. And we cannot do the 
world greater good than by telling them of God's great 
favor, and thus helping them also out of darkness into the 
light. The light is given us that we may let it shine. 
May we be enabled to sing from our hearts: 

"All for Jesus, all for Jesus- 
All my being's ransomed powers; 

All my thoughts and words and doings, 
All my days and all my hours!" 

WE ARE NOT OUR OWN 

In Titus 2:14, St. Paul sets forth a similar thought: 
"A peculiar people, zealous of good works." The people 
here referred to by him are the saints of God, those who 
are waiting for the fulfilment of God's promises— for 
those things which were to be brought to them at the coming 
(during the parousia— presence) of the Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ. These are the people who realize 
that they have been purchased with the precious blood. 
Some translators render 1 Pet. 2:9 "A purchased people, 
zealous of good works." The Lord's people are a people 
who have been redeemed, purchased. Whatever they 
were through the fall, they have been redeemed from that 
condition. St. Paul, in recounting certain sins, said, "And 
such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are 
sanctified, but ye are justified."— 1 Cor. 6:9-11. 

The thought in Titus 2:14 is much the same as in the 
other. Ye are a peculiar people, a people bought back 
from Sin and Death, and all such are "peculiar," different 
from the remainder of mankind. Amongst mankind, 
in Christendom, we find some that are vicious, and 
even amongst the heathen we find noble people. But 
these peculiar people of whom St. Paul wrote, are different 
from all others— they are New Creatures in Christ. 

To these, "old things have passed away, and all things 
have become new." They have new hopes and new aims. 
They are hoping to attain the highest position offered to 
any in the Universe; namely, to be made associates in the 
Government of Messiah. These are very wonderful 
hopes. And the possession of these hopes by faith constitutes 
them different and peculiar, separate and distinct 
from all other people. 

CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PECULIAR PEOPLE 

While others seek the emoluments and distinctions of 



the present time, these count all the things of this world as 

loss and dross, in view of the wonderful things that God 

has set before their minds. They have seen the "pearl 

of great price," and have given their all to purchase it. 

They see that the Kingdom of God is the most valuable 

thing that is obtainable now or ever will be attainable. 

They have recognized the terms upon which this Kingdom-Pearl 

may be obtained and are seeking to make good 

the purchase. The terms are self-sacrifice, faithfulness to 

God at any cost, and patient endurance under adverse 

conditions, even unto the end. 

These peculiar people are seeking to accomplish this 
work in themselves, because they see that these are the 
most gracious characteristics and qualities that can be 
imagined. Hence they are doubly solicitous; they are 
zealous of good works. They love to see others good and 
happy, and they love to spread the knowledge of God. 
They love the things that God delights in, because they 
have the Spirit of Christ. They are interested in reforms 

R5462 : page 152 

—social reform, temperance reform, every kind of reform; 
but this does not mean that they will engage in 
these reforms. The same man cannot be a great preacher, 
a successful farmer, a successful lawyer, etc. If he be a 
great farmer, he must give up the other things to a large 
extent. Or if he be a great preacher, he will have to give 
up, for the most part, other things. Yet he may have 
pleasure in them all. 

And so with these peculiar people: they have one particular 
work given them of the Father. They recognize 
that this work is most important to be done, hence they 
cannot give their attention to political reform, social reform, 
or other reform, outside of their own work. For 
this reason they are called theorists instead of practical 
people. Nevertheless they have the most practical plan of 
all; for God's Plan is of all plans the most practical. 
These people, in becoming co-workers, are taking the 
wisest course. But they do not find fault with others. 
They see that the only ones who can grasp these things 
are those who have the eyes to see and the ears to hear; 
they know that others cannot go beyond what they see. 
The peculiarities of these "peculiar people" extend to all 
the affairs of life. 

WHAT CONSTITUTE GOOD WORKS 

This class of people are wise enough to know that 
all the Truth even should not be mentioned at once. The 
Master said to those who had been His close followers 
for three and a half years, "I have yet many things to 
say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now." (John 16:12.) 
The Lord's people are eager to do good, but in 
the way that will be the most effective, and in the way 



R5462 : page 153 

that will not stumble others. The good works, then, that 
this peculiar people are zealous of are the works of God. 
As Jesus said, "I must work the works of Him that sent 
Me."-John9:4. 

The world cannot appreciate this, not having the Spirit 
of God, but more the spirit of the Adversary. The world 
are walking in the way of slander and hypocrisy, more or 
less. Jesus said, when speaking to the Pharisees, "Ye are 
of your father, the Devil." (John 8:44.) And when 
Jesus walked in the way of God, His course was a condemnation 
to them. Therefore Jesus declared, "The darkness 
hateth the light," and He forewarned us that it 
would be the same all the way down through the Age. 
He warned His followers that they would suffer the same 
persecution He had suffered. But the Master urged that 
they be zealous for the Truth— solicitous for it. 

Since God has called us to good works, we are to 
show great zeal, even though it bring upon us the envy 
and hatred and opposition of others. We are to rejoice, 
even if we are called to suffer persecution for His sake. 
And though the world does not appreciate these good 
works now, they will see and understand by and by, in 
their day of visitation. (1 Peter 2:12.) They will see 
that God's Plan was the best plan. The Church glorified 
will be the channel for blessing the world in general. 

Only this peculiar people can now understand these 
things. Jesus said unto His disciples, "It is given unto 
you to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, 
but to them [the multitudes who went to hear Him] it is 
not given. ...Therefore speak I to them in parables; 
because they seeing, see not; and hearing, they hear not, 
neither do they understand." (Matt. 13:11,13.) Only 
those who have come into this special relationship can 
understand. "The secret of the Lord is with them that 
reverence Him, and He will show them His Covenant."— 
Psa. 25:14. 

We find a great many who gladly accept the Truth, 
and then seem to forget that the only way they can make 
progress in the Truth is to consecrate themselves to God. 
If they fail to make consecration, they must fail to make 
progress. We should be sure that we give people the 
right thought along this line. Only those who thus become 
God's "peculiar people, zealous of good works," can 
inherit the Kingdom. 



R5462 : page 153 

EXPIATION OF SIN-AD AMIC AND PARTIALLY WILFUL 

THE expiation of sin may be viewed from two 
different standpoints. A satisfaction to Divine 
Justice for Adamic sin is, first of all, 



necessary. The decree of the great Supreme 

Judge of the Universe— that the human race 

must die— went forth because of the disobedience 

of Adam; and no one can be released 

from death until that decree shall 

have been revoked because of its requirements 

being complied with. The annulling 

of that decree of Justice, however, will not make the individual 

at once a perfect man. 

If a man had been put into prison for some offense, 
and after ten years someone should make satisfaction, 
should pay up his account and comply with the requirements 
of the law, the prisoner would be released— justice 
would be satisfied. But freedom from the restraint of 
prison life would not give back to the prisoner his clear 
vision, his teeth, his hair, his health, or anything that he 
might have lost or that had been impaired during his 
term of imprisonment. And likewise, whatever satisfaction 
of Justice is made for mankind, they will not, at the 
time they are awakened from the tomb, be free from the 
marks that Sin has placed upon them. 

There will be no Divine disfavor holding over upon 
the world at that time, because the price for man's release 
will have been paid. But mankind at the beginning 
of the Millennial Age will still have the blemishes 
resulting from the fall. It will be the work of that Age 
to restore the human race, to lift them up out of imperfection 
and weakness. Man will be helped up from his 
fallen condition, because Justice will have been satisfied. 

The world will be in the hands of Christ, who purchased 
them by the sacrifice of His own life. We are to 
bear in mind that the satisfaction of Justice does not 
bring about the restitution of humanity from imperfection, 
but this judicial satisfaction is merely the turning 
away of the disfavor of God, the annulling of the death 
penalty. This gives the opportunity for man to be restored 
to favor with God— to be brought into a condition 
worthy of Divine acceptance at the close of the Millennium. 

As for this satisfaction of Divine Justice which must 
take place before the New Covenant can be inaugurated, 
it includes not only a satisfaction for Adamic sin, but it 
embraces also stripes for partially wilful sins, and satisfaction 
for certain gross injustices which mankind have 
committed when they had a knowledge of a better course 
and were in a measure responsible for their unjust words 
and actions. To an extent they were in ignorance, but 
often they were wilfully so, and in proportion to the measure 
of responsibility will Justice require a recompense. 

JEWISH AGE RECKONING 

At the close of the Jewish Age God had a reckoning 
with the nation of Israel, which was one of the most terrific 
times of trouble the world has ever known. The 
declaration of Jesus was, that of that Age— that generation 
then living— God would require expiation for all the 



righteous blood that had been shed from the time of Abel 
to the time in which He was speaking.— Matt. 23:34-36. 

And these partially wilful sins of the world are not 
fully covered by the Sin-offerings. In so far as they have 
been wilful they must be expiated by punishment. These 
sins and trespasses are shown as placed upon the scapegoat 
class— the Great Company. In the great Antitype 
shortly to be enacted, these will be allowed to suffer for 
some of the partly wilful sins of the world— especially 
the sins of Babylon. All the blood of God's holy ones, 
from the beginning of this Gospel Age, will be required 
of the present generation, in the "great Time of Trouble, 
such as never was." 

The martyrs of the past, "the souls under the altar," 
are represented symbolically as crying out for the vindication 
of Justice, saying, "How long, O Lord, holy and 
true, dost Thou not judge and avenge our blood upon 
them that dwell on the earth!" They were bidden to wait 
until others of their brethren should be similarly killed, 
when the guilt of all will be avenged.— Rev. 6:9-11. 

RECKONING OF THE GOSPEL AGE 

From the above we see that at the close of this Gospel 
Age there will be another squaring of accounts. A 
time of trouble such as never was since there was a nation, 
and never will be afterwards, is to come shortly. 
(Matt. 24:21,22.) This is shown forcefully in many 
prophecies of Scripture. Our Lord is now again present, 
as the great Judge, and the storm clouds are rapidly gathering 
in this Day of His kingly presence. 

Why require the full payment for all the wrongs of 

R5463 : page 154 

the two Ages— the Gospel Age and the one preceding, 
extending from the time the blood of righteous Abel was 
shed to the present time— at the closing of these Ages, 
is it asked? We answer, Because the chief light of 
each Age comes at its close, and because those who sin 
against such light are worthy of more severe judgment 
than similar evildoers preceding them, who had less light. 
The Scriptural argument is that to endorse the wrongs 
of the past in the light of the present is to multiply the 
responsibility and to deserve the plagues of the whole. 

We have not far to look if we would see these iniquities, 
or inequities, of the world today, especially of 
Christendom. There is considerable light now shining 
upon the whole world, and more particularly upon its 
civilized portion. The principles of righteousness set 
forth in the Jewish Law, and subsequently amplified by 
the Lord and the Apostles, have enlightened the minds of 
the public in general in respect to justice and injustice, 
right and wrong, good and evil, so that there never was 
so responsible a generation as the one now living. 

Notwithstanding this increase of knowledge, and notwithstanding 



that there are gross iniquities prevailing 
throughout the world, we find comparatively few willing 
to do anything toward a readjustment and equalization 
of the world's affairs, financial, social and religious. 
Rather, it seems that the majority of those possessing 
advantages are quite willing to hold to them, even though 
recognizing that they are inequitable, iniquitous. 

We perceive also that much of the evil done against 
the Lord's holy ones of the past has thus far failed of 
the punishment due. Great systems which in the name 
of Christ persecuted the true Church have practised and 
prospered, but have not yet received their just recompense 
of reward. In the terrible trouble of the near future 
great Babylon will go down as a mighty millstone 
into the sea, when every man's hand will be against his 
neighbor in anarchy, when "there will be no peace to him 
that goeth out, nor to him that cometh in." 

LEGAL EXPIATION BY SCAPEGOAT CLASS 

But it seems that the legal expiation of these sins 
must be accomplished by the scapegoat class, as shown 
in the type. (Lev. 16:20-22.) Israel here represents the 
world. In this scapegoat type, the Lord pictures the sending 
into the wilderness of isolation and persecution the 
Great Company who, after consecration, were unwilling 
to go voluntarily "outside the camp, bearing the reproaches" 
of Christ. They shared not in the Sin- Atonement, 
but will be permitted, yea, forced, to bear the 
weight of some of the world's wilful sins, and thus to 
become dead to the world, that their spiritual being may 
be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus. 

This class, particularly large in the present day, will 
be delivered over to the Adversary, to suffer in this great 
time of trouble. Such of them as respond to these tribulations, 
faithfully and loyally, will be counted as overcomers 
and be granted palms of victory, as shown in 
Revelation 7, and will be privileged to share in the Marriage 
Supper of the Lamb and to be honorable servants 
of the Bride of Christ. If they fail to respond, and to 
wash their spotted robes in the blood of the Lamb, they 
will go into the Second Death. 

It is this great trouble-time which the Little Flock, 
the Lord's goat class of faithful sacrificers, will escape, 
and which the Great Company will not escape, but will 
share. They will come up out of this trouble with 
washed robes, made white in the blood of the Lamb. 
Their sufferings will not wash their robes, but in their 
sufferings they will learn to appreciate as never before 
their relationship to the Lamb of God and to His atoning 
merit, and will by faith be permitted to apply the 
same to their own cleansing. As we consider the experiences 
of these children of God, so soon to come, let us 
all the more manifest our love for the Lord, and all the 
more seek to lay down our lives faithfully in the service 
of our King, and in behalf of the Household of Faith. 



JESUS ALONE THE RANSOMER 

It would not be correct to say that the scapegoat class 
atone for sin and thus make it possible for a certain part 
of humanity to be brought forth from the tomb. The 
tomb represents the penalty upon Adam for his transgression, 
and this penalty has been inherited by all of 
Adam's children. The Apostle says that "by one man 
sin [disobedience] entered into the world, and death by 
[as the result of] sin; and so death passed upon all men." 
—Romans 5:12. 

The death of Jesus alone can cancel the sin of Adam. 
He only was the Redeemer, the Ransomer. He gave His 
life for Father Adam's life, and thus as a satisfaction 
for the sins of the whole world. Those for whom Jesus 
advocates as the members of His Body become associated 
with Him and identified with Him in His work, not by 
virtue of their own merit, but because "accepted in the 
Beloved." These are Scrip turally shown as having something 
to do with the cancelation of "the sin of the world," 
because of their association with the Head. The Great 
Company have nothing whatever to do with the cancelation 
of THE sin of the world. 

RESPONSIBILITY FOR SINS AGAINST LIGHT 

"THE sin of the world" (John 1:29) was the sin of 
Adam; but there are other sins aside from Adamic sin, 
which was brought on the race by the fall. We may suppose 
that in every Age there have been sins committed 
against a measure of light. But the sinners were not begotten 
of the Holy Spirit, and therefore their sins against 
light would not involve them in the Second Death. 

Nevertheless, in whatever proportion they had light 
and knowledge, they had also responsibility. And while 
Jesus died in order that all might have an opportunity of 
coming back from the tomb, and to perfect life, yet He 
did not die on account of any individual sin committed 
against light. For such sins the individual is himself responsible. 

In the case of the Church class, wilful evil-doers will 
be cut off from life. The Apostle Paul says that some 
were delivered over to Satan for the destruction of the 
flesh, that their spirit might be saved. Every wilful sin, 
no matter by whom committed, or when committed, must 
be answered for by stripes or by the death of the sinner. 

SINS NOT COVERED BY CHRIST'S SACRIFICE 

Nothing is to be atoned for by Christ's death but the 
sin of Adam. But other sins of direct responsibility, sins 
against light, must also be settled for. In olden times 
there were bitter persecutions of God's people, and those 
persecuted were obliged to dwell in caves and dens of the 
earth. (Hebrews 11:32-40.) The transgressions against 
these, in proportion as they were committed with a degree 



of light, were to be settled for by the transgressors. 

God's providence squared off the account against the 
Jewish people in the end of the Jewish Age. There came 
upon that people wrath to the uttermost. The squaring 
of accounts for that nation, we understand, was completed 
A.D. 70. As for other nations, we must assume 
that God has dealt with them along similar lines— though 
not just the same; because they were not in covenant relationship 
with Him as were the Israelites. 

Coming down to the Gospel Age, many sins have been 
committed which could in no way be covered by Christ's 
sacrifice— sins against a measure of light and knowledge. 

R5463 : page 155 

The chiefest of all these sins have been, according to the 
Master's words, against His people. He said that whoever 
would harm one of the "little ones" who believed in 
Him should have punishment; and that whoever would 
give even so much as "a cup of cold water" to one of 
these should have a reward.— Matthew 18:6; 10:42. 

We read of terrible atrocities committed against the 
saints during the Dark Ages. They were covered with tar 
and burned; they were fed to wild beasts, their poor bodies 
being torn to pieces. They were tortured in innumerable 
ways. We are reasonably sure that some punishment is 
due to those who committed these atrocities. But the 
Lord has told us that we are not to judge before the 
time. In due time we shall be made judges of the world. 
Now we are to look to the Lord and wait for His judgment. 

THE ANTITYPICAL SCAPEGOAT 

The Scriptures indicate that as there was a settling 
time, culminating in A.D. 70, with the Jews, so there 
will be a settling time with those claiming to be Christian 
nations. To whatever extent they have lent themselves 
to injustice, to whatever extent they have sinned against 
light, they are responsible. We do not know the extent 
of their responsibility— God knows ! But in this Time of 
Trouble He will square all these matters, in order that 
the New Dispensation may be free from all accounts— 
that there may be nothing of this kind charged up to 
humanity. The sins committed nationally will be expiated 
nationally. And of course, as individuals suffered 
from the wrong-doing, so individuals will suffer in the 
expiation. 

And how will God reckon with the injustice which He 
wishes to cancel, so that the world may come forth with 
a clean slate? We answer, the Great Company class will 
have a share in that trouble. And since they do not really 
deserve a share in the trouble, in the sense of having merited 
Divine wrath, what they will suffer will be in a 
measure a suffering the merit of which will go to others. 
It is not a punishment to get into the Great Company 
class. The Great Company will be a very blessed class. 



They will not be seated in the Throne, but will serve 
before the Throne; neither will they obtain the Divine 
nature. The Little Flock class will get the great prize 
of being associated with the Master, joint-heirs with 
Him in the Kingdom. The other class will get a reward 
on a lower spiritual plane— a spiritual plane, because they 
also were begotten of the Spirit. 

So far as the Great Company are concerned, God's 
permitting them to share in the trouble at the end of 
this Age will be for their own development. Their 
Covenant was unto death; and unless they lose their lives 
in obedience to the Lord, unless they prove faithful unto 
death, they will not be worthy of any position of life on 

R5464 : page 155 

any plane. Hence it will be to their own personal advantage 
that they suffer in that time. They are said to 
suffer for the iniquities, the sins and transgressions of 
the people of the world as the antitypical scapegoat. 
(Leviticus 16:21,22. See TABERNACLE SHADOWS, pp. 
68-72.) Instead of allowing that merit of the Great Company 
to go for nothing, the Lord makes a credit of it, as 
it were, to balance the world's account for wilful sins. 



R5464 : page 155 

THE FRIEND OF SINNERS 

-JUNE 14.-LUKE 18:9-14; 19:1-10.- 

"I came not to call the righteous but sinners."— Mark 2:17. 

IN OUR Lord's parables He dealt chiefly with 

the Pharisees and the publicans; for the 

Sadducees were Jews in name only, not believing 

the Scriptures nor expecting a future 

life. The Pharisees were orthodox, reverenced 

the Law and taught it to the people. 

Outwardly, they were very correct; but 

Jesus in various parables pointed out that 

with many of them religion was a ceremony 

and the keeping of the Law an outward 

obedience, which did not extend to the heart. The publicans 

did not profess holiness, but rather confessed estrangement 

from God and lack of harmony with His Law. 

The Pharisees treated the publicans as though they 
were Gentiles— refused their company and would not even 
eat with them. The Pharisees recognized Jesus as being 
exemplary, and His teachings as in full accord with the 
highest principles. They wondered, therefore, that He 
did not join with them, and wondered still more that He 
would have fellowship with publicans— confessed sinners. 

The secret of the matter is that Jesus looked not upon 



the outward appearance, but upon the heart. He did not love 
the publicans because they were sinners, nor disapprove 
of the Pharisees because they outwardly kept the Law. 
We remember the case of the young Pharisee who came to 
Jesus and who, when questioned about the Law, said, 
"All these things have I kept from my youth up." We 
read, "Jesus beholding him loved him." He was a sincere 
Pharisee. 

The parable of our lesson illustrates this matter. It 
shows us the heart-attitude of some of the Pharisees and 
of some of the despised publicans: Both men went up 
to the Temple to pray. The one said in his heart, How 
thankful I am that I am not a sinner, like the majority 
of men and like this poor publican! I thank God that I 
am a Pharisee— that I am righteous! But the publican 
felt differently. The weight of sin was upon him. He 
could not look up to Heaven. Striking his hand on his 
bosom, he exclaimed, "God be merciful to me, a sinner!" 

From God's standpoint, both men were sinners— both 
needed forgiveness of sins. But the one trusted in his 
own imperfect works, and asked no forgiveness; the other 
realized his blemishes, and prayed for mercy. We are 
not to get the impression from this that God is more 
pleased with people who live in sin than with those who 
strive to live to the best of their ability in harmony with 
His Law. The lesson is to the contrary. We must all 
realize that we come short of perfection, and that we need 
Divine mercy. The sinner who recognizes this is more 
pleasing to God and nearer to forgiveness than the more 
moral person who fails to see his blemishes. 

At another time, Jesus referred to this same error of 
the Pharisees, saying, "The whole need not a physician," 
and, "I came not to call the righteous, but sinners, to 
repentance." By these words He sought to call attention 
to the fact that although the Pharisees claimed to be 
righteous, they were not so. They were sin-sick, imperfect, 
needing a Savior. But they were not in a condition 
to appreciate their need and to come to the Lord 
for forgiveness— not until they should learn their need- 
that they and all other members of the fallen race are sin-sick 
and need the remedy which only Jesus can give. 

Not realizing their need, the Pharisees did not come 
to Jesus, did not become His disciples; and thereby they 
missed a great blessing. On the contrary, the majority 
of Jesus' followers was made up of publicans and sinners 
—people who had not been living proper lives, but 
who were earnest, who acknowledged their faults, turned 

R5464 : page 156 

from them and accepted the forgiveness and healing of 
the Good Physician. 

PHARISEES IN OUR DAY 

Both classes are still represented in the world, amongst 



Christians. Some are trusting in their church membership, 
their benevolences and general morality, for salvation, 
and ignoring the fact that all are sinners, and that 
forgiveness of sin is obtainable only through faith in the 
Crucified One. Others today, not so conspicuous in 
religious circles, are all the more ready to discern their 
own weaknesses, to confess them and to accept forgiveness 
of sins and everlasting life as unmerited gifts of 
God based upon the Sacrifice at Calvary. These latter, 
we may be sure, will have much advantage every way 
over the others as respects Divine acceptance to joint-heirship 
with Christ in His Kingdom. 

The general lesson to us all is expressed by the 
Apostles James and Peter: "God resisteth the proud, but 
showeth His favor to the humble"— the penitent. "Humble 
yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that 
He may exalt you in due time." Confess your sins, strive 
manfully against them, and trust for deliverance, ultimate 
victory and life everlasting through the merit of the 
Crucified One, in whose footsteps you seek to follow. 

A LITTLE MAN-A BIG HEART 

The latter part of our lesson relates to Jesus' journey 
from Jericho to Jerusalem, just prior to His crucifixion. 
Multitudes were journeying in the same direction, going 
up to the feast of the Passover. As always, Jesus was 
the center of attraction; all wanted to see and hear Him 
of whom we read, "Never man spake like this man." 

Zacchaeus, a rich man of that vicinity, was one of 
those whose curiosity was aroused to see Jesus, of whom 
he had heard much. He was not a Pharisee; he did not 
profess holiness of life. He was one of those condemned 
and ostracised by the Pharisees. He had accepted a 
minor office under the Roman government; he was a tax 
collector for the Romans— a publican. On this account 
he was despised, and declared to be disloyal to Judaism. 

Small of stature, Zacchaeus was unable to see Jesus 
because of the crowd. He therefore ran ahead and 
climbed a sycamore tree, that he might have a good view 
of Jesus as He passed by that way. Little did he realize 
that the Master knew him and had read his heart and 
perceived in it honesty, and that therefore he was to be 
greatly honored. When Jesus came where Zacchaeus 
was, He looked up at the publican, called him by name 
and told him to come down at once, for He was to be 
his guest. The summons was gladly received by Zacchaeus. 
And we may be sure that the whole circumstance 
was greatly to the disgust of the Pharisees. They 
murmured at Jesus' being the guest of one not orthodox. 

Evidently the murmuring reached the ears of Zacchaeus, 
too; for forthwith he addressed the Lord in self-defense 
—as though urging that these charges against him 
should not hinder the Master from coming to be his 
guest, and as intimating his desire of heart to be all that 
he ought to be and could be. He said: "Lord, behold, I 



give one-half of all my goods to the poor; and if I have 
wrongly exacted money from anybody, I restore him 
four-fold." Thus did Zacchaeus intimate his devotion to 
God and to righteousness, and his acceptance of Jesus as 
his Lord, his Teacher. 

How did Jesus receive all this? He replied to Zacchaeus, 
"This day is salvation come to this house; for 
as much as he also is a son of Abraham." From the 
Lord's standpoint, all the sons of Abraham were eligible 
to discipleship. The thing required was an honest confession 
of imperfection, a turning from sin, a hearty acceptance 
of Christ and an endeavor to walk in His steps. 

Unquestionably this same principle still applies, regardless 
of what men may think or say to the contrary. 
The Lord is willing to receive the repentant. No longer 
is it necessary to be of the natural seed of Abraham in 
order to be acceptable as disciples of Jesus. The middle 
wall of partition between Jew and Gentile has been broken 
down, as St. Paul explains. All who have the faith of 
Abraham may be counted in as children of Abraham by 
becoming related to the Divine Plan as disciples of Jesus. 

Our lesson closes with our Lord's words, "For the Son 
of Man came to seek and to save that which was lost." 
Some who deny that Adam was created perfect, who deny 
his fall from Divine favor and who deny that redemption 
by Jesus was necessary, have sought to sustain their position 
by saying that Jesus never referred to the fall, although 
the account in Genesis tells of it, and St. Paul and 
other Apostles particularly mention it. But in this text 
we have Jesus' own statement as to why He came into the 
world at all. He did not come into the world to help 
along the Adversary's schemes; but, as He says, He came 
into the world to be man's Redeemer— to seek and to 
recover, restore, that which was lost. 

Everlasting life was lost, Eden was lost, human perfection 
was lost, the image of the Divine character was 
lost. These could not be recovered by humanity, all of 
whom were under death sentence— the curse. God's 
compassion arranged a Plan, by which Jesus came into the 

R5465 : page 156 

world and gave Himself a Ransom for all. 

The very fact that the Master speaks of His work as a 
ransoming one (Matthew 20:28) corroborates the declaration 
that man was under a sentence of death and needed 
to be ransomed from it. Without the Ransom there 
could be no resurrection of the dead, no future life. The 
Bible is beautifully consistent and harmonious when we 
allow it to speak for itself. It demonstrates that it is the 
Word of God, written under Divine direction. 

TWO SALVATIONS-ONE SAVIOR 

Although the race was one and although all shared 
the same sentence of death, nevertheless it has pleased 



God to provide two different salvations from this curse 
of death. Both salvations are based upon the great sacrifice 
which Jesus accomplished at Calvary. The first of 
these salvations is for the Church class, called out of the 
world during this Gospel Age, called to a change of nature 
—from human to spiritual nature. Even this first salvation 
is not yet complete, and will not be until the whole 
company of the Church shall have been selected from the 
world, and by the First Resurrection shall have been glorified 
with Christ. These will be joint-heirs with Christ in 
His Kingdom; and that Kingdom will begin its work on 
behalf of the remainder of the world. 

The second salvation belongs to the Millennial Age, 
during which Messiah's Kingdom will control the affairs 
of earth, and Satan will be bound. Then the knowledge 
of the Lord shall fill the whole earth. Then all the blind 
eyes shall be opened and all the deaf ears be unstopped; 
and at that time the second salvation will be effective 
to all mankind. That will not be a spiritual salvation— to 
the new nature, like unto the angels. It will be a salvation 
to human perfection, and uplift out of sin and death to the 
image of God, as at first experienced by Father Adam. 

Both salvations will be grand, glorious, though that of 
the Church will be the more glorious. This salvation 
alone is open now; and the pathway to it is by the low 
gate and narrow way of consecration and self-sacrifice, 
walking in the footsteps of Jesus. 



R5465 : page 157 

DIFFICULTIES OF THE RICH 

-JUNE 21. -MARK 10:17-31.- 

"Ye cannot serve God and mammon."— Luke 16:13. 

IT MUST have been an enthusing sight for 
the disciples of Jesus to see a rich young 
ruler run after the Master and, on overtaking 
Him, fall down on his knees at 
Jesus' feet, saying, "Good Master, what 
shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?" 
—a very hopeful subject, we all agree. The 
Good Teacher did not answer the question 
directly; but for the benefit of the young 
man, and of others who have since read the 
narrative, He inquired why the title "good" was applied to 
Him. He would have the young man notice, and would 
wish all to notice, that everything that is really good must 
in some way be of God and in accordance with God. 
There were only two ways in which Jesus could be 
viewed. Either He was, as He claimed, the Son of God 
come into the world on a special mission in the interest of 
humanity, and therefore a servant of God; or, on the 



other hand, if He was not, He was a deceiver, misrepresenting 
Himself and deceiving the people, and was bad, 
very bad. Jesus wished the young man to consider the 
force of his own expression and to decide at once this 
important question, upon which so much would hinge. 

Not waiting for a reply, Jesus proceeded: "Thou 
knowest the commandments, Do not kill, Do not commit 
adultery, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Do not 
defraud, Honor thy father and thy mother." The young 
man replied: "Master, all these things have I observed 
from my youth." And Jesus, beholding him, loved him 
and said unto him: "One thing thou lackest; go thy way, 
sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou 
shalt have treasure in Heaven; and come, take up thy 
cross and follow Me." 

WHAT DID JESUS MEAN? 

What did Jesus mean by telling the young man that 
the way to everlasting life was the keeping of the commandments? 
We would not so tell him now. On the 
contrary, we would tell him that he could not keep the 
commandments perfectly, and that his only hope for 
everlasting life would be through the exercising of faith 
in Christ and His sacrifice for sins. 

Why did Jesus point to the Law? We reply that the 
Law Covenant was still in force in Israel, as it had been 
for more than sixteen centuries. God's promise to the 
Jews was respecting the Law. "He that doeth these 
things shall live by the doing of them." Righteousness 
was to be the condition of everlasting life. All the Jews 
understood this; and this young ruler confessed that he 
so understood, and that he had been striving to live 
according to this rule. Yet he realized that he was dying, 
like the remainder of the race. Therefore his query. 
Jesus' answer signifies, "You should not strive only to 
keep the Law, and no more; you must be a sacrificer, 
and take up your cross and follow My example." 

We are not hastily to suppose that Jesus meant that 
the riches should be given away recklessly or indiscriminately. 
Had the young man agreed to the terms and 
asked the Lord how he could best distribute his wealth, 
we doubt not that the Lord would have said to him, 
"Give it all to God; and then, as His steward, distribute 
it according to the wisdom which God will give you 
and according to His providential leadings." Even this 
full surrender of earthly possessions would not be sufficient 
for one who would gain a place in the Kingdom 
class. He must do more; he must become active in the 
Lord's service, take up his cross, practicing self-denial, 
and follow on patiently in the narrow way of self-sacrifice, 
in the footsteps of the Redeemer, even unto death. 

After the close of the Jewish Age, Jesus would not 
have suggested the possibility of everlasting life through 
keeping the Law, but rather would plainly have stated the 
impossibility of any imperfect person's keeping the Divine 



Law perfectly and the necessity of having the imputation 
of Christ's merit to cover his imperfections. Only thus 
can the righteousness of the Law be "fulfilled in us who 
are walking not after the flesh, but after the Spirit." 

SORROWFUL! FOR VERY RICH 

The young Jewish ruler was anxious to do God's will, 
but not sufficiently anxious to be accounted worthy of 
membership in the Little Flock. He was willing to do 
right, to do justly, but unwilling to sacrifice. Jesus and 
all of His followers, on the contrary, engaged to sacrifice 
their lives, even unto death. "Present your bodies 
a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God." 

The riches of the young ruler were not of themselves 
harmful. God is very rich; Abraham of old was very 
rich. The difficulty was that the young man had set his 
heart upon the riches, so that when the testing time came 
as to whether he loved riches or God more, he demonstrated 
that he loved God and the Divine will less than 
he loved his earthly property. He forsook the opportunity 
to do the greatest good, and thus turned his back 
upon a membership in the Kingdom class. We are not, 
however, to understand that there is no hope for that 
young man, who had such a noble character that Jesus 
loved him. In due time he will be getting necessary lessons. 
Even while missing the Kingdom opportunities, 
he may be one of the multitude who will be blessed by 
the Kingdom. 

Jesus points out this test, saying: "Ye cannot serve 
God and mammon." The call of this Gospel Age is to 
be servants of God at any sacrifice, with the assurance 
that "all who will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution," and find the path to glory, honor and immortality 
in the footsteps of Jesus a very rugged one. God 
has purposely put the matter so that we cannot be servants 
of wealth and servants of God at the same time. 
He wishes to bring us to the testing point. With all of 
this class now being called out of the world to be sons 
of God and joint-heirs with Christ, the test is "God 
first." We should have no idols— either wealth or fame 
or selfish ease— which might attract our devotion away 
from God and tempt us to ignore the rich blessings which 
He is now offering to the faithful. 

FEW RICH IN THE KINGDOM 

The rich young man's failure to become a disciple on 
Jesus' terms furnished a text for Jesus. He said to His 
disciples: "How hardly shall they that have riches enter 
into the Kingdom of God!" How difficult it will be for 
any rich man to get into the Kingdom class ! 

The disciples were amazed at this; for, of the great 
bulk of those who were claiming to be the holiness people 
of their day, very few were Jesus' disciples. The richer 
Jews were chiefly associated with the Pharisees. How, 



then, could it be that few rich would enter into the Kingdom? 
Was it not a mistake? Could Jesus mean it? 

But Jesus emphasized His teaching, saying: "How 
hard it is for them that trust in riches to enter into the 
Kingdom! It is easier for a camel to go through the 
Needle's Eye than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom 
of God. "--Matthew 19:23,24. 

A CAMEL THROUGH A NEEDLE'S EYE 

The illustration regarding "the eye of a needle" used 
by our Lord was unintentionally spoiled by our translators. 

R5466 : page 158 

How many have looked at an ordinary cambric 
needle, and have noticed the smallness of the eye and the 
impossibility of a camel's going through it, and then have 
felt perplexed! 

The Needle's Eye referred to by Jesus was the name 
given to a small gate or opening in a large gate in the 
city wall. The gates of Jerusalem were closed at night 
for protection against robbers, and watchmen were on 
duty. The gates were not allowed to be opened until 
morning, lest a considerable number of armed men might 
enter and pillage the city. An arrangement was made, 
however, for travelers who failed to reach the gate 
before it was closed. The smaller gate, the Needle's 
Eye, was just large enough to permit a camel to go 
through after it had been unburdened— its load removed. 
Thus understood, Jesus taught that as a camel could go 
through the Needle's Eye, or smaller gate, only by having 
its load removed, so a rich man could enter the 
Kingdom of God only by renouncing his burdens, giving 
up all to the Lord. 

All this placing of the rich, the favored class, apparently 
at a disadvantage as compared with the poor, or 
disfavored class, caused amazement to Jesus' disciples. 
They inquired, "Who, then, can be saved?" The rich 
seemingly had all the opportunities of time, influence 
and money to enable them to give more and better service 
to the Lord than could others; and if they would have 
such difficulty in getting into the Kingdom, how would 
it be with others, less favored apparently? Jesus 
answered that "all things are possible with God." That 
is to say, if the rich man's heart be pleasing to the Lord 
—if he be honest-hearted and humble, and his riches 
alone stand in the way— the Lord would know how to 
show him His will in respect to their use; or if this did 
not avail, the Lord would know how to strip him of 
his wealth, even as the master of the camel would 
unload his beast to permit him to pass through the 
Needle's Eye. 

Many have had this very experience. They have been 
rich in honors of men, in social standing or in a financial 
sense; and God, in love and mercy, has stripped 



them of all these, giving them the necessary lessons, 
fitting and preparing them for a share in the Kingdom. 
With God this is possible. He knows how to overrule 
all things for good to those who love Him with all their 
heart, mind, soul and strength. 

"WE HAVE LEFT ALL" 

St. Peter seemed to get the thought that join t-heirship 
with the Master in the Kingdom would mean a full 
surrender to God— a leaving of all and a yielding up of 
all— in order to a close approach to God and full acceptance 
by Him. St. Peter said: "Lo, we have left all, and 
have followed Thee." 

Jesus did not fully endorse St. Peter's statement. He 
knew about Judas, who had not nearly left all. He knew 
about St. Peter himself— that some self-will still remained, 
and that self-preservation would lead him to deny his 
Master. But the answer that Jesus gave fully covered 
the question, not only for the Apostles, but for all who 
have become followers of Jesus from that day until now. 
He said: 

"Verily I say unto you, There is no man that hath 
left houses, or brethren, or sisters, or mother, or father, 
or children, or lands, for My sake and the Gospel's, but 
he shall receive a hundredfold now in this time— houses, 
and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and 
lands— with persecutions; and in the world [age] to 
come, eternal life." 

What a broad promise, and how abundantly fulfilled 
in its earthly respects to many! The persecutions they 
are sure to get; but everything sacrificed for the Lord's 
cause is compensated a hundredfold in the present life. 
How gracious the Divine arrangements; and then beyond, 
the everlasting life and, if faithful, a share with the 
Master in the Kingdom ! 

"But many that are first shall be last; and the last 
first." In other words, many possessing great privilege 
and opportunity for Divine favor and exaltation to the 
Kingdom will fail to embrace the opportunity, while 
others, naturally less favored, will gain the great prize 
of glory, honor and immortality. Again, we might say 
that those who first had the opportunity of becoming 
disciples of Jesus at His First Advent will not on that 
account (except the Apostles) have any pre-eminence 
or advantage over others of the Lord's followers in the 
future, nor did they have here. 



R5466 : page 158 

AN INTERESTING QUESTION 
GOD'S SUPERVISION OF THE NATIONS 



"THE MOST HIGH ruleth in the Kingdom of 
men, and giveth it to whomsoever He will, 
and setteth up over it the basest of men."— 
Daniel 4:17. 

"Let every soul be subject unto the 
higher powers. For there is no power but 
of God; the powers that be are ordained of 
God. Whosoever therefore resisteth the 
power, resisteth the ordinance of God."— 
Romans 13:1,2. 

Question.— Should we understand from the above 
Scriptures that God guides the affairs of nations, and 
chooses their rulers? 

Answer.— These Scriptures are in harmony with other 
statements of Scripture. In the case of Nebuchadnezzar, 
for instance, after he had been seven years insane, lying 
amongst the beasts of the field, his reason returned to him 
and he extolled the God of Heaven, acknowledging that 
God setteth up those whom He will and putteth down 
those whom He will. We understand that God's dealing 
with King Nebuchadnezzar was prophetic. 

In the case of Israel God had very particular oversight 
of their affairs, and dealt with their rulers. David 
was anointed when he was a youth, to be king in due 
time instead of Saul. So with several others of their 
kings— the Lord had them anointed in advance. It might 
be said of Israel, that whoever sat upon the throne was 
there as the Lord's representative. We remember also 
that on one occasion the Prophet of God was sent to 
anoint one of the kings of Syria and to give him a 
prophecy respecting himself, that he should take the 
throne. 

Looking back, we see that in the case of Pharaoh, the 
perverse king of Egypt, God declared, "For this very purpose 
I raised thee up, that I might show forth My Power 
in thee." God did not approve of Pharaoh, but used him 
to show forth His own glory. God also used King Cyrus 
of Persia as a servant to perform His bidding. 

GOD'S SUPERVISION OF CURRENT EVENTS 

All of these recorded instances show a vital interest on 
God's part as to who shall come forward and who shall 
be retarded when these matters would affect His own 
Plan. We are not to understand that these different 
kings represented God's choice as respects their loyalty 
to Him, but that these were the ones through whom the 

R5466 : page 159 

Divine Plan in operation could be signally manifested and 
outworked. And so it is today. The Lord knew which 
of the men running for the office of President of the 
United States in the fall of 1912 would be the most suitable 
—the one who would most fully co-operate in the 
carrying out of the very conditions which He is pleased 



to permit to come to pass at this time. 

The Lord guides in the affairs of nations now, only in 
so far as such oversight will promote the fulfilment of 
His own purposes. When the monarchs of various countries 
declare themselves "King by the grace of God," we 
do not agree to the thought they have in mind in making 
such claim. They are expressing the thought which has 
prevailed throughout Christendom for centuries— that 
they reign as representatives of the Kingdom of God, and 
by His special favor. And likewise the Catholic Church: 
When the pope claims that he is the head of the Church 
of Christ, claims that he is Christ's Vice-gerent, he thus 
claims that Christ has set up His Kingdom, and that the 
pope reigns in His stead. 

OVERRULE TO OUTWORKING OF GOD'S PLAN 

After the Papal power waned in Europe, and the 
Protestants came into power, the Protestant rulers claimed 
the same right that the Catholics had claimed— to rule as 
the Lord's special representatives. And it is from this 
standpoint that kings maintain that they reign "by the 
grace of God," that the Kingdom of God is set up, and 
that they are reigning in God's Kingdoms. We do not 
understand this to be the right thought, but that in God's 
providence He permits these to occupy the thrones of the 
world for the time being. We understand that God does 
exercise a supervisory oversight in respect to them— not 
that He has authorized them to represent Him, or that 
He is responsible for their deeds and acts, but that He is 
so controlling matters as to cause them to outwork His 
own arrangements. 

God will not convert a king in order to do this; He 
will not make him a saint. But He can allow or hinder 
events without interfering with the free will of any individual, 
and without becoming responsible for his 
government. 

We may assume that this supervision of Divine 
Power is for the ultimate interest of mankind. We remember 
that there is a Prince of Darkness, who is seeking 
to do violence to humanity. Our thought is that the 
Divine Power hinders or restrains, so that the worst 

R5467 : page 159 

things cannot come to pass until His due time, and He 
overrules to bring those into power who will have the 
disposition to do what He purposes to permit when His 
due time has arrived. However, since the Lord does not 
explain to us just how He does this, it would be wise for 
us not to be too emphatic in our statements. 



R5467 : page 159 



SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
SOUNDS A NOTE OF WARNING 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

A peculiar circumstance occurred here in the Ecclesia on 
Sunday, March 15th, which I think should be brought to your 
attention. Just what it portends or just how far the several 
versions are to be relied upon, I cannot say; but as it appears 
to be in line with numerous warnings issued through THE 
WATCH TOWER for years past, I will state the facts upon 
which there appears to be unanimity: 

It is the custom of the parents in this Ecclesia to allow 
the children to play during meeting hours in the ante-rooms 
adjoining our main hall. On this particular afternoon after 
the Berean Lesson had been in progress for some little time 
a commotion was heard in the children's room, mingled with 
screams of fright. One of the sisters was just entering the 
building when the matter started, and rushing into the room 
found several of the children hysterical, others cowering in 
abject fear with heads covered, and all greatly alarmed. 
When pressed for an explanation they stated that they had 
seen "a ghost." The older ones, better informed, declared 
they had seen a demon materialized, and that several arms 
had appeared protruding from the bare walls of the room. 
They declared that when they began to cry and shout, the 
apparition disappeared in the air. 

It required some little persuasion to quiet them and to 
furnish solace in the suggestion that the Lord would not permit 
harm to come to the children of consecrated parents. 

Besides this circumstance, two of the brothers in the class 
have had particularly heavy trials through semi-materializations 
of the demons within the last few weeks. Another 
brother who, I understand, has been clandestinely attending 
"Tongues of Fire" meetings on different occasions, suddenly 
became insane a few weeks ago and was sent to the asylum. 
His sad case gives many evidences of obsession. 

Too many of the dear friends only half-heartedly accept the 
plain Scriptural teachings respecting the actual existence of 
these evil personalities and their pernicious activities. Some 
of these are in danger of severe testings from this source. 
Would it not be well to sound a warning? Can this sudden 
increase of activity on the part of these evil spirits, reports 
of which are coming from many sources, be premonitory of 
the "loosing of the winds" in the very near future? God 
help us all to have on the "whole armor and to stand in 
the evil day." 

The Vow is still as valuable a factor in this "wrestling 
against principalities," etc., in exalted positions, as it was the 
day I made it my own. 

With Christian love, your servant, WM. A. BAKER. 

A SOFT ANSWER 

Below is a copy of a letter sent by one Brother to another 
in the endeavor to effect a reconciliation. We commend it: 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

Grace, mercy and peace from God our Father and from 
Jesus Christ our Lord be unto you! 

What is it, dear Brother, that has caused this difference 
between us? As brethren of the Lord we should not devour 
one another; for that is the spirit of the world, and as the 
Apostle says in Galatians 5:15, there is a likelihood of our 
being consumed one of another: "Take heed that ye be not 
consumed one of another," urges the Apostle. 

What if, in our appreciation of the liberty that is ours, 
and of which we know through the Gospel, we should reach 
the point where we would be so contentious for our liberties, 
great and small, that we would consume some brethren for 
whom Christ died! What if in injuring another, the spirit 
of strife should so react upon us as to poison our own 
spiritual lives, and we also should be consumed, lost, as respects 
the gracious things to which the Lord has invited us 
and for which we have been running in the race! 

Now, dear Brother, let the Apostle's words RING in our 
hearts, "Lest ye be consumed one of another." 

With this thought before our minds, let us more and more 
put on the armor of God to fight AGAINST our own fleshly 
weaknesses and to fight FOR our dear brethren, assisting them 
by example and by precept to war a good warfare also against 
the world, the flesh and the Adversary. Nearly all these 
contentions come through some misunderstanding. Neither 
you nor I have a desire to injure each other, but we earnestly 
desire each other's good. 

For what I have done in any way to hurt your feelings 
in the past, I heartily ask your forgiveness; and believe me, 
I do the same with you, remembering Matthew 7:1,2 and 
6:14-16. 

If our views are correct, dear Brother (I really believe 
they are), with regard to 1914, we have no time to lose; and 
as the Apostle says, "There should be no SCHISM in the Body; 
but the members should have the same care one for another." 
Now let me conclude with love, and Jude 24,25. 

Yours by His grace, J. HODSON. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR MONTH OF JUNE 
Questions from Manual on Series Second of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDIES III. and IV., VOL. II. 

Week of June 7 Q. 15 to 20 Week of June 21 Q. 8 to 15 

Week of June 14 Q. 1 to 7 Week of June 28 Q. 16 to 23 

Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each, 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



page 161 
