How Will Living Forever Be Possible?
FROM where does life come? Atheists claim it came about by accident. A scientific work says: “Living organisms probably began in a very modest way when, in a world of lifeless rocks, certain chemical elements came together to form complex molecules. In due course collections of these came to be imbued with the ability to feed and reproduce.”
Does that sound convincing to you? The word “probably” shows that it is a guess. All living cells are extremely complex. If we set aside speculation and even educated guesses, we face the fact that “the ability to feed and reproduce” has not been observed just to happen. Rather, what we all can observe about the astonishing complexity of creatures proves the existence of a Mastermind​—One who can purpose and execute marvels beyond our ability and full comprehension. Many scientists agree that life has been shown to proceed only from preexisting life. Hence, there must be an original Source of life. As the Bible says: “How precious your loving-kindness is, O God! . . . For with you is the source of life.”​—Psalm 36:7, 9.
Science cannot satisfactorily explain life in all its forms, yet it has helped to reveal the amazing complexity and beauty of God’s handiwork​—the seemingly endless variety of insect, animal and plant life, the many-hued flowers and shrubs to enchant the eye, the countless aromas and tastes to delight our senses, the immensity and majesty of the universe, the fascination of microorganisms—​and much more still to be discovered and enjoyed. A hundred years of life is barely enough to begin to know and appreciate all the enchanting and awe-inspiring creations of the Almighty.
Numerous people who have carefully studied this matter have concluded: Surely all this variety and beauty bespeak, not an impersonal remote force, but an all-wise Creator. Much of the life we see on earth points clearly to a loving Father, or Life-Giver. So many things have obviously been created to make us happy. As Revelation 15:3 states, “Great and wonderful are your works, Jehovah God, the Almighty.” The Bible shows that Jehovah God, although he is to be feared when we rebel or disobey, is “the happy God” who delights in making others happy.​—1 Timothy 1:11; Acts 20:35.
God’s Original Purpose for Man
The Bible gives a simple but satisfying account of man’s origin. Its first chapter recounts the creation of the earth, then of plants, marine life, flying creatures and animals. (Genesis 1:1-25) Interestingly, geology and the fossil record reveal this same order. Finally, God made man “out of dust [or elements] from the ground”​—another scientifically sound statement. (Genesis 2:7) Man was also made “in God’s image.” Is that not true to life? Man was obviously made to think and reason on a plane far above animals. He has a moral sense and appreciation of spiritual values that animals lack. Even primitive tribes have their religion; but what is the religion of, say, a dog or an ape?​—Genesis 1:27.
The ancient Biblical record provides reliable information about the earth and life forms on it. So let us open-mindedly see what it says about the earliest history of humankind.
Jehovah prepared a beautiful residence for man​—“a garden in Eden” with “every tree desirable to one’s sight and good for food.” (Genesis 2:8, 9) The flora​—trees, blossoms, fruit and flowers—​could be a constant source of delight. Man was also given satisfying work​—that of cultivating and taking care of his Paradise home—​as well as responsibility​—‘having in subjection every living creature.’ (Genesis 1:28; 2:15) Imagine that! A gorgeous garden and a host of fascinating fauna to look after​—without a need for man to worry about growing old and dying.
But still another fine gift was yet to come. Adam noticed that all these creatures had mates and could produce offspring. So where was his mate? As he awoke from a deep sleep​—there she was! What a thrilling experience! Deeply moved, Adam expressed what was probably the first poetry:
“This is at last bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh. This one will be called Woman, because from man this one was taken.”​—Genesis 2:23.
The historical record preserved in the Bible informs us that “God blessed them and God said to them: ‘Be fruitful and become many and fill the earth and subdue it.’” (Genesis 1:28) What a glorious privilege​—to generate a perfect human race that would live forever on a paradise earth! That was God’s original purpose for man.
Why Do We Die?
Adam and Eve however were not robots, programmed to do what God wanted. They were able to decide and plan for themselves. Hence, God provided a simple test of their loyalty: “From every tree of the garden you may eat to satisfaction. But as for the tree of the knowledge of good and bad you must not eat from it, for in the day you eat from it you will positively die.”​—Genesis 2:16, 17.
Furthermore, trouble was brewing behind the scenes. A mighty angel, or spirit creature, seeing the marvelous prospect of humans filling the earth, coveted their obedience and worship for himself. Using an intermediary, he told the first lie: “You positively will not die.” This rebel angel thus became “Satan” (opposer) and “Devil” (slanderer).​—Genesis 3:1-5; John 8:44; Revelation 12:9.
The first pair failed in that simple test of loyalty to God. They turned traitors, and God cannot abide traitors. Expelled from Eden, they finally suffered the foretold penalty​—death. Their children, born after their parents were condemned, could not inherit perfect health and everlasting life.​—Romans 5:12.
It was a long time before imperfect Adam died​—930 years—​but God’s sentence was inescapable! For some 2,000 years man’s age remained remarkably high. Adam’s son Seth lived to be 912, Enosh 905, Kenan 910, Methuselah (the oldest on record) 969 years. Noah lived to be 950. From then on, ages declined rapidly.​—Genesis 5:5, 8, 11, 14, 27; 9:29; 11:10-25.
That interesting record illustrates the potential regenerative power of the human body. Even though we are far removed from Adam’s original human perfection, our body cells renew themselves. Says the Encyclopædia Britannica: “The potential immortality of all essential cellular elements of the [human] body either has been fully demonstrated, or has been carried far enough to make the probability very great.” If men lived for almost a thousand years despite the burden of sin and death working in their bodies, think how long they could live without that terrible handicap.
Release From Sin and Death
The main point, however, is that whereas human projects, including scientific projects, often fail, God cannot fail: “My word . . . will not return to me without results, but it will certainly do that in which I have delighted, and it will have certain success.” (Isaiah 55:11) We can be released from sin and death. How?
We are prisoners to sin and death. But Jesus, a second “Adam” in the sense of being a perfect man while on earth, died a sacrificial death to buy back what Adam lost​—according to God’s ancient law of “soul for soul.” “For as by one man’s [Adam’s] disobedience many were made sinners, so by one man’s [Jesus’] obedience many will be made righteous.” (1 Corinthians 15:45; Exodus 21:23; Romans 5:19, Revised Standard Version) Jehovah’s love for the world of mankind made this possible.​—John 3:16.
Everlasting life is one of the main teachings of the “New Testament.” A minority group, 144,000 “called and chosen and faithful” will be granted the privilege of reigning as kings with Christ on his heavenly throne. (Revelation 17:14; 3:21) The Bible assures us, though, that a vast crowd of obedient humans will live forever in a restored earthly Paradise.​—Revelation 7:9-17.
When? How?
Why not read Matthew chapter 24 and Luke chapter 21? They foretell world wars, food shortages, earthquakes in one place after another, false prophets, increasing lawlessness, pestilences, great fear of the future and much more. As Jesus said: “When you see these things occurring, know that the kingdom of God is near.” Yes, the long-awaited switch from human rule to God’s Kingdom is fast approaching.​—Luke 21:31.
Just as surely as sunrise tomorrow will bring a new day, so the swift destruction of God’s enemies will clear the way for “a new earth” in which “righteousness is to dwell.” God promised this. He cannot lie. (2 Peter 3:13; Isaiah 65:17; Hebrews 6:18) To live forever in that new earth​—what a privilege! Is it for you? Does that prospect not thrill you?
Jehovah has made provision for gaining life-giving knowledge​—the real elixir of life. Why not start to partake of this knowledge by enjoying a Bible study in your home? Jehovah’s Witnesses will gladly assist you with such a study​—free!​—John 17:3.
[Picture on page 5]
CUTAWAY VIEW OF CELL
The awesome complexity of a living cell could not be just an  accident
ROUGH ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM
NUCLEAR ENVELOPE
NUCLEUS
NUCLEOLUS
CELL MEMBRANE
MITOCHONDRIA
RIBOSOME
LYSOSOME
MICROVILLI
CENTROSOMES
GOLGI BODY
SMOOTH ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM
[Picture on page 6]
Do animals have their religion?

