Are You Using It to the Full?
1 “I can’t wait to use it in the field!” That is what one sister wrote after reading The Watchtower of January 1, 2008. Have you considered some of the regular features of the public edition, and have you found ways to make good use of them in your field ministry?
2 “What We Learn From Jesus”: Perhaps you have found this feature to be helpful in starting Bible studies. If you have not done so already, try reading the title of the article to the householder and then call attention to what Jesus said about the matter, as related in the first paragraph. When initial interest is shown, endeavor to continue the discussion by using the subheadings, which are set out as thought-provoking questions. Invite the person to comment on the question. Briefly explain any related pictures, and move on to the next paragraph. You may be able to cover the first half of the article on the initial call and then discuss the second half when you return. Be prepared to continue the study in the Bible Teach book.
3 “Keys to Family Happiness”: This series, appearing every three months, is intended to help husbands, wives, and parents to see how to apply Bible principles when dealing with problems that threaten family peace. You can also use these articles to help non-Witnesses to see the wisdom found in the Bible.​—2 Tim. 3:16, 17.
4 Features for Young Ones: The series “For Our Young People” provides an interactive outline that can be used to explore a specific Bible account. You can use these articles to help youths you meet in your ministry to see the practical value of studying God’s Word. (Ps. 119:9, 105) When speaking to parents, you might highlight the “Teach Your Children” series, which appears every other month. These articles can help younger children to learn important lessons from Bible characters. Have you made it a point to read these articles with your children?
5 Other Features: Each month, the feature “Our Readers Ask” considers a question that non-Witnesses are likely to raise. You might highlight this article when offering the magazines from house to house. The feature “A Letter From . . .” is a vivid first-person report showing the challenges that missionaries and others face in carrying out their ministry. These articles can help interested ones to see that the good news is being preached earth wide, in fulfillment of the sign of Christ’s presence.​—Matt. 24:3, 14.
6 The monthly feature “Draw Close to God,” which is based on the Bible reading for the Theocratic Ministry School, may move sincere ones to want to learn more about Jehovah. The series “Imitate Their Faith,” which appears four times a year, is designed to help people visualize Bible accounts, making Bible characters​—their choices, their challenges, their faith—​come to life for modern readers.
7 How delighted we are to receive each month an entire issue of The Watchtower that is designed for use in the field! By all means, let us become thoroughly familiar with its content and use it to the full in our ministry.

