Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting August 11
Song 63
10 min: Local announcements. Ask the audience to comment on articles in the current magazines that they have found to be appealing to people in the territory. Invite audience to mention specific points in the articles they plan to feature. What question could be asked to start a conversation? Which scripture in the article could then be read? Arrange demonstrations showing how suggested presentations might be used.
15 min: Do the Will of God​—Without Distraction. Talk based on “Come Be My Follower,” pages 93-94, paragraphs 12-13.
20 min: “Are You Using It to the Full?”a Interview a publisher who had an experience using one of the new features of the public edition of The Watchtower. The experience may be reenacted. Also, based on paragraph 2, demonstrate how a study may be started using the feature “What We Learn From Jesus,” in the August 1 Watchtower.
Song 26
Week Starting August 18
Song 135
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Discuss “New Circuit Assembly Program.” Announce the date of the next circuit assembly if available. Remind audience to bring the September 1 Watchtower and the September Awake! to the Service Meeting next week and to be prepared to discuss how these may be offered in the local territory.
20 min: Our Dress and Grooming Honors Jehovah. Talk by an elder. Because Jehovah is a holy God, physical cleanness is a priority among his people. (Ex. 30:17-21; 40:30-32) By our exemplary dress and grooming, especially in our ministry, we please Jehovah and bring him glory. (1 Pet. 2:12) On the other hand, failure to do so could cause ‘the word of God to be spoken of abusively.’ (Titus 2:5) Relate local or published experiences showing how the exemplary appearance of a publisher resulted in a witness.
15 min: Youths Who Give a Powerful Witness. Encouraging talk for parents and their children who will be returning to school shortly. Remind young ones to take advantage of opportunities to give a witness. As time permits, invite the audience to relate personal experiences of witnessing while at school.
Song 61
Week Starting August 25
Song 24
15 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Discuss “New Special Assembly Day Program,” and announce the date of the next special assembly day if it is known.
15 min: Local needs.
15 min: Prepare to Offer the September 1 Watchtower and the September Awake! Audience discussion. Give a brief overview of the magazines, and ask the audience which articles may have appeal in the local territory. What question and scripture could be used to introduce the subject? Demonstrate how a sample presentation from Our Kingdom Ministry might be used. Have one of the elders demonstrate a brief presentation that he has prepared based on an article that would fit the local territory.
Song 196
Week Starting September 1
Song 112
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for August.
20 min: Isolated but Not Forgotten. Talk based on the April 15, 2008, Watchtower, pages 25-28. Mention any Christians in the congregation who are living in local nursing homes. If none, use the principles in the article to encourage the congregation to support any who are infirm or otherwise limited in ability to participate in congregation activity.
15 min: Start a Bible Study on the Initial Call During September. Audience discussion. During September we will offer the Bible Teach book and endeavor to discuss a few paragraphs with the householder on the initial visit. Review the suggestions in the January 2006 Our Kingdom Ministry insert and have one or two demonstrations showing how to start a Bible study on the initial call.
Song 74
[Footnote]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

