“Good Health to You!”
HOW is your health? Is it all that you would like it to be? There is something that can improve it, no matter what your present condition may be. Is it diet? No. Is it medicine? No. What will it cost? It costs nothing and has no detrimental side effects. All you need to do is read the Bible and apply its sound, basic principles of living.​—Prov. 4:20-22.
The Bible’s simple, clean principles truly can mean ‘health to all your flesh.’ How is this true? Well, think for a moment about the human body. It is the most complex “machine” that exists on earth. No man really understands what is involved in the intricate workings of the body. As a result, in hardly any other field of knowledge do we find more contradictions than in the field of health care. Only the body’s Creator completely understands the human body.
To face life successfully, everyone, healthy or ill, needs a valid, well-founded hope. The proper mental and spiritual outlook is essential in order to face sicknesses that come and to endure ailments one may have. Doctors know that the total welfare of patients, mentally and physically, must be considered to improve health. God the Creator not only knows the body’s every function; he is also more interested in us than anyone else. Consequently, what he tells us will give us sure, reliable hope​—not a passing thing, but a hope that can fill our lives.
The hope the Creator holds forth is everlasting life on a beautified earth under His administration. Whether our health holds out until then need not be our chief concern, for he has provided a resurrection. (Acts 24:15) Since the Bible shows the dead are unconscious (Eccl. 9:5, 10), if you should die before this righteous condition is brought to the earth, to you the time in the death state would seem only a split second, even if it amounted to years. You would awaken, however, in God’s new arrangement of things here on earth, under his Kingdom rule. (Rev. 21:1-4) Knowing this is a great step toward health of mind and body now, for it greatly lessens the fear of death.​—Hos. 13:14.
There is another most important factor. That is the help that the Bible gives in controlling our emotions. Here is where the Bible can give us help that no doctor or psychiatrist can provide. What is its counsel on this vital problem?
Well, it tells us: “Never be anxious and say, ‘What are we to eat?’ or, ‘What are we to drink?’ or, ‘What are we to put on?’ . . . For your heavenly Father knows you need all these things. Keep on, then, seeking first the kingdom and [God’s] righteousness, and all these other things will be added to you. So, never be anxious about the next day.”​—Matt. 6:31-34.
The Bible also kindly counsels against the more violent and destructive emotions. Venting our anger, vindictiveness and desire for revenge will not bring about the results we would really like. (Rom. 12:19) Rather, such emotions and desires will prove to be calamitous.
The Bible says: “Man’s wrath does not work out God’s righteousness.” (Jas. 1:20) It wisely advises: “Let the sun not set with you in a provoked state.” (Eph. 4:26) Straighten out the trouble immediately in a peaceful way. Then your sleep will be pleasant, with benefit to your health.​—Matt. 5:23, 24; 18:15.
Is it a proved fact that such emotions actually affect one’s physical health? The Bible definitely shows that this is the case. (Prov. 14:30) And in harmony with that, a study of emotions by medical doctors and psychiatrists reveals that jealousy, anxiety and anger or rage contribute to, aggravate, or even cause, such ailments as asthma, skin diseases, hives, ulcers and dental and digestive troubles, and can trigger heart failure.
Following Bible principles gives a person balance in life and helps him to avoid the things that destroy health. A few more examples may be mentioned in proof:
Bible Principle                   Result of Following Bible                                        Principle
“Flee from fornication.”          Freedom from venereal​—1 Cor. 6:18.                     disease
Avoid greed, gluttony, heavy      Avoidance of or relief fromdrinking.​—Prov. 23:20, 21;        stomach, liver and heart1 Cor. 5:11.                      ailments, other dangers
“Let us cleanse ourselves of      Great degree of protection fromevery defilement of flesh and     many infectious diseases asspirit.” (Includes habits         well as heart disease, cancer,such as tobacco use,              mental unbalance, untimelyperversions; also mental          deathdefilement, such as drugabuse.)​—2 Cor. 7:1.
Avoid spiritism. (Includes        Freedom from being led intoastrology.)​—Gal. 5:19, 20.        demon possession, insanity,                                  death as a suicide
Forsake bad associations.         Protection from bodily injury​—1 Cor. 15:33;                    due to being drawn into unwise Prov. 13:20; 28:7;                actions, revelries, crime,Ex. 23:1, 2.                      uprisings
What more could you rightly want now than better health, a better mental and spiritual condition, better relations with your fellowmen and, most importantly, with God? “Good health to you” is a Bible expression. A man with an experience of some thirty years in practicing godly devotion as recommended in the Bible said: “It holds promise of the life now and that which is to come.” Why not prove this for yourself by reading the Bible and applying its fine principles.​—Acts 15:29; 1 Tim. 4:8.
[Diagram on page 196]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Giving in to rage radically affects the major body systems labeled above, with potentially damaging results
BRAIN FUNCTIONS
BLOOD VESSELS
THYROID
HEART
SPLEEN
ADRENAL GLANDS
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
LOWER BOWEL
BLADDER

