The Work of Paramount Importance
 1. What sacrifices will our deep appreciation for the ministry impel us to make?
1 Why are we regularly encouraged to devote our time, energy, and resources to the ministry? Because no work has greater value! Reflecting on its far-reaching effects will increase our desire to share in this never-to-be-repeated work.—Acts 20:24.
 2. How does our preaching help to sanctify Jehovah’s great name?
2 Sanctifies Jehovah’s Name: The preaching work emphasizes that Jehovah’s Kingdom by Christ Jesus will replace all human governments and provide solutions to all that ails mankind. (Matt. 6:9, 10) Jehovah is magnified as the only one able to rescue us from sickness and death. (Isa. 25:8; 33:24) Since we bear his name, others who observe our fine conduct and zeal may glorify him. (1 Pet. 2:12) How satisfying it is for us to make known throughout the earth the name of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah!—Ps. 83:18.
 3. What blessings come to those who respond favorably to the Kingdom message?
3 Saves Lives: Jehovah “does not desire any to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.” (2 Pet. 3:9) Yet, without someone to teach them, how would people ever learn what Jehovah considers to be proper or improper conduct? (Jonah 4:11; Rom. 10:13-15) When individuals respond to the good news, the quality of their lives improves as they abandon harmful practices. (Mic. 4:1-4) Furthermore, they gain the joyful prospect of everlasting life. Our active preaching and teaching saves us and those who listen to us. (1 Tim. 4:16) What a highly honored role we have in this most important work!
 4. Why should we be actively involved in the Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work?
4 Soon the great tribulation will bring an abrupt end to this unrighteous world. Those who take Jehovah’s side will survive. Thus, preaching and making disciples is the most urgent, important, and beneficial work taking place today. Let us give it the foremost place in our lives!—Matt. 6:33.

