Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
The man who builds to the future following Bible counsel will enjoy peace. (Ps. 37:37) An outstanding aid to Bible study, now published in sixty-two languages and helping millions to build to the future in a proper way, is the Watchtower magazine, a copy of which you have in your hand. During January Jehovah’s witnesses will offer a year’s subscription for this journal, with three booklets, for only $1.
GOOD CHEER THROUGHOUT THE YEAR
How many times do you spend a dollar in a year? How many of those dollars bring you something of value that lasts all year? The way you can insure the most for just one dollar is by subscribing now for The Watchtower and receiving all twenty-four issues published throughout one year. Its message of comfort and good cheer is taken directly from the Bible and will equip you to face this year’s problems with new courage. Send now and receive free the booklets God’s Way Is Love, God’s Kingdom Rules—Is the World’s End Near? and “Look! I Am Making All Things New.”
WATCH TOWER PUBLICATIONS INDEX
Information is useful only as it is available. To assist you in locating the wealth of specific material contained in The Watchtower over the past year, the Watch Tower Publications Index for 1961 has been published. The Index contains a comprehensive listing of all subjects and scriptures discussed in the twenty-four issues of the 1961 Watchtower, and covers also Awake! for 1961, the book “Let Your Name Be Sanctified,” the booklets Blood, Medicine and the Law of God and When All Nations Unite Under God’s Kingdom, the Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses for both 1961 and 1962 and appendix material in the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, 1961 edition. Specific entries cover both major discussions and brief comments of particular value. Send 10c for your copy of the Index today.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
February 25: World Ruler Out of the “House of Bread.” Page 41.
March 4: Like Dew from God and like a Lion Among Nations. Page 48.

