Gilead’s First Graduation at Brooklyn
MONDAY, November 27, 1961, would be long remembered. “The Bethel family has looked forward to having a Gilead class here,” said President N. H. Knorr to his audience of 720, including the 100 students of Gilead’s thirty-sixth class. “For you it is a very blessed day,” he told the graduates.
Instructor Fred Rusk counseled them to remember Jesus’ words, “If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing.” (John 8:54) “Increased knowledge with love—a wonderful combination,” said instructor Harry Peloyan; “increased knowledge without love—never may that happen to us.” U. V. Glass pointed out that this first class at Brooklyn had “an opportunity that no other class has ever had.” No other class had as many guest lectures from members of the governing body and the Bethel family. They had a close association with the headquarters organization that no previous class had. Registrar Edward Dunlap likened this association to Timothy’s training by Paul, one of the early governing body.
Following the reading of telegrams and congratulations from around the world, the students heard the factory servant, Max Larson, declare that their training in coordinated functioning or organization would help them succeed in their ministry. George Couch, Bethel Home servant, expressed appreciation for their fine example of willingness and cooperation.
The Society’s vice-president, Fred Franz, reminded the graduates that they are in a spiritual war. Highlighting the organizational training received at the headquarters of Jehovah’s visible organization, the graduates were told: “You have been trained here so that in case of emergency you can fill in.” “The time will come when there will be a gap or a breach in the organization,” he said, referring to anticipated efforts of the Devil to “force out prominent individuals in the organization, those who are pillars.” “All the gaps in the front lines have to be filled, and that is a privilege and opportunity for which you have been training here.”—Isa. 58:12.
Brother Knorr then spoke on the need for courage and hearts unified in Jehovah’s fear. “The Devil will want you to compromise,” said the speaker, pointing to the threat from imprisonment or any efforts at internal corruption of the organization. “Many of you will be acting as special servants. As overseer you will have to take your ministry very seriously.” He told the graduates: “You don’t want to be afraid of the position of service given to you. Thank Jehovah for it.” They were urged to copy the humility of Jesus and the willingness of Paul to work in order to carry on his ministry. ‘What if you are cut off from communication with the Society; will you carry on?’ he asked. The students were admonished to encourage their brothers, build them up and take the lead. ‘Carry out the responsibility that goes with your assignment.’ “Let Jehovah give the blessing.” “Your faith has been increased,” said the president. “Just as you have greater faith, so the Society has greater faith in you. We believe that you will accomplish more.”
Certainly this thirty-sixth class had received splendid training for organizational duties in branch offices, for supervising the field ministry, organizing new congregations, and opening up new fields. They had studied the history of religion, true and false, and had made a verse-by-verse interpretative analysis of the entire New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. So equipped, they now came forward to accept assignments to fifty-three nations as missionaries, pioneers, members of Bethel families, circuit, district and branch servants. In a resolution presented by graduate Leo Greenlees, the class expressed its determination to continue to do the things they had learned. Then Brother Knorr announced intermission for the evening meal.
A condensed Watchtower study was conducted beginning at 7:30 p.m., with selected students commenting on the subject “Bearers of the Fear-inspiring Name.” The president then called on student representatives from forty-four lands for brief farewell talks. With hearts overflowing with love and thanks to Jehovah, the graduates expressed appreciation for their ten-month training. The first student said Jehovah’s organization gets more beautiful the closer you look at it. All were grateful to have attended the new Gilead School.
The interesting program of experiences and impressions of life at Gilead was concluded at 11:30 p.m. with a closing song, and prayer by Brother Knorr. Gilead’s first graduation at Brooklyn had been an occasion blessed by Jehovah.

