Who Is Qualified to Preach?
1 When it comes to the ministry, have you ever felt like Moses? He said: “Excuse me, Jehovah, but I am not a fluent speaker, neither since yesterday nor since before that nor since your speaking to your servant.” (Ex. 4:10) If you feel that way, you may be inclined to hold back. Yet, Jesus “ordered us to preach to the people and to give a thorough witness.” (Acts 10:42) So how do we become qualified preachers of the good news?
2 It is not the extent of our secular education that qualifies us for the ministry. Paul said that “not many wise in a fleshly way were called” and that “the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God.” (1 Cor. 1:26; 3:19) Jesus selected his apostles from among the working class—at least four being fishermen by trade. The proud religious leaders viewed them with disdain as “men unlettered and ordinary.” Judged by worldly standards, the apostles were unqualified to preach. Yet, Peter’s masterful discourse delivered on the day of Pentecost moved 3,000 to be baptized!—Acts 2:14, 37-41; 4:13.
3 Jehovah Qualifies Us to Preach: Paul declared: “Our being adequately qualified issues from God.” (2 Cor. 3:5) Jehovah, the Source of wisdom, has taught millions to preach Kingdom truth to others. (Isa. 54:13) The effectiveness and fruitfulness of this work can be seen in the 338,491 who were baptized last year as living “letters of recommendation.” (2 Cor. 3:1-3) We have every reason to preach with boldness and conviction about the things we have learned from Jehovah.
4 God’s organization has established an international training program for ministers. By means of the Scriptures and a great variety of Bible study aids, we are schooled and trained to become “fully competent, completely equipped” to preach. (2 Tim. 3:16, 17) Many have been impressed with the scholarship found in the Society’s publications. For example, a Swedish periodical stated: “Behind the faith being preached by Jehovah’s Witnesses there is an amazing high-class and internationally oriented Bible science.”
5 With the direction given in our five weekly meetings, our program for Bible reading and study, counseling in the Theocratic Ministry School, personal assistance by others who are experienced ministers, and above all, the backing of Jehovah’s holy spirit, we can be confident that Jehovah views us as fully qualified to preach. “Yes, as sent from God, under God’s view, in company with Christ, we are speaking.”—2 Cor. 2:17.
6 If we take full advantage of the theocratic training provided by God through his organization, we have no reason to hold back or feel intimidated. We can joyfully preach to others, assured that Jehovah will bless our efforts.—1 Cor. 3:6.

