Evolution and You
DURING the 19th century, The Origin of Species convinced masses of people that man had survived without divine intervention and would continue to do so. Enthralled by scientific advancements, many felt that God was no longer necessary and that science could save the human race. The book Age of Progress noted that the 19th century “was animated by a conviction that rationally applied human effort could transform the world.”
Toward the end of that century, however, even Charles Darwin wavered in his optimism. According to one historian, Darwin feared that the theory of evolution “had killed God and that the consequences for the future of mankind were incalculable.” Alfred Russel Wallace, a younger contemporary of Darwin, recalled: “During my last conversation with Darwin [shortly before Darwin’s death] he expressed a very gloomy view on the future of mankind.”
What Has Human Effort Produced?
The history of the 20th century has since revealed that much gloom was indeed ahead. The technological achievements since Darwin’s time merely camouflaged what has proved to be by far the darkest, most violent age in all human history. We live amid what historian H. G. Wells described as “a real demoralization.”
Since Wells made that statement (some 75 years ago), the world has continued to experience more demoralization. Nothing that scientists, economists, social agencies, human governments, or this world’s religions have tried has remedied the situation or even stemmed the tide. Conditions continue to deteriorate.
In reality, therefore, it must be asked: What has human effort produced? Have science and technology brought about a better world? “When we open the daily paper and look at what’s going on,” said biologist Ruth Hubbard, “the problems are not scientific. They are problems of social organization, of things having gotten too big, of people going after profit and ignoring human needs.” Hubbard added: “I don’t really think that in a rational allotment of resources, science is likely to solve any or many of the problems that most trouble people in the world.”
Really, of what benefit is it when man can travel to the moon but cannot solve the basic problems of the human family? Did the invention of increasingly destructive weapons, such as the atom bomb, bring an end to wars and ethnic violence? Have the accomplishments of science significantly diminished crime, family breakup, sexually transmitted diseases, immorality, illegitimate births, corruption in high places, poverty, hunger, homelessness, drug abuse, pollution? No, science has, if anything, made some of these things worse. Abandoning God and substituting evolution and science, the human family has not helped its situation but has hurt it.
Not surprisingly, many are having second thoughts about the theory that man evolved from apelike creatures, as opposed to there being a God who created the first humans. A Gallup poll in the United States revealed that only 9 percent of Americans hold to the belief that man evolved with no divine intervention; 47 percent accept the idea that God created man in his present form.
What the Bible Predicted
While The Origin of Species predicted that man would progress toward perfection, the Bible foretold that the world would be rocked by a moral crisis. (Matthew 24:3-12; 2 Timothy 3:1-5) The Bible also foretold that this crisis would reach a climax, after which faithful mankind’s lot would be a paradise, free from all of today’s problems.​—Psalm 37:10, 11, 29; Isaiah 11:6-9; 35:1-7; Revelation 21:4, 5.
This hope has caused many to examine the Bible with keen interest. Could it really be that the purpose of life is more than a struggle for existence? Could the Bible hold the key not only to man’s past but also to his future, including your future? It would be very much worth your while to investigate what the Bible really teaches about God and his purpose for this earth and its people. If you would like more information, Jehovah’s Witnesses would be happy to assist you.
[Box on page 9]
Millions have been helped to take another look at the evidence for a God of creation, using the book Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation?a To date, some 30 million copies have been printed in 27 languages. Also, Awake! magazine continues to publish information regarding what the facts of true science show as to the validity of the theory of evolution.
[Footnotes]
Published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
[Picture on page 8, 9]
Contrary to the theory of evolution, the Bible predicted today’s moral crisis and its solution​—a trouble-​free paradise
[Picture Credit Line on page 8]
U.S. Coast Guard photo
[Picture Credit Line on page 8]
Starving child: WHO photo by P. Almasy
[Picture Credit Line on page 8]
Right: U.S. National Archives photo

