From Our Readers
Burnout  Thank you for the series “Do You Suffer From Burnout?” (January 8, 1995) Although I serve as a pioneer, for months I have felt sapped of strength and lacked motivation. The article gave me some points that I shall apply personally, especially the suggestion to avoid criticizing others.
M. S., Germany
These were extraordinary articles for me because I finally recognized my problem. I am a wife, the mother of four children, and have a lot to do. Sadly, I get little appreciation from my family. I feel better knowing that this is a common problem among sensitive people. Never stop publishing articles like these!
J. M., Italy
I have been experiencing fatigue, lack of enthusiasm, helplessness, hopelessness, and malaise. After reading the article, I understand the factors that led to these feelings. I want you to know how good it feels to be understood and to know that Jehovah and his organization care enough to write encouraging articles.
Z. L., United States
Burnout contributed to my giving up Bethel service and later giving up pioneering. I was on the verge of giving up serving as an elder! I can now see where I have failed to communicate in times past. I’ve improved in this area, and my frame of mind is much better.
E. R., United States
It was encouraging to learn that other Christian ministers have endured this problem and that they have overcome it.
C. L., Switzerland
Unwed Mothers  Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can Unwed Mothers Make the Most of Their Situation?” (October 8, 1994) You acknowledge that the pregnancy came about through wrongdoing. But instead of dwelling on this and making the girl feel even worse, you offer practical, helpful guidelines.
J. D., United States
I became a single parent ten years ago. But with the help of Jehovah and my Christian parents, I’ve done well. After graduation from school, I served as a full-​time minister for six years and married a Christian man who now serves as an elder. I have benefited greatly from Jehovah’s mercy and kindness and am able to use my experience to help others.
A. M., United States
I could not hold back tears as I read the article. I experienced the very situation you described. Now that I am a Christian, I am happy to be able to raise my daughter with insight.
C. R. S., Brazil
Snoring  The article “Do You Snore?” (September 8, 1994) warned of the possible hazards of snoring. But you implied that if you are a heavy snorer, you have sleep apnea. Not necessarily. The tendency to snore occurs as we age. It may also occur with allergies and sinus problems. But if the heavy snoring is accompanied by periods of no breathing, followed by gasping or snorting, and daytime sleepiness or fatigue occurs, sleep apnea is likely the culprit. The most common treatment is, not surgery, but devices that use compressed air to keep the airways unobstructed during sleep.
C. S., United States
We appreciate these comments and are sorry if our item caused any misunderstanding. Medical authorities agree that occasional snoring is not abnormal. As with all medical problems, evaluation by a physician is essential for proper treatment.​—ED.

