VOL. XXXIV SEPTEMBER 1 No. 17 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

Superiority of the Original Abrahamic 
Covenant 259 

The Children of the Oath 260 

The Three Great Covenants in Brief 260 

"Laborers Together With God" 261 

Some Glaring Inconsistencies 262 

The Law of Retribution 263 

God's Work in Our Wills and Hearts 263 

Three Ways of Determining God's Will 264 

The Work Done in Our Hearts 265 

God's Supervision in World and Church 265 

World's Empires Illustrated Great 
Principles 266 

Matters of Church Discipline 266 

Graves of Greediness 267 

The Sin of Murmuring 267 

Selfish Prayers Answered 268 

Jealousy and Envy Punished 269 

Some Interesting Letters 271 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 271 

page 258 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 



SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



VOLUNTEER EXTENSION WORK 

The Volunteers this year are doing nobly and we have 
splendid ammunition. No doubt the results will be great. 
However, we must not hope to know the details until we reach 
the Kingdom. Meantime it is ours to do faithfully what our 
hands find to do— what our Lord privileges us to do. 

We suggest that Class Extension work find parallel in 
Volunteer Extension work. After you have served your place 
of residence, seek the Lord's blessing in an endeavor to extend 
the distribution of free literature to other towns and cities 
within a reasonable radius. The Society is pleased to 
supply the ammunition free of all charges. It merely wishes, 
with the order, the names of the places to be served and the 
assurance that the work undertaken will (D.V.) be promptly 
done— that the literature will not be permitted to lie by unused. 
Remember that census population includes infants and that a 
proper estimate of one paper to the family would be one to 
five of the population. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR OCTOBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. 
At the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns 
for October follow: (1) 165; (2) 166; (3) 305; (4) 179; (5) 
58; (6) 4; (7) 102; (8) 330; (9) 42; (10) 39; (11) 7; (12) 230; 
(13) 16; (14) 12; (15) 147; (16) 208; (17) 105; (18) 145; 
(19) 135; (20) 8; (21) 281; (22) 109; (23) 12; (24) 176; (25) 
160; (26) 222; (27) 293; (28) 101; (29) 235; (30) 244; (31) 168. 



R5300 : page 259 

SUPERIORITY OF THE ORIGINAL ABRAHAMIC 
COVENANT 

THE Scriptures mention three great Covenants, 
typified by the three wives of 
Abraham. These Covenants are represented 
in the order of those wives. Sarah was the 
first wife of Abraham— the only acknowledged 
wife. Then came Hagar, Sarah's 
maid-servant; and later Keturah. Sarah 
and Hagar each had one son, but Keturah 
had six. The Scriptures show that Abraham 
made Isaac his heir (Gen. 25:5), and 



that through Isaac both Ishmael and the sons of Keturah 
received their portion. The fact that Ishmael was born 
before Isaac did not alter the fact that Isaac was the heir. 

From the very beginning, the Covenant which God had 
in mind was the one which is in operation in the Church— 
the Abrahamic Promise, or Covenant. St. Paul declares 
(Gal. 3:8) that God preached the Gospel to Abraham in 
advance, saying, "In thee and in thy Seed shall all the 
families of the earth be blessed." (Gen. 12:3; 28:14.) The 
same Apostle also shows that the original Abrahamic 
Covenant mentions two seeds, represented in the statement, 
"I will multiply thy seed (1) as the stars of heaven, 
and (2) as the sand which is upon the sea shore." (Gen. 22:17.) 
As Abraham here typified God, the Promise 
shows two classes developed as God's children— (1) 
Christ and the Church, on the spirit plane; and (2) the 
Restitution class of mankind, on the human plane. 

St. Paul refers to these two seeds in Rom. 4:16,17, 
the one developed under Faith, and the other under Law 
and Works. The first, the Spiritual Seed, has been in 
process of development during this Gospel Age. The 
second, the seed according to the flesh, the Restitution 
class (with the exception of the Ancient Worthies, developed 
previous to the Gospel Age), will be developed 
under the New Covenant and by its Mediator, according 
to Law and Works, and not by Faith merely. 

The Law Covenant, made at Sinai, was a type of the 
New Covenant, and had for its mediator Moses, the man 
of God. This Covenant brought nothing to perfection, 
however, for its mediator, as well as the people, was imperfect. 
St. Paul explains that Israel, typified by Ishmael, 
did not receive the blessing, but that The Christ received 
it. Later, however, Israel is to receive a blessing, as the 
Apostle points out; and that blessing will be brought by 
the New Covenant, after the glorification of the Church. 

The question naturally arises, If the Abrahamic Covenant 
contained the Divine Promise to the full, both for 
the Church and for the world, why did God arrange for 
two other Covenants; namely, the Law Covenant, instituted 
at Mount Sinai with Israel, and having Moses for 
its mediator, and the New Covenant, which is to follow, 
and under which the whole world is to be blessed? 

PURPOSE OF THE ADDED COVENANTS 

We answer that these two Covenants were added to 
further elucidate the Divine Purpose, and to help us to 
appreciate the operation of Divine Love and Justice. 

(1) The Law Covenant was added to the Abrahamic 
Promise, or Covenant, as St. Paul explains, to fill up the 
time until the promised Seed should come, to whom the 
Covenant applied, and this was necessary because of sin, 
that the high Divine standard for the Seed might be shown. 
The Law Covenant with Israel rendered this very service; 
for it set up the standard which approved Jesus and condemned 
all others. It also helped to develop the Jewish 



nation toward God and righteousness, and to fit and prepare 
some of them for the glorious High Calling of the 
Gospel Age, which ultimately came to them, inviting them 
to Divine favor and joint-heirship with Messiah in the 
Millennial Kingdom. 

The Law Covenant also provided certain typical transactions 
and prophecies, which have been very beneficial 
to Spiritual Israel during this Gospel Age, illustrating to 
us in these types and shadows of the Law, and enunciating 
to us in the prophecies of the Old Testament, various 
matters appertaining to the blessing of the Church during 
this Age, and that of the world during the next Age. 

(2) Through the New Covenant— the second addition 
to the original, Abrahamic Covenant— the world is to get 
all of its blessings and favors of Restitution. This New 
[Law] Covenant has not yet been inaugurated; for the 
Mediator who is to inaugurate it, and to cause its blessings 
to reach every member of Adam's race during the 
Millennial Age, has not yet been completed. This New 
Covenant will be inaugurated in the end of this Gospel 
Age, and its work will embrace the entire period of the 
Millennium. 

Jesus, our Redeemer and Head, is the appointed Mediator 
of the New Covenant by virtue of the merit of His 
own sacrifice at Calvary. He could have sealed it and 
begun at once its operation, had not the Father "provided 
some better thing for US" (the Church, the Bride of 
Christ, whom God foreknew as Jesus' members), than for 
the Ancient Worthies. This is the Mystery— that the Gospel 
Age has been devoted to the development of the Body 
of the Mediator.— Ephesians 3:3-6; Colossians 1:27. 

R5300 : page 260 

THE CHILDREN OF THE OATH 

The Scriptures clearly show that our Lord was the 
Messiah, the long-promised Seed of Abraham. (Luke 1:32,33,55,72-74; 
2:11; John 1:41; 4:25,26.) "The 

Church, which is His Body," is also developed under the 
original Abrahamic Covenant, which God bound with an 
oath. St. Paul calls it "the hope set before us, which we 
have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, 
and which entereth into that within the veil." (Heb. 6:13-20.) 
Again, he says to the Church, "Ye, brethren, as 
Isaac was, are the children of the Promise." (Gal. 4:28.) 
The Church are the children of the Oath. 

Our begetting Promise, through Christ, to the new 
nature, is very different from that by which the Jews 
were constituted the House of Servants, and wholly different 
from those promises by which restored Israel and 
all the families of the earth will be brought to human 
perfection through Restitution processes, as children of 
the Keturah, or New Covenant. Since our Lord was developed 
under the Abrahamic Covenant, the Church also 
must be developed under that Covenant; for the Spiritual 



Seed cannot be the child of two mothers. It is written, 
"In Isaac shall thy Seed be called."— Gen. 21:12. 

THE NEW COVENANT EVERLASTING 

It is very evident that the world does not enter into 
New Covenant relationship with God individually at the 
beginning of the Millennial Age, and will do so only at 
the end of that Age. Throughout that period, the matter 
will be strictly and solely in the hands of the Mediator. 
During that time He will uplift mankind, and make them 
individually and collectively (as many as are willing) 
worthy of God's everlasting life and blessing. So then, 
we see clearly that the end of the Millennial Age will be 
the end of the Mediatorship of Christ, and will mean the 
personal and individual New Covenant relationship of 
each one of the world. 

There is another view, however, which should have 
our consideration, and that is this: The same New Covenant 
that starts with the beginning of the Millennial Age 
will continue through all eternity. There is not to be 
an additional New Covenant at the end of the thousand 
years of Christ's reign. This New Covenant will be 
operated, not directly between God and man, but through 
the Mediator. In this Covenant, God agrees that He will 
remember the sins and iniquities of the world no more, 
that He will have nothing against them, and that they 
may have His blessings the same as though they were 
personally received of Himself. They will be received 
through their Representative, The Mediator, The Christ. 

The whole world during the Millennial Reign will be 
in Covenant relationship with God, in exactly the same 

R5301 : page 260 

way that Israel was in Covenant relationship with God- 
through the Mediator. The Law Covenant persisted after 
Moses died. So this New Covenant will continue after 
Christ shall have finished His work. The whole world 
will be under that Covenant arrangement. But before 
God finally accepts them, He will give them a test to see 
how many of them will be found worthy of everlasting 
life. Hence the test at the close of the thousand years 
is a test by Jehovah, a test to prove the worthiness of each 
to enter into everlasting covenant relationship with Him. 
They will not be tested as a nation or as a race, but each 
individual must establish his own right to this covenant 
relationship— a new covenant relationship in that the 
original, similar relationship was vitiated by Father 
Adam's disobedience. 

Throughout the thousand years of Messiah's Reign, 
He as Mediator has absolute control of the whole human 
family. His Law and His arrangements, in full harmony 
with those of Jehovah, will be the ones that will be operative. 
They will be more favorable than any arrangement 
Jehovah could directly make; for mankind being imperfect, 



would be incapable of perfect thoughts and words 

and deeds for awhile, and Jehovah's Law cannot recognize 

sin in any degree. 

The Mediator will have mankind fully under His control 
and regulations for the purpose of uplifting all who 
will. This will include the right, also, to destroy in the 
Second Death any who will not obey. He can exercise 
the full powers of an autocrat in the matter. No one will 
have any authority but Himself. The Son having bought 
the world, He will be an Autocrat for those thousand 
years. The Kingdom will be a Reign of compulsion. 
This will be necessary for the correction of the world 
in righteousness, with a view to their perfecting. 

A FULL TRIAL GUARANTEED TO ALL 

The Scriptures are clear in their declaration that God 
has purposed from the beginning that mankind shall have 
another, an individual, trial for everlasting life, wholly 
free from the injury received by them as a result of the 
failure of Adam in the first trial. Provision has been 
made for this, so that Justice can sanction the arrangement. 
To this end, Christ tasted "death for every man." 
He "gave Himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in 
due time." The due time for some is in the present Age. 
The due time for others will be in the Messianic Age. 

Those who die during the thousand years of Christ's 
Reign will be those only who will have had a full trial. 
They will be those who remain unconverted, those whose 
wills are not right. But God purposes that none shall 
perish because of ignorance, misunderstanding. Therefore 
God has made full provision for the enlightenment 
of all (I Tim. 2:3-6), and that all who will be obedient 
shall be saved; and this full opportunity will be brought 
to all through Christ's Kingdom. 

If, under the Messianic Reign, some will die a hundred 
years old, who are still imperfect, not fully restored 
to perfection, how can such be said to have had a full 
trial? The answer is that God's arrangement for every 
member of the race is that Christ in His Mediatorial 
Kingdom will help them out of their fallen condition, if 
they will. The condition required is that they shall accept 
and seek to obey the Divine will. After coming to a 
clear knowledge of the Truth, all such will be helped out 
of their weaknesses, allowance being made for all their 
failures through imperfection. But those who would sin 
wilfully under such knowledge and opportunity, would 
do the same if they had full knowledge and ability. 

This last class are spoken of as angels, or messengers, 
of Satan and Sin; for whoever wilfully and intelligently 
sins against the Divine arrangement is of Satan's spirit. 
All who develop such disobedient wills shall go into the 
Second Death. There is nothing further for them. The 
whole Plan of Salvation is with a view to rescuing those 
who with knowledge and opportunity will be glad to come 
into harmony with God and to walk in the ways of 



truth and righteousness. 

THE THREE GREAT COVENANTS IN BRIEF 

As heretofore stated, the Abrahamic Covenant is first 
in order of time and importance. This Covenant has 
two parts. The first applies to the Spiritual Seed of 
Abraham, The Christ, Head and Body— the antitype of 
Isaac, or, in another figure, of Isaac and Rebecca. These 
are the Seed of Abraham— the Seed of Promise— not 
fleshly, but Spiritual. 

R5301 : page 261 

The second part of the Covenant applies to the world 
of mankind— "all the families of the earth." These are 
to be blessed by the Spiritual Seed with an opportunity 
of becoming Abraham's natural seed, and heirs, with him, 
of the earth and the fulness thereof. The conditions upon 
which they may obtain God's favor, and a Restitution to 
all that was lost, are that they shall exercise faith, and 
render obedience to the Divine provision which will be 
represented in Messiah's Kingdom, when it shall be 
inaugurated. 

The Seed of Abraham— Jesus and the Church— is the 
legitimate Heir of this Abrahamic Covenant, wholly regardless 
of the Law Covenant which was made with 
Israel at Sinai, or of the New Law Covenant that is to be 
made with Israel at the close of the Gospel Age. 

This Abrahamic Covenant has no mediator; but the 
Law Covenant had Moses for its mediator, and the New 
Law Covenant will have Messiah, the Spiritual Heir of 
the Abrahamic Covenant, as its Mediator. 

The Abrahamic Covenant needs no mediator; for 
there are no terms and conditions upon which to base a 
mediation. In it God merely declared His purpose to find 
a Seed of Abraham, by certain selective processes of His 
own, and to bless and honor this Seed in connection with 
the remainder of mankind. This especially selected Seed 
of Abraham, as the Apostle points out, is Christ and the 
Church-God's Elect.-Gal. 3:8,16,29; Rom. 8:29,30. 

GOD'S SELECTION OF THE SPIRITUAL SEED 

God has taken certain steps whereby He is making a 
selection of those worthy and pleasing to Him, to constitute 
this Messianic company. His arrangement for finding 
these is shown by the Scripture which, referring to 
this call of the Gospel Age to membership in that Seed 
of Abraham, says, "Gather My saints together unto Me; 
those that have made a Covenant with Me by sacrifice." 
(Psa. 50:5.) This Covenant of sacrifice of the human 
will, and of all the rights and privileges and liberties of 
the flesh, proves a most drastic test, and demonstrates 
to the Lord the very peculiar people whom He desires to 
be the Spiritual Seed of Abraham. They become a Spiritual 



Seed by renouncing the flesh and all its rights and 
liberties— even unto death. 

The Head of this Seed is the portion which contains 
the life for the entire Body. All the members added 
to Him needed, first of all, to be justified by His 
merit. These were not justified under the Law Covenant, 
which made nothing perfect; nor were they justified under 
the New Covenant; for it is not yet completed. But 
the blood which by and by will be effective for the sealing 
of the New Law Covenant for Israel and the world, is 
effective now, in advance, for the justification of those 
accepted as the Body of the Mediator. This is possible 
because these Body members were selected from the 
same human family as the rest of mankind. Therefore 
the blood which by and by is to seal and make operative 
the New Covenant to the world, is the same blood, or 
merit of Christ, which justifies freely all those now called 
to be saints, and joint-heirs of Jesus. 

SECOND AND THIRD COVENANTS-TYPE AND ANTITYPE 

The Second Covenant, in order of time, was the Law 
Covenant. (Exod. 19:3-8.) This was an addition to the 
Abrahamic Covenant, which addition could not interfere 
with the original Covenant. It was typical. It had a 
typical mediator, typical sacrifices of bulls and goats, a 
typical Atonement Day, a typical Holy and Most Holy. 

The third and last is the New Law Covenant, to be 
instituted in the future. (Jer. 31:31-34; Heb. 8:6-13.) 
This cannot set aside, or make null or void, the original 
Abrahamic Covenant of Grace, any more than could the 
Law Covenant of Sinai. The New Law Covenant cannot 
be introduced, sealed, made operative, until the Abrahamic 
Covenant shall have brought forth the Seed of 
Abraham and invested Him with glory, honor and Divine 
majesty. Then this antitypical Moses, The Christ complete, 
Head and Body, will mediate between God and the 
world of mankind for a thousand years. 

The basis of this New Covenant's blessings will be 
the merit of Messiah; but this merit will not be presented 
on behalf of the world, or to seal the New Covenant for 
Natural Israel and mankind, in order to the Restitution 
blessings, until first the entire Seed of Abraham, Head 
and Body, shall have been completed; and it cannot be 
completed until all the sacrificing has been finished. The 
sacrifice of the Head was finished eighteen centuries ago, 
and was typified by the bullock, in the Atonement Day 
sacrifices of Israel. The sacrifice of the consecrated 
Church, His members, who have been accepted by Him, 
has been going on now for eighteen centuries, and was 
typified by the goat, in the sacrifices of the same Day of 
Atonement. 

Not until the Messiah shall have finished all of His 
sacrificial work of the Gospel Age, not until the last 
member shall, under His hand, have passed from the 
earthly condition of membership to the Heavenly condition, 



will the sufferings of The Christ be finished, will the 
sufferings which He left behind be filled up; and not 
until then will He usher in the blessings of the Messianic 
Kingdom. And those blessings will be secured to 
mankind by the great Mediator's applying the merit of 
His sacrifice on their behalf. 



R5302: page 261 

"LABORERS TOGETHER WITH GOD" 

"We are laborers together with God."— 1 Cor. 3:9. 

DURING this Gospel Age there has been a 

work of God, arranged for and carried on 

by Him. And that work is the selection 

of the Seed of Abraham. The first opportunity 

of being of this Seed was granted to 

the natural seed of Abraham— Israel after 

the flesh. The work succeeded so far as 

the gathering of an elect company from 

among them was concerned. And having 

accomplished this part of the work, God set 

the Jewish nation aside, while the further work of the 

selection of the Elect from among the other nations has 

continued for eighteen centuries. 

"Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for, 
but the Election hath obtained it, and the rest were 
blinded." The blindness is merely until the remaining 
members of the elect class have been found; and then 
God's favor will return to Natural Israel. "And so all 
Israel shall be saved: as it is written, There shall come 
out of Zion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness 
from Jacob; for this is My Covenant with them, 
when I shall take away their sins." Israel made a failure 
respecting the Election, except a few. And yet they are 
still beloved for the fathers' sakes.— Romans 11:7,26-28. 

The one work of the Gospel Age has been the selection 
of the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, through whom all the 
families of the earth shall be blessed— shall become of 
the earthly seed. This Promise, that all the families of 

R5302 : page 262 

the earth shall be blessed, cannot be fulfiled until the 
Spiritual Seed shall first be completed. "If ye be Christ's, 
then are ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to the 
Promise." There has been but one work from first to 
last. And so we read: "One soweth, and another reapeth. 
I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labor; 
other men labored, and ye are entered into their labors." 
(John 4:35-38.) Whether it was at the beginning, or 
now at the close of the Age— the time of the reaping— it is 
all one work, and there is the one purpose being served, 



the gathering of the Elect. 

HUMANITARIAN WORK 

If asked as to the reason why we will not enter into 
and engage in humanitarian work, building hospitals, 
looking after the poor, doing slum work, etc., our 
answer would be, We are so engaged. We have agents 
all over the country attending to that very work. In every 
county in the state there is an almshouse. The hospitals 
are taking care of the sick and the blind. The money to 
do this with is provided by the state— and it is the money 
of the citizens which is used. If anybody assists in doing 
some additional work for the poor, he has that privilege, 
he has that right. 

We believe it to be our duty to be humanitarian, and 
our state laws are humanitarian. New York is a first 
class state. And if we were in Pennsylvania, we would 
be able to say the same. And so in respect to any state 
we know of in this country. As respects these humanitarian 
efforts, the reason we do not engage in them more 
particularly is that we think they are well managed by 
the "powers that be," according to the Government and 
the will of the people. And any one who thinks differently 
holds different views from the majority. We stand in 
with the majority as to the proper way of dealing with 
these questions. Why do we not more particularly take 
part in slum work? We understand that it is not for us to 
do. We cannot do better along this line than the majority. 
To interfere in these matters would imply that we have 
not confidence in the laws. We have no right to go about 
interfering with the laws. 

Why do we not engage in holding revivals? For the 
reason that those who engage in the holding of revivals 
are doing something that the Scriptures never instructed 
us to do. Nothing in the Bible says that we are to go 
and pull the people in to hear some one speak. Let each 
do as seemeth him best. If there is any one who thinks 
differently, and he can do any good, all well and good; if 
he does more harm than good, then that, also, is his 
responsibility. Our responsibility is to follow the course 
laid down by the Bible. And the Bible does not say 
anything about holding revival meetings. Those who 
wish to do this have the privilege of so doing. This is a 
free country. But we do not find that Jesus did this. To 
any one who thinks differently, we give full liberty to do 
according to his will, and find no fault with him. 

Why do you not take up collections for the missionary 
societies? is asked. We answer, You have a right to 
contribute to your missionary society. It is not ours, it is 
yours. You will be responsible to the Master for what 
you do, so you have full right and privilege to do whatever 
you think proper— and we have the same. What we 
are trying to do for the heathen is to show them that 
God is Love. 

We are trying to show them that the theory of 



eternal torment is not the Truth, and that if they 
really knew the teachings of the Bible, they would see 
that God is a God of Love, and they would love Him; 
and this would be a helpful thing to them. You have a 
right to create a missionary fund. We would not throw 
a straw in your way. By and by you will hear whether 
the Master says, "Well done!" to your work or to ours. 

As to why we do not engage in Socialism: Socialism 
is impracticable. We are glad that Socialism has done a 
great deal for the world. We are glad that we have a 
measure of Socialism— the street railways and cars, gas 
and water systems, etc. If, for instance, any family 
wanted to make its own gas and have its own plant for 
filtering water, etc., to do so would be quite an expense. 
And if each wanted to have its own street car lines, etc., 
the streets would be crowded up too much. But when 
Socialism goes on to tell us that it is the savior of the 
world, we dispute the claim. We hold that, on the contrary, 
Socialism is about to bring the world into anarchy. 
Not that Socialists wish to do so, but they are unwise. 

We would be very much inclined to favor many phases 
of Socialism, were it not that we see in the Bible that 
God has a very much better way of accomplishing the 
same results. However, the Bible assures us that there 
is a great time of trouble coming, before the blessings can 
come. But first God is gathering out a saintly company, 
and testing and proving them, so that He can entrust to 
them the government of the future. They will constitute 
the theocracy of God. 

We are fully convinced that the Bible is correct, that 
it is the Truth, and that nothing can bring about the 
desired result but the Kingdom of God. We are laborers 
together with God. He is working with us, and we are 
working with Him. What is the work? God's present 
work is finding the saintly, the true, and guiding them, 
fitting them for the spiritual Kingdom to be introduced. 
Therefore we are working for Socialism to an extent, but 
working in a different manner. Socialists are working 
according to their light, and we according to our light. 

SOME GLARING INCONSISTENCIES 

The various denominations represent Christian people 
with good desires, good intentions, and having certain 
fixed ideas respecting God and His will. No two of these 
agree. Many of their beliefs are thoroughly inconsistent. 
There are over six hundred different denominations. It 
is unreasonable for us to believe, as the Baptists do, that 
any one will go to a place or condition of everlasting 
torment for not having been put into water over his head! 
We cannot believe anything so unreasonable. And just 
the same with our Presbyterian friends and their doctrine. 
They are certainly sincere. They have taken hold of the 
doctrine of John Calvin. 

If John Calvin had had the proper view, he never 
could have signed the death warrant to burn his Christian 



brother Servetus at the stake. This fact teaches us that 
he was not a proper teacher of theology, however good 
he might have been in mind and heart. And when we 
come to look at his theology, that God fore-ordained that 
a little handful of humanity should be saved, not for any 
good that they had done, but of His sovereign will; and 
that He equally fore-ordained all the non-elect to an 
eternity of torture— if we believed such doctrine as this, 
we would believe that God was the veriest devil we could 
imagine— to cause hundreds of millions to come into existence, 
knowing that He had nothing for them but an 
eternity of suffering! That is a most devilish thought! 
We cannot believe that theory. If we did, we could not 
worship God! 

And then as to the Methodists, and their Free Grace! 
This does not give one much show. How could that 
Grace be free?— only one in ten thousand ever having a 
chance of getting it! We are sorry for them if that 

R5302 : page 263 

view appears to their minds as rational. We would not 
be a Methodist or a Presbyterian for a million dollars a 
year! Not that we do not love our Presbyterian, Methodist 
and Catholic friends, etc., but it would not be right 
for us to so believe. We find so much error in any one 
of their doctrines! We find that not one of them is in 
accord with the Bible. 

We prefer to stand by Jesus and the Apostles and all 
who are in harmony with them. We prefer to stand for 
what the Bible calls the Church of the First-born, and for 
whatever the Bible teaches. And when we thus take our 
stand, we find that the Bible teaches something beautiful 
—that God is indeed preparing a Church, to be associated 
with Jesus in His Kingdom; and we find that nobody is 
to be roasted eternally— quite to the contrary, they are all 
to be blessed with an opportunity to live forever. 

The Elect are the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, through 
whom all the non-elect are to be blessed. According to 
the Bible, the dead are all asleep; they do not know anything. 

R5303 : page 263 

"Their sons come to honor and they know it not," 
because "There is no wisdom, nor knowledge, nor device 
in Sheol, whither thou goest." We find that Jesus went 
to Sheol. We find that, having thus given the Ransom-price 
for Adam and his family, all that are in their graves 
shall hear the voice of the Son of Man, and come forth. 

We find that during the thousand years of Messiah's 
Kingdom, Christ and His Church will be reigning— not 
to oppress the world, but to lift them up, to break the 
shackles of sin and death. We find that under this blessed 
arrangement, all will be brought to a knowledge of the 
Truth; and that at the close of that thousand-year period 
Christ will have finished His work; and that as a result 



of His Reign, not only will all be destroyed who love 
unrighteousness, sin, and who refuse to live in harmony 
with God, but all who were willing to come into harmony 
will have bowed the knee. "Unto Him [Christ] every 
knee shall bow and every tongue confess." 

These are the reasons why we cannot work hand-in-glove 
with those who have opposite theories and opposite 
ideas. We cannot associate with systems and be bound 
up to creeds that are dishonoring to God and contrary 
to His Word, the Bible! 

THE LAW OF RETRIBUTION 

There will be many who will have their chance in the 
future who do not have their chance now. But whatever 
knowledge they have now will not do them any harm. 
A certain cast of mind cannot receive the things of God 
now. The Scriptures say that they cannot appreciate a 
God of Justice and Love. Therefore "none of the wicked 
shall understand" is the statement of the Scriptures. If 
they could understand, if they could get the right thought, 
they would see that every transgression, in proportion to 
its degree of wilfulness, will be punished in the future; 
hence they would know that they are treasuring up to 
themselves wrath. 

God has established, as a general law, the principle 
that whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he reap. Every 
step a man takes down must be retraced. If every one 
knew this, it would make mankind very much more careful. 
If a man knows that there is to be a just punishment, 
it will make him very much more careful than if he 
thinks it will be an unjust punishment. Our thought is 
that if the people could get the proper focus on the subject 
of the penalty for sin, it would be the most potent 
factor in convincing them of the propriety of righteous 
living. Furthermore, we might cite to the denominations 
the fact that with all their preaching of eternal torment, 
they succeed in driving but a comparatively small number 
into holiness of life— into becoming footstep followers 
of Jesus, character copies of God's dear Son. 



R5303 : page 263 

GOD'S WORK IN OUR WILLS AND HEARTS 

"Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for 

it is God that worketh in you both to will and to do of His good 

pleasure."— Phil. 2:12,13. 

IN EVERY instance where the Apostles use 
the word we, they evidently refer to the 
New Creation, the spiritual New Creatures 
in Christ. When St. Paul says, "Work out 
your own salvation," he is addressing the 



Church, not the world. The world is not 

now on trial for salvation. "Work out your 

own salvation; for it is God that worketh 

in you both to will and to do." But when 

addressing the New Creature we are to remember 

that the personality is still maintained. For 

instance, the Apostle says, "Ye were bought with a price" 

—before you became New Creatures. It is the same ego, 

the same personality as before. 

In the words, "It is God that worketh in you," the 
Apostle does not mean that God began to work in you 
when you were bought, but it means that from before 
the time of your begetting and quickening He has done so; 
for as the Scriptures elsewhere say, we were drawn of 
God, and we were called of God, before our consecration. 

GOD THE MAGNET TO LOVERS OF RIGHTEOUSNESS 

God is represented as the great Magnet, drawing all 
who love righteousness. He drew us before we became 
Christians at all— the truth and righteousness of our 
Heavenly Father was the magnet. Man having been 
originally created in God's image and likeness, a measure 
of this image and likeness still remains. And to whatever 
extent the natural man loves righteousness and truth 
and mercy, he has something that is approved of by God, 
who is the great Center of Righteousness, Justice, 
Truth and Mercy. 

Some of humanity have fallen so low that the drawing 
power of the Magnet has very little influence upon them. 
In others of our fallen race there is a larger measure of 
our Lord's character-likeness remaining. Such as have 
some love for righteousness, some degree of mercy, would 
realize a drawing toward the great Heavenly Father. 
Perhaps every one of us who are disciples of Christ felt 
something of that drawing before we came to the Father 
at all. The Lord Jesus says, "No man can come unto Me, 
except the Father which sent Me draw him." So we 
must first be drawn of the Father. 

But God has appointed only one Way for us to come 
unto Him— and this Way is Christ. Those who desire 
to come unto God, then, must come by this Way, and 
must learn the terms upon which they may come. They 
are told that they can come only by humbling themselves, 
and sacrificing self. "If any man will be My disciple, 
let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow 
Me." So the Lord puts the barrier there, and none will 
come in except those who have a real, earnest desire. 
In the next Age, God has something to offer the rest of 
mankind. He will deal with them under different conditions. 
But now He is not looking for those who are 
merely feeling after Him. 

To those who seek the Lord there comes the question, 

R5303 : page 264 



Do you love God and righteousness? Will you surrender 
all human will and preference, and accept instead the 
Divine will? If they accept these terms, then they will 
become Jesus' disciples. If they say, No, I cannot go so far 
as that! then they cannot become His disciples. As one 
minister said not long since, "I have not taken my consecration 
so seriously as that yet." So it is with a good 
many. They would like to go to Heaven on flowery 
beds of ease. 

But those who make a full consecration of their lives, 
who through Christ come into vital relationship with the 
Father, are New Creatures. Does God cease to work 
in them after this step has been taken? No. God has 
provided further ways by which He works in them. It 
is the spirit of character-likeness to God— their love of 
righteousness— that so worked in them that they were 
willing to give up their earthly rights. That is a powerful 
working. God thus first works in us to will. All that 
we did, then, was to give ourselves to Him, through 
Christ. We willed that we would give ourselves up to 
God, if He would receive us. And He did receive us. 

THREE WAYS OF DETERMINING GOD'S WILL 

We receive the instruction to know the will of God 
through His Word, through His providences, and through 
all the experiences of life, in order that we may both 
will and do His good pleasure. When we made our 
consecration we willed to do God's will. But we did not 
see that will fully. As we go on, we see His will more 
and more distinctly. And as we see the leadings of His 
providence in all the experiences of life, we become more 
and more imbued with His Spirit— the Holy Spirit. Thus 
God gradually works in us to do. The willing comes 
first, then the quickening, energizing, doing. 

The power that works in us to do is the same power 
that works in us to will. Can we will perfectly? Yes. 
Can we do perfectly? No. Why can we will perfectly 
and not do perfectly? Because the will of God has become 
our will, our mind. The Apostle says, "With the 
mind I myself serve the Law of God, but with the flesh 
the law of sin." (Rom. 7:25.) The flesh has inherited 
various weaknesses and fallen tendencies; therefore we 
are unable to do perfect works, and the flesh continually 
needs the Robe of Christ's Righteousness. 

We need continually that the great Redeemer shall 
be our great Advocate, that we may come with courage 
to the Throne of Heavenly Grace and find mercy and 
help in time of need. So God is working in the New 
Creatures, first to will and then to do His good pleasure. 
And every promise of God is to this end— not merely 
that we should submit to His will, but that we should 
rejoice to do His good pleasure, that we should delight 
to do His will at any cost. Thus shall we work out 
our own salvation and please our Heavenly Lord. 



WORKING OUT OUR OWN SALVATION 

In order to appreciate our text we must study it in its 
proper setting, remembering that it is not addressed, as 
some people are inclined to suppose, to the world. It is 
addressed to a special class whose sins have been forgiven, 
and who through Christ have been brought into 
a special relationship with God, into the position of sons 
of God. And it is from this standpoint that they must 
work out their own salvation. Our salvation is to be 

R5304 : page 264 

brought unto us at the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

No one has salvation now except in a reckoned sense. 
In this sense we have been saved, and can draw near to 
the Father. But we are still under the general dominion 
of Sin and Death. We are not actually saved as yet. 
We must work out our salvation. In this text the Apostle 
is showing how it is to be done. He shows this further 
when he addresses the Church as Beloved. He would 
not thus address vile persons, or those who had no knowledge 
of Christ— who were either heathen or worse. The 
Epistle itself shows that he is addressing saints of God. 

What kind of salvation is this of which the Apostle 
is speaking— that has to be worked out? It is not salvation 
in the general sense, out of sin and death back to 
human perfection, when conditions will all be favorable, 
when Satan will be bound for a thousand years, and 
when all the active influence of Messiah's Kingdom will 
be in operation. When the Apostle here says, "your 
salvation," he is particularizing the salvation peculiar to 
this Gospel Age— "so great salvation."— Heb. 2:3. 

As we enter more particularly into this matter, to see 
how great a salvation it is, we are more and more 
astonished at its depth and height. It is not merely a 
salvation from sin, but it is very much more. Not only 
is it to be everlasting, but it is a salvation to glory, honor 
and immortality, joint-heirship with Messiah in all the 
glorious things that are His in His exalted position, far 
above angels, principalities and powers and every name 
that is named. (Eph. 1:21.) The wider our eyes of 
understanding open to see the length and breadth and 
height and depth of this great salvation, the grander it 
appears. As we think of the possibility of obtaining it, 
we are filled with enthusiasm— and also with fear. For 
what if any of us should come short of so glorious a 
salvation— so high a calling! 

The Apostle says, "Let us therefore fear, lest a promise 
being left us of entering into His rest, any of you 
should seem to come short of it." (Heb. 4:1.) The 
slightest intimation that we are coming short of the 
glorious Divine standard should fill us with fear lest 
we miss the great salvation. This is not the fear of 
torment, begotten of ignorance and misunderstanding of 
God, such as the heathen have. They have a fear of 



God, a dread of God, which amounts to torment; as the 
Apostle John says, "Fear hath torment." But this kind 
of fear is cast out of us as we come to a knowledge of 
the Lord and are privileged to call Him Father. It is 
the holy fear that actuates us, altogether. We have no 
slavish fear, either of men or anything else. We belong 
to this special class, the Beloved, who have a special offer 
of a special kind of salvation. 

OUR GREAT PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY 

The expression, Work out, has a peculiar force and 
meaning. It suggests something that is difficult, that requires 
time and patience. The decision has already been 
made, or we would not be of this class. We settled the 
matter when we first made this determination. We have 
already presented our bodies living sacrifices. And now 
we are beloved sons of God; and this that we have undertaken 
lies before us. We see how our Master laid down 
His earthly life, and we see from the Scriptures that He 
is to be an Ensample to us. So we are to submit ourselves 
rejoicingly to all the providences of God— glad 
to have God's will done in us, whatever it may cost, whatever 
it may mean to sacrifice. 

It is by painstaking care that we work out our great 
salvation. God has provided the way— made all the 
arrangements for us. There is nothing lacking, so far 
as God is concerned. The whole matter lies with ourselves. 
God has begotten us of the Holy Spirit. All the 
influences necessary for us are at our command, because 
at His command, because we have been called, because 
we have been accepted, because we have been introduced 
into His family through the merit of the great Advocate! 

R5304 : page 265 

And so much the more are we disposed to feel a sense 
of fear and trembling as we think of all this! There is 
this great position— glory, honor and immortality! The 
result lies in my own hands! There is not another person 
in the universe responsible for my success or failure but 
myself! I must gain that great prize! The Lord will 
not gain it for me. He will merely assist me in the performing 
of this great Covenant. 

So it is very proper for us to have this fear, a realization 
of the fact that we are each making history for 
eternity. We are to be either on the great plane of glory, 
the Divine nature, or else on a lower plane, as the 
Levites; or we may go into the Second Death, and lose 
everything, from which there will be no recovery. 

THE WORK DONE IN OUR HEARTS 

As we realize these facts, it is no wonder that we 
tremble and fear, and feel our need of walking, as the 
Apostle says, circumspectly, and of weighing our thoughts, 



so as to be in conformity to the will of God in Christ. 
This is indeed a condition that might be called fear and 
trembling. It is a condition of great earnestness. There 
is no room for foolishness here, or lightness, or frivolity. 
God is testing every power we possess to see whether we 
know what we have said in our consecration vow, to prove 
whether we were sincere and meant it all, to prove 
whether to any extent we overstated ourselves and did 
not mean entire devotion to Him. 

If we were not wholly in earnest about this matter, 
then we shall show it. God has done His part in making 
all the conditions and in accepting us. Now everything 
is for us to work out. Surely we should have fear and 
trembling as we remember this. We know that it is God 
that is working in us. God Himself has begun a work 
in us. None of the angels ever had such a work take 
place in their hearts. None of the angels had the offer 
of this salvation. 

We who were of the Adamic family are being transformed 
and developed along the lines which the Father 
has marked out for us, that He may make of us a New 
Creation. It is He that first worked in us, through all His 
providences, to will. And then, after we had presented 
our bodies living sacrifices, He worked in us to do 
—not that we could do perfect works according to the 
flesh; God knew we could not, and is not expecting perfection 
in the flesh. But He is expecting perfect heart 
intentions. He says, My child has had the imperfections 
of the flesh to contend with, and by his good warfare with 
these he has shown his obedience to My will. If by and 
by I shall give to this child a perfect body, a spirit body, 
in the resurrection, then I am sure he will do My will. 
My Spirit has worked in him to will, and is now working 
in him to do. And he is showing Me, by doing to the best 
of his ability under present conditions, what he will do 
with a perfect body. Sown in weakness, this New Creature 
will be raised in power; sown a natural body, it will 
be raised a spirit body.— I Cor. 15:42-44. 



R5304 : page 265 

GOD'S SUPERVISION IN THE WORLD AND IN THE CHURCH 

"Promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, 
nor from the south. But God is the judge; He putteth down 
one, and setteth up another."— Psalm 75:6,7. 

THE Scriptures declare that "The earth hath 
He [God] given to the children of men." 
Father Adam was the first great king of 
the earth. After his fall, this kingdom over 
the beasts of the field, the fish of the sea 
and the fowl of the air, was bereft of the 
power of the perfect man, because man had 



begun to deteriorate. This kingdom was 

also bereft of the Heavenly Father's guidance 

by His Spirit, because of man's disobedience. 

It was originally intended that humanity 

should have God's guidance in the affairs of the earth. 

But humanity became insane, or mentally unbalanced. 

This is their condition from the deterioration which sin 

and death have wrought. 

Satan has been blinding and deceiving and misleading 
mankind on various subjects, putting light for darkness 
and darkness for light. This power of Satan is spoken 
of in the Scriptures as being that of the "prince of this 
world." And we are told how he rules. By promoting 
sin, he promotes that which is in opposition to God. He 
"now worketh in the hearts of the children of disobedience." 
This work has been going on for centuries, 
and particularly since the time of the Deluge. Before 
that time Satan operated in a somewhat different manner, 
because men were more generally acquainted with the 
proper standard and less fallen than they have been since. 
Longevity before the Deluge was greater than now, the 
average length of life today being thirty-five years. 

Very rarely has God interfered with the arrangement 
which He put into the hands of man. As mankind look 
back they see the blunders that have been made. Being 
under the power of the "prince of this world," and allowing 
Satan to mislead them, they have fallen into various 
traps. Mankind has had a more severe experience with 
sin and death than would have been thought possible. 
The Apostle Paul calls our attention to the fact that 
man was not always in this degraded condition. He says 
that when man sinned, God gave him over and allowed 

R5305 : page 265 

him to take his own way— to lose himself in sin and the 
misguidance of the Adversary. 

Why should God do this? We believe that His intention 
was that thus, eventually, during the next Age, 
mankind shall see what the real nature and outcome of 
sin is; that they shall learn a great, permanent lesson- 
that any deviation from the Divine standard is injurious; 
and that that lesson shall be recognized by the angels— 
that they also shall see what is the result of sin, and that 
they shall have this great, horrible object lesson before 
them. One can hardly read in the pages of history what 
humanity has done in this course of sin without being 
disgusted and horrified. 

Then we see how humanity could have helped themselves 
by seeking to follow God's way. We see that when 
God gave man over to a reprobate mind, and did not 
hinder him from taking an evil course, it resulted in 
terrible excesses. (Romans 1:28-32.) We see that God 
merely intervened when, in the condition of things before 
the Deluge, to have permitted this course to continue 
would have been a serious wrong. The thoughts of men 



were evil, and only evil continually. Therefore God 
brought that condition of things to an end in the Flood. 
And He started things afresh with Noah and his family, 
who were saved in the Ark. God has interposed only 
here and there, as in the case of the Ninevites, the 
Sodomites and the Amalekites. In the case of the 
Sodomites, God rained down fire from heaven, setting 
forth an example, and the kind of destruction that would 
better conditions— not thereby settling the future of the 
Sodomites, but making them an example. 

R5305 : page 266 

WORLD EMPIRES ILLUSTRATED GREAT PRINCIPLES 

When the Babylonians essayed to be the rulers of the 
world, they apparently had good intentions, good sentiments 
toward mankind. They wished to give the world a 
good government. In some respects, perhaps, their rule 
was a benefit. At all events, it was not long before their 
success brought in a measure of arrogance. And then 
God permitted another nation to gain the ascendancy— the 
Medo-Persians. After them, the Grecians tried to rule 
the world, with a better government; and again, after 
them, the Romans. Each of these World-Empires, after 
a measure of success, toppled over and made wreck of 
their progress. 

And so God has in a general way been permitting 
things to go thus, keeping humanity within general bounds 
in their sort of loose governments, and has merely hindered 
them when they went too far and were likely to 
hinder the Divine Program. 

There was some promotion in some manner. The 
Scriptures say that Nebuchadnezzar became the head of 
gold— the head of the Gentile governments. Promotion 
came to him because God was pleased that Nebuchadnezzar 
should have this opportunity, because God permitted 
him to have it, and that nation to have the ascendancy. 
And thus with the other universal governments; and 
God had to do with the setting up and the pulling down. 
He thus permitted the world to have a variety of governments. 
As another instance, a certain Pharaoh was in 
power in Egypt at the time for Israel to be delivered 
from their bondage. According to the account given by 
the Apostle Paul, the Lord said to Pharaoh, "For this very 
purpose have I raised thee up."— Rom. 9:17; Exodus 9:16. 

Pharaoh thus was given an opportunity of illustrating 
certain great principles along the lines of which God was 
dealing. There are some who think that God worked in 
Pharaoh to make his heart hard and to make him a bad 
man such as he was. But this is not so! He was a bad 
man naturally. God may have let other heirs drop out 
so that this particular man would come to the throne at 
that particular time. God set him there at that time- 
not that He might influence Pharaoh to evil, but that He 
might show the influence of an unregenerate heart. 



The plagues came. "Let My people go," said the 
Lord. Thus after each plague had come, Pharaoh would 
entreat Moses, the servant of God; and when the plague 
was gone he would say, "Well, you did not have much 
to do with it. The plague has gone anyway." And so 
another plague would come. And time after time 
Pharaoh illustrated the mercy of God, who time after 
time lifted the plague and had mercy on the Egyptians. 

It was a lesson, not of God's working in a man to 
make him a bad man and make him do evil things, but a 
lesson of the hardening effect of God's Mercy— in taking 
away the plague— of its having only a bad effect, instead 
of softening the heart. And so it is with many in the 
world. They are told that God is willing to forgive them, 
and they think, "Well, then I can go on and sin more!" 
We learn from this a great lesson of God's Mercy and 
of His method of dealing with men. Finally came the 
last plague. Yet even after that Pharaoh and the Egyptians 
went out to capture the Israelites. The finale was 
that the Egyptian pursuers were drowned in the Red 
Sea.-Exodus 14:5-31. 

ACCORDING TO GOD'S WILL 

By faith we believe that God has a supervision of all 
the affairs of today. Therefore if we voted for a 
candidate at the last Presidential election, and if the one 
we thought the most suitable for election was not elected, 
we are not to believe it was a matter of chance. We are 
to assume that the Lord knew all about the election; and 
that in the Divine arrangement certain things were 
permitted to go in certain ways; and that therefore, the 
President, Mr. Wilson, was the most suitable as in 
harmony with the Divine arrangement. 

We are to believe that all things are working according 
to the counsel of God's will— not that God touches 
every thought or act of every individual. Not so ! But 
God is able so to regulate the winds of strife or contention 
that the results will come about not contrary to the 
Divine arrangement. We may be assured that so far as 
mere man is concerned, God does not care whether it is 
one or another. So far as the world is concerned, the 
Lord has no preference or favorites at all. It is along 
the line of principles that He is directing and ruling, to 
work out, eventually, good to all. 

Thus God is arranging that all the affairs of the world 
shall reach a crisis soon, whether He is permitting this 
king to rule, or that one; or this one to be President, or 
that one. All things are working in harmony with His 
great Program. God will set down the "prince of this 
world," Satan, and all the arrangements he has made- 
set them down by a severe fall, by a great overthrow, and 
will set up His own Kingdom, that will bring blessing to 
all mankind— His own Kingdom that will be the "desire 
of all nations." It will be the Kingdom of Messiah and 
His Bride, who is to be His Joint-heir in the Kingdom. 



It is the Kingdom for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come; Thy will be done on earth as in Heaven." 

MATTERS OF CHURCH DISCIPLINE 

We would apply our text particularly to the Church— 
the Church being especially guided of the Lord, and those 
in which He is especially interested. In His arrangement 
He has provided for the setting of these members in the 
Church. "God hath set the members every one in the 
Body, as it hath pleased Him." "God hath set some in 
the Church, first, Apostles, secondarily, public orators, 
thirdly teachers, pastors, after that workers of miracles," 
etc.— indicating different stations in the Body of Christ. 
We are to remember that, as the Apostle says, God hath 
set the members in the Body. 

In proportion as twenty or thirty or three hundred or 
five hundred or a thousand put themselves in harmony 
with His will, He will set some to be Elders and some to 
be Deacons, etc. How will He set them? Through the 
voice of the Church. Whoever should receive the appointment 
to be a Deacon in the Church should be faithful 
to the Lord and to the brethren. And whoever should 
be appointed as an Elder should consider it a matter of 
privilege, and be faithful to the Lord and to the brethren, 
so that he might profit the Church and be pleasing to the 
brethren, and above all, be pleasing to the Lord. 

This is the thought the Apostle gives in his parting 
words to the Elders of Ephesus. (Acts 20:17-38.) He 
tells them to take heed to themselves that they may feed 
the flock. And he goes on to give varied advice— how 
they should take heed as those who should give account 
of their opportunities and responsibilities, which they must 
recognize as from both the Lord and the brethren. 

Sometimes in the Lord's permission— certainly not 
without His permission— the classes, in their endeavor to 
express the Lord's will, may say, This brother was chosen 
as Elder last time, and we will not choose him as an 
Elder this time. Or they may say, He was a Deacon last 
time, and we will not choose him as a Deacon this time, 
but we will drop him. What should be the attitude of 
the brother thus dropped? 

R5305 : page 267 

SUBMISSION TO THE LORD'S WILL 

We have had experience along this line— letters from 
those thus dropped, intimating that they think the Class 
has made a mistake in not recognizing their ability and 
not re-electing them. And our answer has been that we 
did not know what had been the thought back of the 
action of the Class, and we did not know whether the 
Class had acted wisely or not, but that our thought would 
be that the brother should accept this decision as from 
the Lord. 



Such a one should say to himself, I have been the 
servant of the congregation and have appreciated it very 
much. I recognize that such a promotion is of the Lord, 
and that the service given me was of the Lord. But now, 
in God's providence, I am not to be an overseer for a 
year, or six months, or what-not. Perhaps the Lord has 

R5306 : page 267 

a good lesson in this for me. Perhaps the Lord wishes 

to show whom He will set up and whom He will not. 

So instead of feeling hurt or miffed or moody over the 

matter, I am going to say, If I can see anything in which 

I was derelict in my duty, I will consider it a chastisement 

from the Lord. I will remember the words of the 

Scripture which say, "Let the brother... rejoice in that 

he is exalted, and let the brother... rejoice in that he 

is abased." I am glad to see that the Class exercise independence 

enough to do what they consider the Lord's 

will. At all events, I will try to recognize that promotion 

cometh not from the East nor West nor South, but that 

God is the Judge, the Decider, and that He putteth whomsoever 

He will over the affairs of the Church. 



R5306 : page 267 

GRAVES OF GREEDINESS 

-OCTOBER 5. --NUMBERS 11:4-34.- 

"The supplication of a righteous man 
availeth much in its working."— James 5:16. 

THE ISRAELITES remained at Mt. Sinai 

about a year. This was a time of preparation. 

The people were learning important 

lessons, as a result of their new conditions, 

so different from those of Egypt. The component 

parts of the Tabernacle were prepared, 

and it was set up as a meeting place 

between God and the people. God was 

represented in it by the pillar of cloud, 

which rested upon the top of the Tabernacle, 

and which at night had a flame like a torch at its top. 

God's presence on the inside of the Tabernacle was 
seen only by Moses and Aaron, in conjunction with their 
privileged services. He was represented by the glorious 
Shekinah brightness, which rested upon the Mercy Seat. 
Thus the Tabernacle became the center of the nation's 
life and interest in relation to their God, who was their 
Captain and Leader, and who communicated to them 
through the mediator of the Law Covenant— Moses. 

The people had flocks and herds; and these would 
necessitate their being at some distance from the Camp, 



but the pillar of cloud by day and its fiery torch at night 
would always indicate the center of the Camp, and always 
guide their minds to the thought that they were God's 
adopted people, to whom, by first right, belonged the 
gracious promises made to Abraham. 

Similarly, antitypical Israelites may realize that God 
has called them from the world to be His peculiar people, 
and may well exclaim, "God is in the midst of her, she 
shall not be disturbed"— overthrown! The center of our 
interest is our great Advocate, who on our behalf has 
entered into the Most Holy, and is proceeding with His 
great work of antitypical Atonement. 

THE SIN OF MURMURING 

Those who become the people of God, who accept 
Him as their Guide and Leader, should never murmur, 
never complain. To do so is to dispute the Divine Wisdom 
and the Divine promises, and to that extent to break 
their covenant of faith, obedience and loyalty. St. Paul 
reminds us that the murmuring of the Israelites on this 
occasion carries such a lesson to us (Hebrews 3:7-19; 
4:1-11), which appears great or small to us, according 
to our standpoint and standard. The Lord's dealings with 
the Israelites show us that justice, love, mercy, loyalty to 
God and to principle are in the Divine estimation the 
highest qualities, and violations of these the most serious 
crimes. If this is not the way we have looked at matters, 
it behooves us to change our viewpoint and to take 
that of the Almighty. 

This murmuring against the Lord was on the score of 
the manna, for which at first the people had been so 
thankful. They allowed their minds to grow so vexed that 
they wept like children as they thought of the meat and 
garlic and flesh pots of Egypt. They murmured against 
the Lord and against Moses in desiring that they might 
have back the conditions which they had left. Little did 
they comprehend the true situation. Had they been returned 
to the bondage in which they previously were, after 
even a year's experience in freedom, their lot would have 
seemed much more wretched than ever. 

It was with Israel, however, as often with us, "Distance 
lends enchantment to the view." As they looked 
backward, they forgot the trials and difficulties of the 
bondage of Egypt. As they looked about them, they forgot 
their comforts, privileges, liberties under Divine leadership. 
Like peevish children, they reasoned not clearly. 

MOSES TOO GREATLY BURDENED 

The result of the murmuring was severe upon Moses. 
He was the people's representative before the Lord, and 
the Lord's representative before the people. Murmuring 
against the Lord in their experiences meant murmuring 
against Moses also. Heart-broken, that Prophet sought 
the Lord, pleading that his burden was too heavy, that the 



people cried to him as children to a father, and that he 
could endure it no longer. He rehearsed that the Lord 
had promised to take this people as His people and to 
bring them to the land promised to Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob. He urged, therefore, that if this burden must 
remain with him it would be better for him to die: "Kill 
me, I pray Thee, out of hand, if I have found favor in 
Thy sight; and let me not see my wretchedness." 

Then it was that God directed the institution of the 
Jewish Sanhedrin— seventy of the heads or the Elders 
of the people, to be the court of judges, responsible to 
the people and to deal with them, to hear their murmurings 
and to counsel them properly. In this arrangement, 
while Moses was still the head of the nation, the seventy 
Elders shared his responsibility before the people, and 
would more or less, therefore, be his defenders with 
the people. 

By Divine direction Moses made out the list of these 
Elders, and directed them to meet him at the Tabernacle. 
All but two of them came. There God manifested the 
honor he had bestowed upon Moses as the head of the 

R5306 : page 268 

people, by communion with him, and then, as foretold, 
placed a share of the responsibility of leadership upon 
the seventy. This was indicated by their miraculous 
prophesying. This prophesying became a sign to the 
Elders themselves and to all who heard it. Even the two 
who remained in the camp prophesied at the same time. 
The Lord thus indicated that they should be co-laborers 
with and under Moses in respect to the guidance and 
direction of the people. 

QUAIL IN OVER-SUPPLY 

God then sent word to the Israelites through Moses, 
the message probably being conveyed through the seventy 
Elders selected from all the different tribes, that He was 
about to send them flesh food, such as they had been 
murmuring for. He declared He would send a thirty-day's 
supply for the whole people. Even Moses was 
astonished, though he trustfully gave the message. Under 
the Lord's providence, a strong wind across the Red Sea 
drove thousands of small birds, quail, to the vicinity of 
Israel's Camp and for a considerable distance all around 
it. As a result, the people ate freely, and prepared dried 
quail for future use for a full thirty -days' supply, as the 
Lord had said. Two days and nights they ceased not to 
gather in the quail. 

Some agnostics have questioned this statement, thinking 
it to be a declaration that the birds fell in a solid mass 
two cubits high. The proper thought is that the birds, 
driven by the wind across the sea, were so fatigued by 
their flight that they flew low down, about two cubits in 
height above the ground, where they were easily caught 



with the hand or hit with sticks and captured. A writer 
on conditions in that vicinity says: 

"These quail cannot sustain themselves long on the 
wing when exhausted. They would be easily taken when 
they flew at a height of about two cubits (three feet) 
above the ground." 

Those who had been murmuring discontentedly suddenly 
got their desire for flesh food; and they ate it so 
greedily and so much of it that an insidious pestilence 
broke out amongst them, a fever from over-eating, called 
"a fire from the Lord." Many died and were buried there, 
and thus the place was called "Kibroth-Hattaavah," 
which signifies "Graves of Greediness." Thus did the 
Lord permit the murmurers, the unthankful, to do themselves 
injury and to cut themselves off from further opportunities 
for murmuring. 

The most happy condition of mind conceivable is the 
one of full rest and confidence in the Lord— satisfied with 
God's appointments and provisions. And this is especially 
appropriate to the Spiritual Israelites, and particularly the 
Royal Priesthood, who have made a full surrender to the 
Lord, a Covenant by sacrifice, which includes all earthly 
rights and interests. Happy is it for such if they can 
sing with the spirit and with the understanding also: 
"Content whatever lot I see, 
Since 'tis my God that leadeth Me." 

The spirit of discontent looks away from the Heavenly 
Manna of Divine provision, longing for other food of 
their own provision or of other earthly supply. The 
Lord grants such an opportunity of feasting to the full 
on what they are desiring, and as a result, the murmurers 

R5307 : page 268 

cease from being members of the Lord's family and have 
no further opportunity of partaking of the Manna He 
provides in sufficient quantity. 

To give an illustration: the Bible supplies the Manna 
of Divine Truth. The Truth needs to be gathered, and 
to be ground and to be baked, but it is God's provision. 
It is wholesome, it is nutritious, it is the very thing that 
we, as the people of God, need for our strengthening and 
perfecting. Yet some crave the flesh pots of Egypt— the 
world's theories. Then He allows these to come within 
their reach. They fill themselves with Higher Criticism 
and Evolutionary theories, and as a result perish as New 
Creatures, cease to be the people of God, cease to walk 
in the Master's footsteps. They are consumed by the 
fire, or fever, which the errors they crave produce. 

GRAVES OF GREEDINESS 

Greed, selfishness, stands connected with sin of every 
kind. It leads to every form of immorality, to satisfy its 
selfish propensities. It leads to injustice and untruthfulness 
in its endeavor to acquire a large share of the blessings 



of God. It leads to anger, malice, hatred, envy, 
strife and murder in its endeavor to get and to hold a 
superabundant share of this world's goods. Selfishness 
is thus unrighteousness, and "all unrighteousness is sin." 

As we think of the graves of greediness filled with the 
Israelites, we are reminded of how many Spiritual Israelites 
have made similar mistakes. Greedy for the things 
of this world, they have neglected their Covenant with 
the Lord and the higher interests of the life to come. 
Jesus said that the thorns that sprang up amongst the 
wheat and choked it were the cares of this life and the 
deceitfulness of riches; in other words, greediness. 

Oh, how much all the followers of Jesus should be on 
guard against this spirit of the world! It is not our suggestion 
that none should look out properly to have a reasonable 
share of the blessings and comforts of the present 
life. The danger is that of setting our hearts upon these 
things, coveting them and serving them, in an idolatrous 
manner, and thus causing our spiritual interment, over 
which might well be inscribed "Graves of Greediness." 

THE TEXT OF THIS STUDY 

The text assigned evidently is meant to apply to the 
prayer of Moses for help and relief. "The supplication 
of a righteous man availeth much in its working." God 
granted the prayer of Moses, which was of a proper kind 
in that it was requesting help whereby the will of God 
might be fully submitted to, that the people might be 
rightly instructed to bow to the Divine arrangements. It 
availed much; it brought the desired result; it was in harmony 
with the Divine will. 

On the other hand, the prayer of the unrighteous will 
avail much also in an opposite direction. The murmurings 
of the people were classed as their prayers. They 
got what they desired; but with it they got, not the Divine 
blessing, but a punishment. Let us take heed to how 
we pray, and that we pray for things in harmony with 
the Divine will. Thus will our prayers bring blessings 
upon our heads, and not injury. 

SELFISH PRAYERS ANSWERED 

We know of many prayers answered; some of these 
were uttered selfishly, not with the desire to know and to 
do the Lord's will, but with the desire to have the Lord 
do according to the human will and its selfish desire. 
Such prayers are always dangerous. God sometimes answers 
them. 

We note one instance told us by a mother. She was a 
true Christian woman and had given her son to the Lord; 
but when he fell seriously sick and lay at death's door and 
the physicians said that he could not recover, the mother 
went before the Lord in prayer and earnestly pleaded, not 
that God's will should be done, but that her will might be 
done— that her son's life might be spared. Almost miraculously, 



she says, her boy began to recover. For a time 
she rejoiced that she had had a triumph. 

R5307 : page 269 

Later on, however, she learned a very bitter lesson. 
The son grew to manhood, but was far from a comfort 
to her. He had a vicious character, which often brought 
the mother pain and tears. She said afterwards, "I have 
rued that prayer, which was contrary to God's will, and 
which He answered according to my will. I see better 
now. I have learned my lesson. Henceforth I will seek 
to know and to do the Lord's will, and will pray that His 
will, not mine, be done in all my affairs. My selfishness 
brought me years of misery, which I had assumed would 
be years of pleasure and comfort." How careful we 
should be to "abide in Him and in His Word"! 



R5307 : page 269 

JEALOUSY AND ENVY PUNISHED 

--OCTOBER 12.-NUMBERS 12.- 

"Love envieth not; love vaunteth not itself, is not puffed 
up, doth not behave itself unseemly."— 1 Corinthians 13:4,5. 

ST. PAUL includes envy, and therefore jealousy, 

in his enumerations of the works of 

the flesh and the Devil— together with 

anger, malice, hatred and strife. These are 

works of the Devil in that they are characteristics 

of Satan. According to the 

Bible account, Satan's ambition led him to 

envy the Almighty and ultimately to attempt 

to establish in the earth, with man 

as his subject, a rival empire to the Heavenly 

domain of Jehovah. His ambition and jealousy led to 

strife or opposition— led to a misrepresentation of the 

Divine character in order to deceive our first parents. 

The evil traits mentioned are works of the flesh in the 
sense that after our race, poisoned by Satan, had come 
under Divine sentence, the dying process, which Satan encouraged, 
included evil works, evil desires of every kind. 
More and more our race has become subject to these adverse 
influences, as it has become weak, dying, unbalanced. 

St. Paul urges all of the Lord's people to put off these 
Satanic characteristics and to adopt instead the Divine 
characteristics— those which have the Divine approval, 
and which work in us and make us more and more Godlike. 
These are described as meekness, gentleness, peace, 
long-suffering, brotherly kindness, love. We are assured 
that those who will ultimately become God's saintly people 
on the highest plane of Heavenly glory will have 



these characteristics well developed, dominant. The 
Apostle indicates that such will be granted an abundant 
entrance into the "everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and 
Savior, Jesus Christ."— 2 Peter 1:11. 

That Kingdom will not represent all the saved of 
humanity, but will be the Divine agency for carrying salvation 
to all the families of the earth. Nevertheless, 
only this one offer of salvation is now open; and only by 
following the prescribed course and cultivating these various 
qualities will any now be fit for, or be received into 
the everlasting Kingdom. Thus all the members of that 
Kingdom, as St. Paul declares, must be copies of God's 
dear Son, our Redeemer— not copies in the flesh, but 
copies in our hearts and in our intentions. This will 
mean to be as nearly perfect in the flesh, as nearly in 
harmony with the Divine requirements, as possible. 

Indeed, the Bible clearly teaches that all who will ever 
attain everlasting life and Divine favor, even on the 
earthly plane as perfect men in an earthly body, must entirely 
get rid of everything appertaining to the spirit of 
Satan and sin; that they must thus get back to the original 
image and likeness of God as exemplified in Adam 
before he sinned in the Garden. 

R5308 : page 269 

MIRIAM'S JEALOUSY AND ENVY 

The lesson of today's Bible Study tells us of a serious 
error made by Aaron and Miriam, the brother and the 
sister of Moses, both his seniors. We may safely conclude 
that while the two participated in the sin, Miriam's 
was the leading spirit. This view is fully justified by the 
outcome of the lesson, which shows that God's punishment 
rested upon her, and not upon Aaron. 

The start of the matter was a question of family pride. 
Moses had married an Ethiopian, or Cushite, woman. 
We know not if this was his first wife, whom he had 
married in the land of Midian, and who only now joined 
him as the Israelites were about to start on their journey 
toward Canaan. Some have surmised that Moses' 
first wife had died, and that Zipporah was his second 
wife. No matter which, the fact remains that at this 
time she came to live with Moses in the Camp of Israel, 
and thus became, as wife of the great and influential 
leader, the first lady of the nation. 

Previous to this, Miriam had undoubtedly filled the 
office of chief lady. It was but natural that she should 
feel the loss of her position and of the influence which 
went with it. She felt especially keenly upon the subject 
as she reflected that her new sister-in-law was of an 
alien race. This fact seemed to give Miriam's jealousy 
a religious footing; and she doubtless reasoned to herself, 
and convinced herself, that her hostility to her sister-in-law 
was not based upon jealousy, but upon a high 
moral ground, affecting the honor of God, the honor of 



His nation, Israel, and the future possibilities of Abraham's 
seed in the Land of Promise. 

We are to remember that it was this same Miriam 
who, as the little maiden, watched Pharaoh's daughter 
when she went to the bathing place on the Nile where 
Moses was found in the little basket of bulrushes. This 
same Miriam hastened to bring to the premises her mother 
to be the nurse for the foundling, Moses. This same 
Miriam, doubtless, with Aaron had enjoyed special privileges 
in the confidence of Moses in respect to all the affairs 
of Israel under the Lord's leadings. This same 
Miriam had been recognized of the Lord as a prophetess. 
She it was who, with her timbrels, after the crossing of 
the Red Sea by the Israelites and after the sea had returned 
with destruction upon their Egyptian pursuers, led 
the Israelitish women in the song of triumph. 

Thus seen, there was what we might call an excuse for 
Miriam's jealousy. Indeed, we cannot imagine any jealousy 
which could not find an excuse for its existence- 
good or bad. No good people can harbor jealousy, envy, 
etc., without in some manner deluding themselves into 
thinking that the peculiar circumstances of their case 
fully justify their attitude. 

After thinking slightingly of her brother as foolish in 
his course, Miriam became more and more convinced 
that God would not think of using especially in His 
service one who had thus lost caste with herself. Her 
poisoned mind began to see evidences that the Lord had 
forsaken Moses, and that otherwise he would not have 
fallen into what she was sure was a great mistake. She 
communicated her fears to her brother Aaron, and the 
two doubtless thought seriously and prayed much respecting 
the sad fall of Israel's leader and the necessity 
thus laid upon them to make good his dereliction. 

R5308 : page 270 

Aaron apparently must have been a weak character, 
and merely used and useful as the mouthpiece of Moses. 
He showed much weakness on this occasion, as he did 
during Moses' absence in the mountain, when in response 
to the persuasion of the Israelites he made for them the 
golden calf and assisted them in their idolatrous worship, 
which they desired. Miriam also probably assented at 
that time that such would be the only course to take to 
satisfy the rebellious spirit of the people. 

The text implies that Miriam began to spread her 
seditious suggestions throughout the Camp of Israel, referring 
to her brother Aaron as holding similar sentiments: 
The people were to be prepared and the Lord 
was to be helped, of course, by the primary suggestion 
that Moses was not the only leader of the nation, that 
Miriam and Aaron were also prophets and in relationship 
with the Lord in exactly the same manner and degree as 
Moses. This insidious preparation of the people would 
make ready for the expected time when God would entirely 



disown Moses and speak entirely through Miriam, 
Aaron being her mouthpiece. 

AND THE LORD HEARD IT 

Too often do the Lord's people and others forget that 
the Lord is not inattentive to His own business, the interests 
of His own cause, but is working all things according 
to the counsel of His own will. As Bible students, 
we should more and more learn to appreciate this 
great fact and to remember that prosperity in the Lord's 
work cannot come by might or human power or cunning, 
but only by and in harmony with the Lord's Spirit, the 
Lord's Power, the Lord's Will. 

The Lord nipped the conspiracy in the bud by suddenly 
calling Moses, Aaron and Miriam into His presence 
before the Tabernacle. All three obeyed the summons, 
Miriam doubtless supposing that now the moment 
had come when the Lord would show that she had rightly 
divined His intentions in ousting Moses from the leadership 
and appointing herself. The denouncement, however, 
was very different. God did, indeed, declare that Miriam 
and Aaron had to some extent occupied the place of 
prophets, in that God had been pleased so to use them; 
but with equal distinctness the Lord pointed out that His 
dealing with Moses was on a very much higher plane. 
To him God had spoken directly, not through dreams and 
visions, but in plain language. Thus the ambitions which 
were the grounds of the jealousy, envy and conspiracy 
and evil speaking, God promptly set aside. 

Additionally, however, God gave a punishment. As 
the Divine Presence, represented by the pillar of cloud, 
departed from them, Moses and Aaron beheld that their 
sister Miriam had been smitten with leprosy. Aaron recognized 
that all this signified that he had assisted and 
upheld his sister in a sinful course. He recognized that 
his brother Moses was indeed the chief of God's people; 
and to him Aaron uttered this cry of distress and prayer 
for relief, saying, "O my lord, lay not, I pray thee, this 
sin upon us; for that we have done foolishly, and for 
that we have sinned. Let her not be as one dead!" 

Then Moses cried unto the Lord, saying, "Heal her 
now, O God, I beseech Thee!" And God heard Moses 
and healed her then, but directed that she should be 
treated as every other person was treated whose leprosy 
was declared to be healed. All such were required to remain 
seven days outside the Camp, under inspection, to 
see that no further symptoms of the disease appeared, 
before they would be admitted to the Camp again. 

"THE LAW WAS A SHADOW" 

The Apostle explains to us that the various things 
commanded Israel under their Law Covenant were prophetic 
shadows illustrating higher things— things appertaining 
to Spiritual Israel. Thus, for instance, the disease 



of leprosy, practically incurable, except by Divine 
interposition, was a type of sin; and the seven days of 
excommunication from the favored people represented a 
full and complete period of tests as respects a putting 
away of sin, a cleansing, a return to harmony with God. 

Various lessons might be drawn from today's Study. 
But the one in which all can probably best agree is that 
jealousy, envy, based upon selfishness, is amongst the 
most deceptive of all sins and one very serious in the 
sight of God, whatever may be thought of it by others. 

The text supplied us is St. Paul's exhortation to the 
Church. And the Church, we must remember, is that 
special class called out from humanity in general by the 
Gospel Message to become followers of Jesus and joint-heirs 
with Him. Their call is to a sacrifice with Jesus 
of all earthly rights and claims, and to a full submission 
to the Divine will and arrangements in everything. 
Their covenant is to be fully submissive to the headship 
of the Savior and, like Him, to be loyal to every principle 
and arrangement of the Divine Program. 

This leaves no room for any work of the flesh or the 
Devil. All these are to be put off, discarded, as displeasing 
to God. On the contrary, the fruits and graces of the 
Holy Spirit are to be substituted, that thus the followers 
of Jesus, like Himself, might ultimately attain to the fulness 
of Divine favor and glory, honor and immortality— 
at His right hand of Power. 

While, therefore, all people should strive to throw off 
the works of darkness and to conform themselves to the 
Divine arrangements under the guidance of the Prince of 
Life, nevertheless, the Church, especially consecrated to 
God, should remember that all their hopes of glory, honor 
and immortality are associated with the development of 
right characters and the opposition of the wrong. Let us 
also remember that "Love envieth not; Love vaunteth not 
itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave itself unseemly." 
And Love, therefore, represents the full standard of the 
Golden Rule and the full character of God; for "God is 
Love."-I John 4:8. 

The prompt punishment of Miriam and its effect remind 
us of the fact that such prompt dealing with sin 
will be the regular order under the Messianic Kingdom 
and will bring prompt results then. All men realize to 
some extent that whosoever sins will suffer; but the penalties, 
or sufferings, resulting from sin are often so far 
removed as not to be identified by the sufferer. Hence 
with many the lesson is lost. 

Besides, our erroneous theology of the Dark Ages led 
many of us to misrepresent the punishment of sin as 
being eternal torture. Thus we directly contradicted God's 
arrangement, drew attention away from the present punishment 
and wages of sin, and made the future punishments 
so absurdly unreasonable that nobody believes 
them, or, believing them, are misled into the supposition 
that a dying prayer for forgiveness will permit an 
utter escape from their penalties. We cannot improve 



upon the Divine arrangement, "Whatsoever a man soweth 
that shall he also reap"— either in the present life or in 
that which is to come— but in no case a devilish and 
eternal torture. 



"Upon Thy Word I rest, 

So strong, so sweet, so sure; 

So full of comfort blest, 

So wonderful, so pure— 
The Word that changeth not, that faileth never! 
My King, I rest upon Thy Word forever!" 



page 271 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I am noting a few incidents which transpired in this town 
last Autumn, which will interest you, I know. They are as follows: 
The pastor of the Episcopal Church at that time was 

the Rev. K ; of the First Presbyterian, Rev. M 

(there was another Presbyterian Church in town). The 
Wesleyan (official organ of the Methodist Church in these 
provinces) is published in this town. (You may recall that 
we sent you, last Autumn, quite a number of issues of the 
Wesleyan treating Pastor Russell and the Truth in a very 

unchristian manner.) Rev. K became very much excited 

because of the circulation of some volunteer matter, and 
concluded the best thing to do was to send for a sufficient 
number of copies of the Brooklyn Eagle to cover the town 
and considerable outlying territory, making the statement, to 
one of his parishioners, at least, that the circulation of our 
literature "must be stopped." He had some of the supply put 
into the hands of some other clerical brethren, and thus the 
distribution was made. 

About the same time Rev. M preached a very 

severe sermon against our Pastor and the work, calling attention 
to the "Vow," holding it up to ridicule. Within a few 

weeks Rev. K , who was a very dignified man (and 

apart from theological narrowness a very nice man), died one 
of the most undignified deaths possible. In making a call on 
a parishioner, in the fire house of the town, he missed the 
doorway and in some unaccountable manner attempted to 
enter through a window leading into the ash-pit. The window 
had been left open, but he had to step up some distance 
from the ground to enter— no one can understand why it 
should occur. He was found two hours later dead on the 
concrete floor of the pit, eight feet below, from a broken neck. 
Recently his son, in closing up his affairs, auctioned off his 
walking stick, and even his overcoat. He was for years, up 
to his death, Archdeacon for the province. 

Very shortly after, Rev. M 's Church was burned 



to the ground— he has left the town. The two congregations 
have voted to unite and rebuild (that is, the two Presbyterian 
congregations), but are now fighting amongst themselves. 
About the same time the pastor of the leading Methodist 
Church took sick and died. This means that through death 
and changes owing to the fire, half the ministers of a few 
months ago are gone. We wonder, in this Day of the Lord's 
judgments, how close may be the connections between these 
incidents. 

We are glad to report the work prospering in the town. 
Sister Black joins me in much Christian love to you all. 

Your brother in the Kingdom Hope, 

W. W. BLACK. 



MY DEAR FRIENDS :- 

I should like to be put on your mailing list. I am getting 
THE WATCH TOWER and I have your STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES; 
but I want your pamphlets also, as they come out, and 
the BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY. Please send me your booklet 
on "Spiritism," and any treatise you may have on Revelation. 
You will, of course, forward bill for any charge, and I shall 
remit at once. 

I enclose check for $5.00, which you may use as you see 
best in furthering the work. If possible, I shall send a like 
amount monthly. 

I want to advance the cause of the Kingdom. The Message 
as you put it appeals to me in such a way that I know it to be 
true. It accords with our blessed God's character and Word, 
and stands at once so reasonable and satisfying, and so full of 
promise to every creature, that it must be the Gospel. I believe 
in Jesus Christ as my personal Savior, and that, through 
His precious blood. And as surely as anything ever happened 
to a man, I have been called by Him. I cannot neglect "so 
great salvation." Will you help me to work in His vineyard- 
even though it is the "eleventh hour"? The wages matter 
not. Only to know Him is worth more than heart can dream 
of. To be like Him in character would be the greatest blessing 
of Heaven. 

Yours sincerely, 

A. MURRAY.-Calif. 



R5307 : page 271 

THE HARVEST CALL 

Come, labor on. 
Who dares stand idle on the harvest plain, 
When all around him waves the golden grain, 
And every servant hears the Master say, 

"Go, work today"? 

Come, labor on. 



The laborers are few, the field is white, 
No rest have they who labor for the right; 
From distant voices far, or near at home, 
The call is, "Come!" 

Come, labor on. 
No time for rest till glows the western sky, 
And the long shadows o'er our pathway lie; 
Then a glad sound comes with the setting sun, 

"Servants, well done!" 

Come, labor on. 
The toil is pleasant, the reward is sure; 
Blessed are those who to the end endure; 
How full their joy, how deep their rest will be 

O Lord, with THEE! Unknown. 



page 271 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study XVI. 
THE PRESENT INHERITANCE OF THE NEW CREATION 

OCTOBER 5 
Read p. 659 to p. 661 par. 1. 

(1) What are the first-fruits of the Spirit— a foretaste of 
future blessings— which are possessed by the New Creation in 
the present life? P. 659, first 18 lines. 

(2) What is the nature of earthly hopes and joys? P. 659, 
18th line to end of par. 

(3) How do the joys, hopes, ambitions of the New Creation 
differ from those of the natural man? P. 660, par. 1, 2. 

TRUE VERSUS FALSE HOPES 

(4) When and for what purpose does Satan transform 
himself into an "angel of light"? P. 660, par. 3. 

(5) What false hope respecting the dead has been introduced 
by the Adversary? P. 661, par. 1. 

OCTOBER 12 

Read p. 661, par. 2, to p. 663, par. 2. 

(6) How has Satan deceived the Church by a false hope 
respecting the time for the rewarding of the Lord's faithful 
followers? P. 661, par. 2. 

(7) How have these false hopes been especially injurious 
to the Lord's people? P. 662, par. 1. 

(8) In view of the foregoing, what is the reason for our 



present hope of an instantaneous change for the faithful members 
of the New Creation? P. 662, par. 2. 

(9) What is our hope as respects the faithful of the entire 
Gospel Age prior to 1878, and of those who have died and 
are dying since that date? P. 663, par. 1. 

(10) How have the hopes of the New Creation become the 
dread of the "Christian World"? P. 663, par. 2. 

OCTOBER 19 

Read p. 664, par. 1, to p. 668, par. 1. 

(11) Why do nominal Christians dread the resurrection 
of the dead? P. 664, par. 1. 

(12) Note the joyful hopes of the Second Advent of 
Christ, and the Resurrection, as set forth in Scripture. Pp. 
664 to 666. 

THE THIEF IN PARADISE 

(13) What is the proper interpretation of the incident of 
"the Thief on the Cross"? Luke 23:42,43. P. 667, par. 1. 

(14) In order to properly understand this Scripture, how 

must we consider the circumstances, surroundings and connections? 
P. 667, par. 2, 3, 4. 

(15) Did the thief request the Lord to take him to Heaven? 
And how does changing the position of the comma clarify the 
whole subject? P. 668, par. 1. 

OCTOBER 26 

Read p. 668, par. 2, to p. 671, par. 1. 

(16) What further explanation might the Lord have given 
the repentant thief? P. 668, par. 2, 3. 

(17) What is the Scriptural significance of the word 
Paradise? P. 669, par. 1. 

(18) Explain why we have a perfect right to change the 
position of the comma, and cite other instances in which the 
word "today" is similarly used. P. 669, par. 2, to P. 670. 

ST. PAUL'S EARNEST DESIRE 

(19) How does the Emphatic Diaglott render Phil. 1:21-24, 
and how does this translation differ from the Common 
Version? P. 670, par. 1, 2. 

(20) How is the word Analusai, "return," used in Greek 
literature, and in the only other instance in the New Testament, 
namely, Luke 12:36? P. 671, par. 1. 



page 273 
