Would You Like to Know More About the Bible?
Why Read the Bible?
THE Bible is unlike any other book—it contains loving instruction from God. (1 Thessalonians 2:13) If you apply what the Bible teaches, you will benefit greatly. You will increase your love for God and will draw close to him, the Giver of “every good gift and every perfect present.” (James 1:17) You will come to know how to approach him in prayer. During times of trouble, you can experience God’s help. If you harmonize your life with the standards set out in the Bible, God will give you everlasting life.—Romans 6:23.
The Bible contains truths that give enlightenment. Those who gain Bible knowledge are liberated from the misconceptions that dominate the lives of millions. For example, knowing the truth about what happens after we die frees us from fear that the dead can harm us or that our dead relatives and friends are suffering. (Ezekiel 18:4) The Bible’s teaching of the resurrection gives comfort to those who have lost loved ones in death. (John 11:25) Knowing the truth about wicked angels alerts us to the dangers of spiritism and helps us to understand why there is so much trouble on earth.
The godly principles in the Bible show us how to live in a way that brings physical benefits. For example, being “moderate in habits” contributes to good health. (1 Timothy 3:2) By ‘cleansing ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit,’ we avoid damaging our health. (2 Corinthians 7:1) Applying God’s counsel found in the Bible also promotes happiness in marriage and self-respect.—1 Corinthians 6:18.
If you apply God’s Word, you will be a happier person. Bible knowledge helps us to find inner peace and contentment and gives us hope. It helps us to cultivate such appealing qualities as compassion, love, joy, peace, kindness, and faith. (Galatians 5:22, 23; Ephesians 4:24, 32) Such qualities help to make us a better husband or wife, father or mother, son or daughter.
Have you ever wondered about the future? Bible prophecies show us where we are in the stream of time. Not only do these prophecies describe the condition of the world today but they also show that God will soon transform the earth into a paradise.—Revelation 21:3, 4.
Help in Understanding the Bible
Perhaps you have tried to read the Bible but found it hard to understand. Maybe you do not know where to look in the Bible to find answers to your questions. If so, you are not alone. All of us need help in understanding God’s Word. Jehovah’s Witnesses, in some 235 lands, provide free Bible instruction to millions of people. They would be happy to help you too.
Usually it is best to study the Bible progressively, beginning with basic teachings. (Hebrews 6:1) As you continue, you will be better able to take in “solid food”—that is, deeper truths. (Hebrews 5:14) The Bible is the authority. Bible-based publications, such as the book What Does the Bible Really Teach?, will help you to understand Scriptural references on a variety of subjects.
Are You Willing to Spend Time Each Week to Understand the Bible?
A Bible study can usually be arranged at a time and place convenient to you. Many study in the privacy of their own home. Some even study over the telephone. The study program is, not a class with many people, but a private arrangement tailored to your personal circumstances, including your level of knowledge and education. There are no examinations, and you will not be made to feel embarrassed. Your Bible questions will be answered, and you will learn how to draw close to God.
You do not have to pay for such a Bible study. (Matthew 10:8) It is offered free of charge to people of all religions and to those who practice no religion but who are sincerely interested in increasing their knowledge of God’s Word.
Who can share in the discussion? Your entire family. Any friends that you choose to invite may also share. Or if you prefer, the discussion can be held with just you.
Many set aside an hour each week to study the Bible. If you are able to spend more time or are limited to less time each week, the Witnesses will make themselves available to help you.
An Invitation to Learn
We invite you to contact Jehovah’s Witnesses. One way you can do this is by writing to an address below. Arrangements will then be made for someone to conduct a free home Bible study with you.
□ Send me a copy of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach?
□ Please contact me concerning a free home Bible study.
Unless otherwise indicated, all Bible quotations are from the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures.

