





HELP FOR THOSE WHO GRIEVE
The Best Help for Those Who Grieve




THE PAIN OF LOSING A LOVED ONE IN DEATH HAS BEEN THE SUBJECT OF MUCH RESEARCH IN RECENT TIMES. Yet, as demonstrated previously, the best expert advice often harmonizes with the ancient wisdom found in the Bible. This speaks well of the timelessness of the Bible’s guidance. The Bible, however, contains more than dependable advice. It provides information found nowhere else, which can bring immeasurable comfort to those who grieve.
  Assurance that our dead loved ones are not suffering
“The dead know nothing,” says the Bible at Ecclesiastes 9:5. Their “thoughts perish.” (Psalm 146:4) Consistent with this, the Bible likens death to peaceful sleep.​—John 11:11.

  A strong belief in a loving God brings comfort
The Bible says at Psalm 34:15: “The eyes of Jehovaha are on the righteous, and his ears listen to their cry for help.” Expressing our feelings in prayer to God is more than good therapy or a means of organizing our thoughts. It actually helps us to establish a personal relationship with our Creator, who can use his power to comfort us.

  A better future to look forward to
Imagine a time in the future when those in the grave will be brought back to life here on earth! The Bible repeatedly speaks of such a time. Describing what conditions on earth will then be like, the Bible states that God “will wipe out every tear from [our] eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.”​—Revelation 21:3, 4.


Many who believe in Jehovah, the God of the Bible, are significantly empowered to cope with grief by embracing the hope of seeing their dead loved ones again. For example, Ann, who lost her husband of 65 years, says: “The Bible assures me that our dead loved ones are not suffering and that God will resurrect all who are in his memory. These thoughts come to the surface whenever I think of my loss, and as a result, I am actually able to cope with the worst thing that has ever happened to me!”
Tiina, mentioned earlier in this series of articles, says: “Since the day Timo died, I have felt God’s support. I have strongly felt Jehovah’s helping hand in my time of distress. And the Bible’s promise of a resurrection is very real to me. It strengthens me to keep going until the day when I will see Timo again.”
These sentiments echo those of millions of people who are convinced of the Bible’s reliability. Even if you feel that the Bible’s claims are unreal or just a dream, you owe it to yourself to investigate the evidence that its counsel and promises are sound. You just might find the Bible to be the best help for those who grieve.



LEARN MORE ABOUT THE HOPE FOR THE DEAD

Watch related videos on our website, jw.org




The Bible promises a future when we will welcome back loved ones who have died




WHAT IS THE CONDITION OF THE DEAD?





What happens to us when we die? The Bible’s clear answer is comforting and reassuring
Look under LIBRARY > VIDEOS (Video Category: THE BIBLE)
WOULD YOU LIKE GOOD NEWS?





With so much bad news, where can you find good news?
Look under BIBLE TEACHINGS > PEACE & HAPPINESS



Jehovah is the personal name of God as found in the Bible.

