VOL. XVII. MAY 15, 1896. No. 10. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 102 

Erroneous Chronology and False 

Conclusions 103 

Mr. Dimbleby's Chronology, Etc 110 

True Bible Chronology Stated A.M 112 

The Temple of God 113 

Bible Study: Parable of the Vineyard 115 

Bible Study: The Destruction of 

Jerusalem Foretold 116 

page 102 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS "-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



INSPIRED COUNSEL FOR ALL SAINTS. 



"FRET not thyself because of evil-doers, neither be thou envious 
against the workers of iniquity. For they shall soon be cut down 
like the grass, and wither as the green herb. 

"Trust in the Lord and do good; so shalt thou dwell in the land 
and verily thou shalt be fed [naturally and spiritually]. Delight thyself 
also in the Lord; and he shall give thee the desires of thy heart. 

"Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust also in him; and he shall 
bring it to pass. And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, 
and thy judgment as the noon-day [sun]."— Psalm 37:1-7. 



R1974 : page 103 
ERRONEOUS CHRONOLOGY AND FALSE CONCLUSIONS. 



MANY are the false chronologies and erroneous 
and very misleading applications of prophecy 
in our day, but the majority of them being little known 
it is not necessary that their errors should be specially 
pointed out. But during the past five years numerous tracts 
and pamphlets have been published and widely circulated by 
a Mr. Dimbleby of England, and by a Mr. Totten of the United 
States, which present a so-called "Bible chronology," and 
various prophetic interpretations based thereon, which are 
quite misleading to many,— inclining them to false expectations 
and thus diverting their attention away from correct 
expectations, and consequently away from the real duties 
of the present "harvest" work and time. 

Their chronology, and methods of applying such prophecies 
as they attempt to expound, are practically the same, 
with a few exceptions which we will show later on. Mr. 
Dimbleby is conceded to be the originator of the Chronology, 
which is far from clear, and very disconnectedly stated. 
It is built only in part upon the testimony of the Bible; 
and, while claiming exactness to the fraction of a day, it 
is one hundred and twenty-nine years astray, according 
to the Bible record. This is shown in the article 
following, on "The True Bible Chronology";— to 
which, for straightforward, unvarnished simplicity, no 
other chronology we have ever seen will compare. We do 
not claim it as "our" chronology: on the contrary, we 
claim it is God's chronology, supplied in the Bible to all 
that are his, and for our common use and behoof. We fear 
human speculations and manufactures along these lines, by 
ourselves or others. 

But it may be asked, Why should any be confused by 
this Dimbleby-Totten chronology, which they do not 
understand, and which is not simple? We reply, it is 



chiefly because of five things:— 

(1) Because these gentlemen claim to back up their 
chronology by astronomical calculations, eclipses, etc. 

(2) Because Mr. Dimbleby is or has been connected 

with the British Chronological and Astronomical Association; 

and Mr. Totten is a man of some erudition, who 

for some time held the position of Instructor of Military 

Tactics in Yale College, and therefore is known as Professor 

Totten. 

(3) Because the majority of people know little about 
mathematics, chronology and astronomy— especially the 
latter— and are apt to overestimate possibilities along 
those lines. 

(4) Because both of these gentlemen, following a very 
common failure, employ their talents rather to impress their 
readers with reverence for their learning, and thus for their 
views, than to elucidate and prove their subject. They use 
technical terms, and assert astronomical proofs of their 
chronology which the average readers do not comprehend, 

the latter are convinced of their own ignorance, and proportionally 

convinced of the wisdom of these gentlemen; 

and forthwith they accept what they do not at all comprehend. 

And as for those who have some knowledge of 

astronomy, they usually have little knowledge of the Bible, 

and no knowledge of Bible chronology. They are therefore 

as unprepared to see, as they would be indifferent to 

expose, the errors of statement on this subject made by Mr. 

Totten and Mr. Dimbleby. 

(5) Because these gentlemen state themselves boldly, 
as though they believe all that they are teaching. 

Respecting the last proposition: We must remind our 
readers that it is nothing uncommon for people to deceive 
themselves, as well as others. Saul of Tarsus, one of the 
most zealous, God-fearing men in Israel, was deceived to 
the extent that he persecuted the Church while verily 

R1974 : page 104 

thinking that he did God service. Hence, while charging 
these gentlemen with serious errors, we do not believe that 
they were originally actuated by any desire to deceive themselves 
or others. They desired to find a chronology, and 
concluded they ought to be able to find and prove one. 
They set about it; and have bent and warped their own 
judgments so that they no doubt at first believed what they 
were teaching, which, as we proceed to show, is very far 
astray chronologically, and without a particle of astronomical 
support. But we do find fault with them in that 
afterward, when they became involved in difficulties from 
which they could not extricate their theories, either logically 
or Scripturally, they taught and still teach them instead 
of refuting them. 

Their "Bible Chronology" is defective; because in 
certain places where the historic account of the Bible is 
broken, they have neglected to take the divinely given 
"bridging" for those "chasms," specially provided by the 



Lord in the New Testament; hence the difference between it 
and the simple, easily comprehended, Bible chronology 
presented in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chapter II. (See 
p. 42), and stated in Anno Mundi order on another page 
of this issue. The largest portion of this error (100 years) 
is made in reckoning the period of the Judges. The error 
next in magnitude is made in connecting Bible chronology 
with secular chronology,— the "seventy years desolation of 
the land" being taken to mean seventy years of captivity, 
whereas the captivity began eighteen years before. Thus 
one hundred and eighteen (100+18) years are lost from 
their reckoning. In these two errors these gentlemen have 
followed Bishop Usher, whose chronology appears in the 
margin of our common version English Bibles. Indeed, 
it may be said that they use Usher's chronology with but 
slight deviation, until, finding it too short, they adopt a peculiar, 
"original" and erroneous method of lengthening 
it, the fallacy of which we will expose. 

But, says some one, if their chronology is wrong to 
the extent of one hundred and eighteen years, or even one 
year, or even one day, how could they prove it by 
astronomy? 

They do not prove it, we answer; they merely assert 
that they prove it: and we will show you why it is impossible, 
absolutely impossible, for them or for any one else to 
prove their chronology, or any other Bible chronology, by 
astronomy. 

R1975 : page 104 

Now do not allow yourself to conclude that because 
you know nothing about astronomy you can therefore only 
choose between their claim to prove their chronology by 
astronomy and our claim that such a procedure is as impossible 
as the most impossible thing you ever heard of; 
for the matter is not nearly so abstruse as some learned 
people pretend and some unlearned people suppose. When 
we have explained, in simple language, the principle of applying 
astronomy to chronology, you can understand it, 
and will understand it; and you will see and fully endorse 
our declaration that astronomy cannot in any sense or degree 
be applied to Bible chronology. 

First— Astronomy has taken note of the fact that the 
heavenly bodies move with such regularity that it is possible 
to calculate their movements into the future and say, 
Unless some remarkable and now unforeseen change occur, 
the sun will rise and set at such hours on a certain day five 
hundred years hence, and that during that year there will 
be such eclipses at such and such hours on such and such 
days. By similar calculations or by reference to tabulated 
reckonings (just as in reckoning interest one person would 
figure it out while another would refer to an "Interest 
Table"), it is a very simple matter to know that such and 
so many eclipses occurred one thousand years ago or ten 
thousand years ago, unless some unknown changes occurred 
in the meantime. 



But now suppose that you had reckoned the matter 
out, and found that just five thousand years ago to-day the 
sun rose at 5 A.M. and set at 7 P.M. in the vicinity of 
Palestine; and that during that year the moon was eclipsed 
four times, and the sun twice; suppose that you were very 
precise and had reckoned the very day, hour and minute 
at which each of those six eclipses occurred; suppose that 
you noted, also, a transit of Venus and a transit of Mercury, 
to the very day, hour and minute, that same year. 
Of what value would all that reckoning be to you, or to 
any one, so far as giving a knowledge of human history, or 
of enabling anyone to connect your astronomic reckoning 
with mankind and the chronology of human affairs? 

None whatever! 

All can see that! Any grammar school pupil can see 
that it would be absurd to claim that because you had found 
that certain eclipses and transits occurred in a certain year, 
therefore, that must be the year in which Adam died; or 
in which Noah was born; or in which Moses and Israel 
came out of Egypt. 

But, says some one, while that seems logical enough, 
will you not explain how astronomy is sometimes used in 
ascertaining, or at least in corroborating, dates of history? 

In ancient times a connected chronology was not 
valued and preserved as now. The solidarity of the race 
was not appreciated then as now, and no common era was 
recognized. The first effort to bring time-order into the 
world's general history was in the second century of the 
Christian era (A.D.), by that celebrated astronomer, 
mathematician and geographer, Ptolemy, of Alexandria, 
in a book entitled "A Table of Reigns." In it he gives a 
chronological table of the Assyrian, Persian, Greek and 
Roman sovereigns from his own day back to Nabopolassar, 
the father of Nebuchadnezzar, of Bible note. The records 
of those kings and dynasties had been written independently; 
and Ptolemy attempted to reconcile and harmonize them 
into one. And, although generally quite accurate, no doubt 
the mistake of reckoning the "seventy years desolation" 
as seventy years of captivity, in his endeavor to unite Bible 

R1975 : page 105 

history with secular history, was originally his. It has been 
followed, very generally, since. 

Astronomy was one of the early "sciences"; but in 
early times it was so mixed with vague imaginations and astrology 
as to be of little value, and astronomers (rather astrologers) 
then not only claimed to foretell something respecting 
the future state of the weather, but after the style of 
the modern "fortune-teller" pretended to predict future 
events;— teaching that there was some connection, or relation, 
between the eclipses and transits of heavenly bodies 
and the events of earth,— such as births, battles, deaths, 
revolutions, plagues, etc.;— and they frequently made note 
of eclipses in connection with their records of events which 
they supposed answered as fulfilments of these superstitious 



notions, just as superstitious people now often connect 
things together in their imaginations which have not the 
remotest philosophical relationship— as, for instance, the 
breaking of a looking glass to be a sign of a death, etc., 
etc. Thus it happened that Ptolemy, who was a historian 
as well as an astronomer, found in those superstitious records 
of the world connections between history and 
astronomic data which he was able to use; and his knowledge 
of astronomy and of dates and times when eclipses 
had occurred helped him in bringing order and harmony 
out of the histories of the four principal heathen nations 
of his day— Assyria, Persia, Greece and Rome. 

To illustrate the incompetency of astronomy in fixing 
dates, we note the fact that scholars are still in doubt and dispute 
respecting the date of our Lord's birth. Some hold that 
it occurred one year and three months before the beginning 
of the year A.D. 1, while others contend that it occurred 
four years (and some six years) previous to A.D. 1. 
Both parties appeal to astronomy to assist them in proving 
their dates. There is nothing in the Scriptural account 
to assist (except the reference of Luke 3: 1 to the 
reign of Tiberius; see MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II. p.54), 
for in the Bible nothing is recorded respecting eclipses or 
transits; but in secular history something was found that 
might bear upon the subject, at least indirectly,— the date 
of Herod's death, supposed to have been the year in which 
our Lord was born, or the year after. The only astronomical 
date was Josephus' record that the same year that 
Herod died a sedition occurred and several of the rebels 
were burnt alive by Herod's orders; and "that very night 
there was an eclipse of the moon." This is more data for 
an astronomer to work on than is furnished by any incident 
mentioned in the Scriptures: but was it sufficient to fix 
the year of Herod's death? No; because there are from 
one to four eclipses of the moon every year. 

How absurd it is, therefore, to talk about establishing 
Bible chronology by astronomy! The absurd claim of the 
Mormons that God gave them a new Bible engraved upon 
copper plates is no more incredible. The one proposition 
is as worthy of belief as the other. 

The following from the American Cyclopedia bears 
upon the point we are considering. It says:— 

"Greek and Roman dates are generally well authenticated 
[back] to the first Olympiad (about 776 B.C.).... 
The Assyrian, Babylonian and Egyptian inscriptions are in 
extinct languages and in characters long obsolete.... 
Ctesia, a Greek, about 415 B.C., wrote a history of Babylonia, 
but it is not regarded as authentic. Herodotus is 
valuable only as to his own time, about 459 B.C., and 
those of a century or two earlier.— Attempts have been made 
to bring astronomy to the aid of chronology. Eclipses being 
anciently regarded as portents, occasional mention is 
made of them in connection with historical events." 

Thus it is seen that secular history of very early dates 
is admittedly not generally reliable; and that only in a few 
instances has astronomy been able to assist in fixing dates 



to a reasonable degree of exactness. Two dates are fixed 

with considerable certainty,— the beginning of Nabonassar's 

reign on Feb. 26 of 747 B.C. and the beginning of 

the reign of Cyrus in 536 B.C. The former date is valueless 

to us in the study of Bible chronology; because Nabonassar 

is not mentioned in the Scriptures. The latter, 

however, is a very important aid; for the Bible chronology 

ends with the "70 years desolation of the land," and it 

tells us that God stirred up the heart of Cyrus to restore 

Israel from captivity at the close of that period, and that 

this was in the first year of Cyrus;— hence 536 B.C. 

The Bible, and the Bible alone, supplies such a chronology 
as the people of God can rely upon; and our conviction 
that God did intend to give us a Bible record of 
all past time is strengthened by the fact that the only broken 
periods in the Old Testament record are "bridged" by 
New Testament records. 

If, then, we rely upon the Bible as an inspired declaration 
on the subject, why should we not use it as far as 
it goes;— to the "seventy years desolation of the land," 
and thus to Cyrus. Why not believe that God intended 
thus to provide a chronology as long as it was needed- 
down to the point where secular history could be depended 
upon as accurate— so as to give us a complete chronology 
A.M.? We do so believe; and we find most satisfying 
corroborative evidence of it in the fact that the whole 
Bible record fits it with accuracy and precision, as shown 
in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II. 

But did not Messrs. Totten, Dimbleby and Usher pursue 
this same safe plan, and make use of the inspired chronology 
of the Bible as far as it will go,— down to the first 
year of Cyrus? 

No, they did not. They admit that the first year of 
Cyrus was the end of the "seventy years desolation of the 
land"; and that that date is well established as A.D. 536; 
but instead of following the Bible line of chronology back 
of that, and making the uncertain dates of secular history 
conform to the positive statements of the Bible, they reverse 
the matter, and attempt to make the Bible record 
agree with the secular dates, admitted to be quite obscure 
and uncertain. For instance, they adopt the uncertain 
secular date for the beginning of Nebuchadnezzar's reign; 

R1975 : page 106 

and then referring to Dan. 1:1, they thus fix the date of 

R1976 : page 106 

Jehoiakim's reign and alter other matters to suit.* Then 

again, they apply the "seventy years" as years of captivity 

and begin them in the third year of Jehoiakim; whereas 

the Scriptures unequivocally declare, repeatedly, that those 

were years of "desolation of the land," "without an inhabitant' 

(Jer. 25:11,12; 29:10; 2 Chron. 36:21; 

Dan. 9:2.) In this manner the remainder of the reign of 



Jehoiakim and all of the reign of Zedekiah (18 years) are 
reckoned in as part of the "seventy," whereas Scrip turally 
they were previous and, therefore, additional years. + 

In this connection let us remind the intelligent reader 
that the secular history, whose dates are taken in preference 
to the Bible history and dates, is so confused, that to this 
very day the ablest secular students of the subject are not 
in full agreement as to who was the immediate predecessor 
of Cyrus,— Darius or Cyaxares; or whether those two names 
were applied to the same ruler, or whether they ruled for a 
time conjointly with Cyrus. 

It is not surprising that unbelievers put as much confidence 
in the uncertain dates of secular history as they do 
in those furnished by the Bible; but it is strange that 
Christians should do so: and that they should give them 
the preference and adopt them when professedly giving a 
"Bible Chronology" is a matter of regret. The consequence 
is that while Usher's chronology is 124 years 
too short, the chronology of Dimbleby, endorsed and 
used by Totten, is 129 years too short. This leads the 
gentlemen into other errors (one error almost always 
leads to another); for they see that there are strong evidences 
that we are living somewhere near the end of the 
Gospel age, and near the time for the Millennium to be 
ushered in by "a time of trouble such as was not since 
there was a nation." 

They believe, with us, that the 6,000 years of permitted 
sin are to be followed by the 1,000 years of Christ's 
reign of righteousness. But whereas the true Bible chronology 
shows that the 6,000 years from Adam ended in 
1 873 (the very year in which the world-wide depression 
began), their erroneous chronology would show the beginning 
of the seventh millennium to be over one hundred 
years in the future. 

To make their short chronology come out to fit present 
times, two fallacies are introduced; and their readers, who 
are unskilled in chronology, are confused and misled into 
false calculations and into false expectations based thereon. 
As their applications of prophecy differ a little, we shall 
consider their efforts separately,— Mr. Totten's first. 

With these three thoughts in mind: (1) that the transition 
should be expected somewhere about the end of six 
thousand years; (2) that present evidences indicate that 
the Lord's Kingdom is near at hand; (3) that his adopted 
chronology shows the end of six thousand years to be more 
than a century future, Mr. Totten seems to conclude that 
he must look up some means of shrinking his chronology, 
of shortening the 6,000 years so as to end them somewhere 
near the present time; or rather near 1899-1X4— which 
date he reckons, by his calculations, will witness the end 
of the Times of the Gentiles. 

Mr. Totten is ingenious. He reflects that while according 
to his accepted chronology the 6,000 years will end 
in A.D. 2002, yet by reckoning twelve lunations as a year, 
each year would be shortened eleven (11) days and the 
6,000 years end very shortly now. These he terms 



"short" or "lunar" years; while the regular solar year he 
styles the "true" year. To count the entire 6,000 years as 
"lunar" years, of 354 days each, would make the 6,000 years 
from creation end in A.D. 1829, rather too early for 
present use; so looking along the aisles of history, and 
figuring, he finds that the date of Joshua's great battle, at 
which he commanded the sun and moon to stand still, 
would be a convenient approximate date, as well as a 
marked event upon which to speculate. He reckons the 
date of that event to have been the year A.M. 2555-1/4, 
and declares that the remaining 3444-3/4 years necessary to 
complete 6,000 years would (if reckoned 354 days to each 
year), according to his chronology, end A.D. 1899-1/4. We 
quote his words from his own publication of Sept. 22. '90, 
as follows:— 

"Since that [Joshua's] day the millennaries have been 
shortened to lunar years, so that there will extend from 
thence 3444-3/4 lunar years to March 1899 A.D. The sum 
of the 2555-1/4 "long" or solar years up to that day and 
the 3444-3/4 "shortened" or lunar years, from thence to the 
specified equinox, is exactly 6000. Thus some particular 
day near the vernal equinox [March] of the year 1899 A. 
D. will accurately terminate the sixth millennary since 
creation." 

We can find no reason whatever for using such a year 
as 354 days would make; and know of no reckoning, ancient 
or modern, upon that basis. The solar year (i.e., 
the year reckoned by the sun, and marked every spring 
and every autumn by equinoxes— the equal length of the 
day and night) has always been used in reckoning years 
The ancient Jewish custom was to reckon intermediate 
time by "new moons," but this was rectified in a simple 
manner, and brought to solar time, by beginning each new 
year with the first new moon at the Spring equinox, 
nature adding an extra month every few years. Thus 
the years of the Bible were true or solar years, and 
may be reckoned in with our present chronology without 
difficulty. Although arrived at in a simple manner, it 
was no less accurate and scientific than our present method 
of intercalation. 

But we shortly after discovered another reason why 
Mr. Totten chose this date for the ending of 6000 mixed 
years (part solar and part lunar);— he wanted it to agree 
with his "Times of the Gentiles," reckoned by his chronology. 



*We, on the contrary, by this passage fix the date of Nebuchadnezzar's 
reign, from the Bible date of Jehoiakim's reign. 

+Thus they lost eighteen years more. -See MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
VOL. II., pp. 50,51. 

R1976 :page 107 

Accordingly, we concluded to examine his 

"Times of the Gentiles," which he brings to a close at 



the same minute, and proves by similarly careful (?) mathematical 
(?) and astronomical (?) calculations. What do 
we find? 

We find that in this, as in his chronology, Mr. Totten 
goes outside the Bible account and takes secular history 
from the first year of Cyrus back to and through the Babylonian 
period. Thus doing, he is obliged to deny the 
Bible statement that the land of Judea lay "desolate" 
"without an inhabitant" for seventy years. (Dan. 9:2; 
2 Chron. 36:21; Jer. 25:1 1,12.) To get the Bible chronology 
linked to secular chronology he shortens the 
desolation period, which followed Zedekiah's captivity, 
from seventy to fifty-two years. 

But, worse yet; in order to get the "Gentile Times" 
to end as early as 1899-1/4 he begins them, not at the time 
when the crown was removed from Zedekiah, the last representative 
of David who sat upon the typical Kingdom 
of God; nor even at the date when Nebuchadnezzar had 
his vision and was told that he was the head or beginning 
of the Gentile governments represented in the image shown 
him in his dream. Mr. Totten goes back twenty-two years 
before the dream given to Nebuchadnezzar, and forty years 
before the crown was taken from God's representative on 
the typical throne of David, and begins it with the first 
year of Nabopolassar. 

God, both by a vision and by his Prophet Daniel, had 
said to Nebuchadnezzar, "Thou art this head of gold, and 
wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts of the 
field and the fowls of heaven, hath he given into thy hand, 
and made thee ruler over them all." (Dan. 2:38.) And, 
in view of this clear, plain statement, no sufficient excuse 
can be found for such misapplication of Scripture as the 
above, by any candid expositor. We can only suppose, as 
above suggested, that Mr. Totten, realizing from the signs 
of the times that the great crisis of the age is close at hand, 
let his zeal run away with his judgment and his conscience, 
to a greater extent than even he has fully realized. 

(1) He errs in asserting that his chronology is that of the 
Bible, and that it is supported by astronomy— eclipses, etc., 
—when in reality everybody familiar with the Bible 
knows, who knows anything about the adaptation of 
astronomy to history and chronology, that there is not one 
solitary event so recorded in the Bible as to make this 

a possibility. 

(2) In shrinking his (erroneous) chronology 103 years, 
he supposes a year such as no people, not even savages, 
have ever used. 

(3) To get his "Times of the Gentiles" near the same 
date, by his erroneous chronology, he violates the Bible 
record and begins them twenty-two years before God gave 
any intimation of Gentile Times, and while God's typical 
throne still stood. 

By reason of the assertive style of Mr. Totten's teachings 
some astronomers even, who were not so well posted 
in the Bible as in astronomy, have been thrown off their 
guard, supposing that he had found something new in the 



Bible on which to calculate the dates astronomically; and 
vice versa, some Bible students were so unfamiliar with 
astronomy that they were ready to believe that it could 
prove anything. And so some very good and some educated 
men are misled by Mr. Totten's supposed wisdom, 
the main evidence of which to them is his strong statements 
that he has "solved the riddle of history," found 
"the hidden key" to prophecy and chronology, etc. 
Many of the unsophisticated of God's children are thus in 
danger of being misled so as to ignore and neglect the true 
light now shining upon God's Word and plan. Unless 
helped in time, they are likely by and by to be greatly 
shaken by the failure of Mr. Totten's predictions; and then 
to become easy captives to the snare of Infidelity. 

But, while Mr. Totten is very positive about all past 
time, he is cautious as he reaches out into the future. He 
states himself, but rather vaguely; intimating that the 

R1977 : page 107 

"watchers" will understand: and they do. We see exactly 
what he expects from his writings and diagrams, but 
have difficulty in finding brief, succinct, positive statements 
for quotation. 

His theory, as presented in his publication of Sept. 
22, 1890, chart, is, that from March 1892 to March 1899, 
seven years, the world will be crazy; as represented in the 
seven years of Nebuchadnezzar's madness. 

By March 1891 A.D. the "Jewish Irredentalism" 
would be accomplished; i.e., the Jews would organize as 
a people, but under the domination of other governments. 

By the autumn of 1891 A.D. he announces "Palestine" 
Redivivus"; i.e., Palestine would come into existence 
again, be revived. By this we presume he meant nationally, 
for Palestine has been in process of revival otherwise, for 
nearly twenty years. That he meant nationally is implied 
also by his expectation that "Jewish Irredentalism" would 
precede it six months. 

By March 1892 A.D. (the beginning of the seven 
years of world-madness), a man, a prince (Antichrist), representing 
himself as Messiah, would appear and deceive 
many Jews, and make "a compact with many"; and the 
following September would see the "altar finished" and 
Antichrist's "edict issued," and then would follow the 
general deception and conversion of the whole world to 
Antichrist,— the "virgins" being the only exceptions. This 
would be quickly done, and fully completed before Sept. 
1895 A.D., the "midst of the week." 

By Sept. 1895 a wonderful event was to take place;— 
the setting up of a great Image of Antichrist, which every 
human being on earth was to be compelled to worship, or 
else be killed. Onward to 1899 the "plagues" and "vials" 
of divine wrath, mentioned in Revelation, will be let loose 
upon Antichrist and all whom he had deceived— the whole 
world; and Antichrist will perish, while Christ and the 



R1977 : page 108 

saints (to be translated about March 1892) will appear in 
glory, at that time, March 1899. 

That it may be seen that we are not misstating Mr. 
Totten's views we quote his words, from his pamphlet of 
Sept. 22d, 1890, as follows (the brackets are ours):— 

"This table gives upon an enlarged scale the years 
surrounding the final seven upon the 'Times of the Gentiles.' 
[March 1892 A.D. to March 1899 A.D.] They antitypify 
those of Nebuchadnezzar's insanity, and cover Antichrist's 
REIGN OF HORROR. The latter half of the seven, which 
will probably be bi-sected [divided, Sept. 1895] by the 
setting up of his IMAGE [Rev. 13:18] in the temple, is the 
time of 'Jacob's trouble.' 

"The times are now short and their signs are all completed 
save a single one— the manifestation of 'Ho-Anomos' 
'That Lawless One' (2 Thes. 2:8), whose synonym in the 
same language gives us the familiar neologism, 'Ho Anarchos' 
-(THE ANARCHIST)-and those short days (a year 
and a half) [Sept. 22d 1890 to March 1892] are the SOLE 
DAYS OF GRACE THAT YET REMAIN TO US. For when that 
One shall have begun his reign [March, 1892] the Holy Spirit 
which hitherto has withstood it (2 Thes. 2:6,7) will have 
withdrawn! From that dread moment [March 1892] we 
must date the 'Great Tribulation,' which is the time of 
'the harvest'. ...Progressive interpretation of the Word 
now suggests the awful certainty that the Holy Spirit, 
grieved beyond endurance, will withdraw [March 1892] 
before the Second Advent! With it 'the elect' will probably 
be 'caught up' to join the returning Savior in the air. 
But 'woe to the inhabiters of the earth' (Rev. 12:12) 
when the 'wise virgins' disappear! The 'foolish' will then 
be truly surrounded by a pack of wolves, for when the 
Holy Spirit 'withdraws itself man must literally face the 
INCARNATE DEVIL." 

We take exception to every item of Mr. Totten's 
program, except that the Gospel age ends with the second 
presence of our Lord in the clouds of a great time of anarchistic 
trouble, already overshadowing the world. We are 
not now presenting our views, however, but criticizing his. 

In the beginning of Mr. Totten's presentations of his 
views, we thought that few probably would be misled by his 
errors; and that those few would quickly be undeceived 
by the utter failure of the predictions for 1891 and 1892. 
But no; we had given his followers credit for more discernment 
than they possessed; for it seems that they and 
Mr. Totten become more and more infatuated with their 
errors as the predictions one after another fail, until now 
they think of no date except 1899-1/4. There they expect 
something, nay, everything, to occur; whereas, according 
to Mr. Totten's claims, if reliable at all, everything should 
be over by that time. 

Mr. Totten himself, instead of coming out frankly 
and admitting that thus far his calculations and predictions 
are certainly erroneous, still infatuated with them, writes 



in the same positive manner as at first. In his publication 
of Dec. 21st, 1892, after the time predicted for "Jewish 
Irrendentalism" and "Palestine redivivus" had passed 
and, as every one knows, brought no such events; and 
after the year 1892 had passed, and no Antichrist such as 
he predicted had appeared, or made an "edict," or made 
a covenant or "compact with many" Jews, so far from 
admitting his errors Mr. Totten writes thus:— 

"I doubt if many hamlets in Saxon lands have failed 
to hear some echo of the message, which during the past 
year I have been constrained to send forth with no will to 
hesitate, nor have I aught of it to curtail or withdraw." 

"Whether the date, March 29th 1892, upon which I 
have fixed as merely the beginning of Judgments, be a type 
only, or the long delayed antitype itself, it is the one or the 
other, and in either sense is FINAL." 

All this is the language of desperation, the language 
of a man who has staked his all, and as it disappears will 
not believe the evidence of his senses, but continues to 
mutter to himself, It is so ! It must be so, even if it 
isn't so! Hear him again:— 

"The time has at last arrived when Biblical Chronologists 
may be absolutely sure of certain things; and have 
no fear that they will ever have to be moved again." 

But Mr. Totten thinks best to take some notice of the 
dates which had so evidently proved false, so far as his predictions 
were concerned. He concludes to mention the 
matter guardedly, lest a few should have seen the slip, and 
need just a word of assurance from him, that his only reliable 
and authentic, only Biblical, and only astronomically 
proved and double riveted chronology is as faultless 
as ever. Yet the statement must be so guardedly made 
that the masses of his readers, uncritical, would not know 
that any slip had occurred. His utterances, therefore, 
must be as much as possible like the utterances of the ancient 
Oracle of Delphi,— capable of being understood variously, 
according to the hearer and according to the facts 
of the future. Thus on page 3 19, Dec. '92 issue, he refers 
to the "Jewish Times" which he had previously shown 
most conclusively would end exactly one and a half years 
before March 1892, as proved beyond shadow of doubt by 
his wonderful astronomical calculations. Without a word 
of retraction of the error (so far as we have noticed), he 
takes a new place for beginning those times; viz., 3406 A. 
M. (his and Dimbleby's chronology) instead of, as before, 
3444-3/4 A.M., a difference of only 38 years— a mere nothing 
however, in Mr. Totten's exact (?) chronology which proves 
(?) itself to a fraction of a minute. 

But more; he not only begins at a different point, but 
also changes the kind of time: he now measures it by the 
"true" or solar year of 365-1/4 days, instead of by his short 
and untrue year of 354 days; then, because the reckoning 
reaches nowhere, he adds 75 years (for no conceivable 
reason except to force a date); and then gives the 
astonishing (?) result, 6001 A.M. Here are his own 
words:— 



"Hence, adding to 3406 A.M. these seven times 
(7x360=2520 years), we reach the 5926 A.M., and by 
the further addition of thirty and forty-five or seventy-five 
years, we reach the year 6001 A.M., which is the first of 
the Sabbath thousand, reckoned on the longest possible or 
Solar scale!... Moreover, as we are at this moment 
(Sept. 20-21 1892 A.D.) only at the end of Solar year 
5890 A.M., it would appear that the first year of the Millennium 

R1977 :page 109 

was still about 111 years off! And so it is upon 
the long or Solar scale." 

This is so stated that Mr. Totten can refer to it by and 
by and say,— I showed that the Millennium might not 
come before 2003 A.D. This would mean that the poor 
Jews would be "trodden down of the Gentiles" for a 
hundred years more;— a hundred years after the end 
of Gentile Times, after all Gentile nations and Antichrist 
have been destroyed by the establishment of 
Christ's Kingdom. Where now is Antichrist's deception 
of the Jews, getting them to build him a temple 
and altar and to worship him— if he flourishes from March 
1892 and is destroyed in March 1899; and, poor Jews! 
must they be trodden down by their dead enemies for another 
century? 

But Mr. Totten well knew that few, very few, of his 
readers would see or appreciate this little statement sandwiched 
in with other matter; and so he proceeds on the 
very next page to reiterate his older erroneous position, in 
these words:— 

"Our 1899-1/4 A.D. —Now I have elsewhere shown 
upon a dozen or so lines of independent calculation that 
the 'Times of the Gentiles' must terminate with this latter 
date; and it is for this reason that I unhesitatingly place 
the termination of a hidden scale of 6000 years at this 

R1978 :page 109 

very point." 

It will be noticed that March 1899 is no longer stated 
as the end of 6000 years, but now the end of "a hidden 
[deceptive] scale" of years;— part "true" or solar years 
and part false or short years. All this we can characterize 
as nothing short of a jugglery of language. 

Although Mr. Totten had previously acknowledged Mr. 
Dimbleby as his "preceptor" "in the critical study of Biblical 
chronology," and claimed that they "use the very same 
line of A.M. years with the same respective calendars, all as 
discovered by Professor Dimbleby"; and although he had 
vouched for the whole, and assured his readers that he 
(Totten) had verified it by astronomy, etc., etc., proving 
it to a second and beyond a shadow of doubt, as it were 
double riveting it all around by his wonderful discovery, 
or inspiration, etc., connected with Joshua's long day and 
the dial of Ahaz, etc., etc., yet after critics had taken some 



notice of its historical and astronomical inaccuracies, 
Mr. Totten shoves the blame of them upon Mr. Dimbleby, 
saying in his serial of Dec. 25, '94.— 

"He [Dimbleby] formerly held the maximum Eclipse 
Cycle to be 651 years to the very day. The true Eclipse 
Cycle seems to be nearer to exactly 649 years, as he now 
agrees. Yet for all practical purposes 651 years is an accurate 
Eclipse Cycle. We now believe that it is really the 
earth's mean anomalistic period, and that it always closes 
with an eclipse to within 4-5 days, sometimes accurately." 

Is this a sufficient retraction for men to make who have 
deceived a confiding public into the belief that they had 
found some new means of verifying their chronology to 
the fraction of a minute, and, by a system of stretching and 
shrinking periods, had led people to expect a fulfilment of 
their predictions from 1892 to 1899, which, if not witnessed 
would impliedly prove God a liar and the Bible a 
fraud;— because their eclipse-proved chronology could not 
err. Now the fraction-of-a-minute exactness means, "within 
4-5 days, sometimes accurately," on a short cycle of 
649 years! 

We have searched carefully for any retraction or acknowledgement 
of the error of the statements of what he 
had previously stated must occur in the several years 1892 
to 1899; but we find none. On the contrary, the Dec. 25 
'94 issue speaks of the leading of the Holy Spirit still, although 
it was to have been withdrawn in 1892 to make 
way for Antichrist. Referring to past teachings in the aggregate, 
he affirms their truth, saying that it must yet "be 
mastered by the scoffers." 

Finally, in Nov. 15, '95 issue, he admits just a possibility 
of some trifling error; but by his triumphant tone 
would have his readers believe these so trifling as to be unworthy 
of mention. He says:— "Now and then a stray 
shot may hit away a 'week-day' designation, and here and 
there a careless disposition may entail the sweeping of a 
whole section of our work into the dust." But not one 
syllable as to the gross misapplications of Scripture and 
history already pointed out in this paper; which misstatements 
will surely do damage to the faith of some well-meaning 
but too credulous people, unless they are helped 
by God's providence.— Psa. 91:11,12. 

In the same publication, in view of the proved gross 
inaccuracies of Mr. Dimbleby in relation to astronomy, 
etc., Mr. Totten says: "Any close astronomical student of 
Biblical Chronology will detect the specific errors of Professor 
Dimbleby." But Mr. Totten himself not only endorsed 
those astronomical inaccuracies, but has also 
used them to delude many trusting souls. Mr. Totten adds: 
"Even were every feature of Prof. Dimbleby's work amenable 
to the specific criticism of inaccuracy, and we will not 
say it is not, it has none the less SUPPLIED THE FOUNDATION 
upon which some of the grandest truths of 
Biblical chronology have been discovered." 

What an admission of the weakness and unworthiness 
of the foundation upon which Mr. Totten has labored for 



years. And how astounding that any man not bereft of 

reason should claim that he had built a substantial faith-structure 

upon an unreliable, crumbling proposition which 

"any close astronomical student" would at once reject as 

senseless, if not fraudulent. Yet Mr. Totten declares, in 

the same editorial,— "We not only believe, but are satisfied 

by PROOF and DEMONSTRATION that the time of the 

end of the times of the Gentiles is almost over, that the 

world ought to have the message sent to it at once, and as 

no message was sent ever before. If we had the means we 

should send it at any cost." But as Mr. Totten has not 

the means, those who believe his unscriptural, unscientific, 

unastronomical and mathematically incorrect presentations 

can procure them at the wholesale rate of $8.50 per 

R1978 :page 110 

set in paper covers, and scatter them as truth, and delude 
fellow pilgrims. Alas! that even those who seem to be 
struggling to open the eyes of their understanding should 
be beset by such bewildering false lights. 

In a chart issued by Mr. Totten, Oct. 1895, he reiterates 
his so-called Bible chronology which we have shown 
is very unscriptural, and repeats the same false measurements 
of Gentile Times, but he says nothing about the withdrawal 
of the holy spirit in 1892, nor about the seven years' reign 
of Antichrist from 1892 to 1899, predicted in a previous 
chart. Instead, he runs the record of years down to 1899, 
and then says, "How long, O Lord!" and following this 
he shows another century— until A.D. 2000, for Israel to 
tussle with a literal, human Antichrist and get firmly established. 
Some may consider this all the retraction of 
previous errors necessary; but we do not. Many will not 
see through it, and hence the necessity for helping the 
candid ones, as we now attempt to do. 

If we have shown that Mr. Totten's chronology is not 
Biblical nor reliable,— and that it is absurd to talk of proving 
his (Usher-Dimbleby) chronology, or any other Bible 
chronology, by astronomy,— eclipses, etc.— because the 
Bible contains no record of eclipses and absolutely no data 
of any kind upon which astronomy could take hold,— and 
that his "Times of the Gentiles" were commenced at a 
wrong period, for which there is no authority in reason or 
Scripture,— and that all of his other prophetic "discoveries" 
are based upon these false premises and hence are 
equally erroneous and misleading, we have accomplished 
our purpose. 



R1978 :page 110 

MR. DIMBLEBY'S CHRONOLOGY, ETC. 



AS ALREADY stated, Mr. Dimbleby's solar chronology 

was the one acknowledged by Mr. Totten. 

Therefore, whatever we have said respecting its errors 

of one hundred and twenty-nine years applies to the calculation 

built upon those errors in the theories of both. But 

to the credit of Mr. Dimbleby's knowledge of astronomy, 

he found nothing peculiar to note about the time of Joshua's 

long day, nor any reason to count his years 354 days each from 

then on, so as to culminate the six thousand years over a century 

sooner than they could honestly be terminated, according 

to his erroneous chronology. So he allows his 6000 years to end 

in the year 2002 A.D.; and begins in another way to show 

that the seventh or great millennium of Christ's Kingdom 

will begin one hundred years before the sixth thousand years 

end— but for what reason each reader is left to guess. It 

was evidently the observance of this inconsistency, together 

with the erroneous chronology, that led Mr. Totten to his 

grievous error of attempting to shorten one period and 

stretch another to bring the two together. 

Mr. Dimbleby errs, as Mr. Totten does, in beginning 
his "Gentile Times" with the beginning of King Nabopolassar's 
reign, fully twenty-five years before Nebuchadnezzar 
had his dream of the great image of Gentile governments, in 
the interpretation of which God informed him, through 
Daniel the prophet, that into his hands (not into the hands 
of his dead father Nabopolassar) he gave the dominion of 
the world. (Dan. 2:38.) So even if his chronology were 
corrected he would be obliged to alter the date for beginning 
his 2520 years of "Gentile Times" or rule;— which, 
by the way, he brings to an end in A.D. 1898-1/4 (March 
1898), one year earlier than Mr. Totten. Working on 
the same exact (?), eclipse-proved (?) chronology, 
Totten begins Nabopolassar's reign with the year 3377-1/2 
A.M., and Dimbleby begins it in 3376-1/2 A.M. 

Mr. Dimbleby, knowing of Mr. Totten's failure thus 
far, steers clear of any danger of failure before 1898, by 
locating the second coming of Christ, the time of trouble, 
etc., beyond or at the close of his "Times of the Gentiles" 
-March 1898. He says:- 

"We must observe that our Lord places his second 
coming as at the end of the 'Gentile Times,' 5896-1/4 
[1898-1/4 A.D.]. ...The coming of Christ, the conversion 
of the Jews, and the appearance of the saints in glory, 
are contingent events, all taking place at the end of the 
Gentile Times." 

"The evidence is abounding and overwhelming, if we 
can add up figures, that the eventful period is 1898-1/4.... 
All civil governments will thus be overturned, and God 
rises up to make the enemies of Christ his footstool." 

"Following the close of 'Gentile Times' will be the 
30 years. ...But how great are the events of this day of 
Christ, or 30 years, now close at hand." 

What about this "30 years?" What is it? Where 
does Mr. Dimbleby get it?— We reply, He claims that there 
are certain Jewish Times as well as "Gentile Times," with 
a different beginning and a different ending,— an ending 



30 years after 1898-1/4, where he ends Gentile Times. But 
this is an unreasonable and untenable position, and betrays 
a misunderstanding of the real significance of "Gentile 
Times." 

God passed by all the other nations of the earth and 
recognized only Israel. (See Amos 3:2; Rom. 3:1,2.) 
In Israel he placed his own throne, typically, and her kings 
represented Him; as it is written, "Solomon sat upon the 

R1979 :page 110 

throne of the Lord as king instead of David his father." 

(1 Chron. 29:23.) Yea, before the first of their kings, 

Saul, God considered himself Israel's King, and so declared. 

(1 Sam. 8:7) Under his covenant with that nation, 

God promised to bless and protect them while they 

remained loyal to him; but to chastise them for disloyalty. 

He did this repeatedly, delivering them on account of sin 

into captivity to the Philistines, etc., and rescuing them 

again after they repented; but still recognizing that nation, 

as represented in "Judah," under the kings of David's line, 

down to the end of Zedekiah's reign (3522 A.M., true Bible 

Chronology*)- There, in harmony with his vision to Nebuchadnezzar, 

in the fourth year of Jehoiakim (18 years 

previous), God actually removed his typical kingdom, to 

permit Nebuchadnezzar's government to become universal; 

for it would be impossible for the Gentiles to have universal 

sway so long as God's Kingdom, even in a typical form, 

existed. The Lord marks this time and event in most 

explicit language, saying of Zedekiah, the last king upon 

the typical throne,— "Thou profane and wicked prince 

of Israel, whose day is come when iniquity should have an 

end, thus saith the Lord God: Remove the diadem, and 

take off the crown: this shall not be the same: exalt him 

that is low, and abase him that is high. I will overturn, 



*Starting from this, the evidently correct starting point, the 2520 
years of "Gentile Times" will, without stretching or shrinking, end 
with September 1914 A.D.; while, possibly, something may be expected 
18 years sooner (1896 A.D.); because the announcement of "Gentile 
Times" was made by Daniel, and the dream representing them was 
given to Nebuchadnezzar, 18 years before God's typical Kingdom 
was taken out of the way of Nebuchadnezzar's universal sway.— 
See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 4. 

R1979 :page 111 

overturn, overturn it [God's typical crown and kingdom 
on earth]; and it shall be no more until he come, whose right 
it is [the Christ, "Head" and "body"]; and I will give it 
[the crown and kingdom there overturned] unto him." 
(Ezek. 21:25-27.) It is for this period, during which the 
crown or kingdom of God is overturned in the earth, that 
God gives a lease of ruling authority to the Gentiles, whose 



"times" are seven symbolic years, or 2520 literal years. 
And it is during their "times" that God's people, Israel 
after the flesh, are trodden under foot by the Gentiles; and 
during the same period Israel after the spirit, "the Kingdom 
of Heaven, suffereth violence, and the violent take it 
by force." (Luke 21:24; Matt. 11:12.) Hence for Gentile 
Times to end means for the Gentiles to cease to tread 
down, and for God's people no longer to be trodden down; 
and the treading and the being trodden must of necessity 
end together. 

But not only does Mr. Dimbleby err in separating his 
Jewish times of being trodden, from the "Gentile Times" 
of treading, but he begins them at different and wrong 
places. He begins his Jewish times at the end of the reign 
of king Jehoiakim; seven years after Nebuchadnezzar's 
dream, and eleven years before God removed the diadem of 
his kingdom and overturned it. Furthermore, although he 
does not use Mr. Totten's false year of 354 days in his 
chronology, he falls into the error of reckoning his Jewish 
times by that false measure, authorized nowhere and by nobody. 
Though his chronology and starting times are erroneous, 
his calculations seem to be truthful, except when he 
tries to bring together various prophecies which have no 
real connection, and there he persuades himself that the 
following statement is true; viz.,— 

"I should also state that the 1260 and 1335 years 
make a total of 2595,— and 2595 lunar [354 day] years 
are 2520 solar." 

Mr. Dimbleby's pencil deceived him here, by five 
years lacking 26 days; for 2595 lunar years, 354 days each, 
would represent exactly 2515 years and 26-1/4 days, of 365-1/4 
days to the year. A rather bad slip for an astronomer and 
premier chronologist, who claims to figure out a chronology 
correct to the fraction of a day, and proved (?) by 
astronomy (?)! 

On the whole, then, Mr. Dimbleby's errors are perhaps 
less serious than Mr. Totten's; but still very serious for himself 
and many others: for he has a very dogmatic style, 
calculated to deceive many. Indeed, he almost charges 
that if there should be any miscarriage of his dates it would 
be because of God's unfaithfulness. For instance, in commending 
his findings and presentations, he says:— 

"Is God going to change? Will he abandon his 
fidelity? Better suppose that the sun will not rise 
tomorrow." 

Such language is not that of a teacher properly under 
the lead of the Lord's spirit. A teacher should present 
the Scriptural or other evidences, and there rest his case. 
Beware of any teachings "hammered in" thus. The implication 
is that Mr. Dimbleby's work is infallible, beyond 
question; sooner question God's veracity and fidelity, and 
sooner yet doubt the sunrise: the thing farthest from failure 
is Mr. D's. chronology and figures,— which we have 
just shown are inconsistent in every important part. We 
recapitulate them here:— 

(1) Errors in Chronology of one hundred and twenty-nine 



years.— One hundred years short in the period of the 
Judges of Israel. The other twenty-nine years in error are 
dropped by leaving the Bible record (as the standard, down 
to the first year of Cyrus, the end of the seventy years 
desolation) and attempting, with Ptolemy, Usher and 
others, to harmonize the statements of Scripture with the 
fragmentary statements of secular history. 

(2) The error of making a period of "Jewish Times" 

(which the Scriptures nowhere mention) separate from "Gentile 
Times"; and of beginning both at wrong dates, and 
counting them upon his erroneous chronology, and one of 
them upon false (short) years. 

(3) Above all the other errors his wholly unwarranted 
and absolutely untrue statements that prophecies begin and 
end on the same day of the week and month, etc., and 
that his chronology is proved by eclipses, exact to an hour 
or minute, etc. Mr. Dimbleby, as well as Mr. Totten, 

must know, what every person of even average acquaintance 
with chronology, astronomy and the Bible should 
know, that the Bible does not contain one solitary item 
that could be used by an astronomer in fixing any date;— 
neither with certainty nor with uncertainty. 

What he has done with his chronology any one could 
do with any chronology. First, as Mr. Dimbleby practically 
does, accept Usher's chronology— partly from the 
Bible and partly from secular history. Then, take your pencil, 
or such astronomical "tables" as are accessible to all, 
and say to yourself, If my chronology is correct, Nebuchadnezzar 
came to his throne in such a year; and, if so, I 
see by the "tables" that there must have been such and such 
eclipses, or such and such transits, that year. If my chronology 
is correct, king David ascended his throne in the 

year , so many years ago; and, if so, according to the 

"tables," there were such transits and such eclipses that year. 

But all depends on the if of the chronology. If the 
chronology were astray one year, or one thousand years, 
astronomy would not assist in detecting the error, unless 
accurate and quite elaborate records of astronomical events 
are found in connection with the history; which is not the 
case with Bible history. 

We could just as easily fix up a statement of solar cycles, 
conjunctions and transits and affix it to various items of our 
truly Bible chronology. We could claim that astronomy 
verified every date; and we could no doubt deceive many 
by such attempts, and few would see through the sophistry. 
But God would know it, and we would know it ourselves; 
and we believe that it is as dangerous for one to deceive 
himself as to deceive others. We advise all to be especially 
on guard against self deception in handling the divine 
Word.-2 Cor. 4:2. 



Much more could be said in criticism of the views set 
forth by Messrs. Totten and Dimbleby— their misapplication 
and distortion of every prophetic date they attempt 



to handle; their expectation of a coming man Antichrist, 
etc., etc.; but we forbear for two reasons. (1) Because 
those who see that their chief proofs (?) and arguments are 
absurdities would know better than to trust in other matters 
to such teacher's assertions. (2) Because our readers 
already have what we believe to be the Scriptural interpretation 
of the various prophetic periods, and a full treatment 
of the Antichrist, in MILLENNIAL DAWN. 



For the sake of some, we remark that a "prophetic 
year" of 360 days, used to symbolize 360 years, is an arbitrary 
arrangement peculiar to its intended symbolic use. It 
is neither a Lunar year of 354-1/3 days nor a Solar year of 
365-1/4 days. The fulfilment of a prophetic year would 
mean 360 actual or Solar years of the common reckoning. 



R1980 :page 112 

TRUE BIBLE CHRONOLOGY STATED A.M. 



THE arrangement of Chronology in our Common 
Version English Bibles was made by Bishop Usher. 
It begins with the era known as Anno Domini (the year of 
our Lord— although Usher believed, with many scholars, 
that our Lord was born 4 years earlier than that era,— and 
we claim 1-1/4 years earlier.)* Usher reckons backward 
from A.D., calling the years B.C., and in our chapter on 
Chronology in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., we have 
followed the same usage. But since some might grasp 
the subject better by a presentation of it in consecutive 
order, from Adam's creation to the present time, we will 
here give such a presentation, known as A.M. (Anno Mundi) 
or the year of the world. Otherwise the statement following 
will be found to coincide exactly with the presentation 
in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II. 

PERIOD FROM CREATION TO THE FLOOD. 



A.M. 
Adam's age when Seth was born— Gen. 5:3— was 130 = 130 
Seth's " " Enos " " " 5:6 " 105 = 235 

Enos Cainan " " " 5:9 " 90= 325 

Cainan's " " Mahaleel " " " 5:12 " 70= 395 
Mahaleel's " " Jared " " " 5:15 " 65= 460 
Jared's " " Enoch " " " 5:18 " 162= 622 
Enoch's " " Methuselah " " " 5:21 " 65 = 687 
Methuselah's " " Lamech " " " 5:25 " 187 = 874 

Lamech's " " Noah 5:28 " 182= 1056 

Noah's " " the flood was on the earth 7:6 " 600 = 1656 



Total years from Adam to the day the flood 

was dried up— Gen. 8:13 1656 

PERIOD FROM THE FLOOD TO THE ABRAHAMIC 
COVENANT. 



A.M. 

Flood dried up (Gen. 8:13) 1656 

Arphaxad was born two years after the Flood (Gen. 11:10) 1658 

Arphaxad begat Salah when 35 (Gen. 11:12) 1693 

Salah begat Eber when 30 (Gen. 11:14) 1723 

Eber begat Peleg when 34 (Gen. 11:16) 1757 

Peleg begat Ren when 30 (Gen. 11:18) 1787 

Ren begat Serug when 32 (Gen. 11:20) 1819 

Serug begat Nahor when 30 (Gen. 11:22) 1849 

Nahor begat Terah when 29 (Gen. 11:24) 1878 

Terah died aged 205 years (Gen. 1 1:32) 2083 

Abraham at that time was 75 years old (Gen. 12:4) 2083 

PERIOD FROM THE ABRAHAMIC COVENANT TO THE LAW. 



A.M. 

Terah was Abraham's father; and at his death (Acts 7:4; 
Gen. 12:4) Abraham removed into the land of Canaan. Thus 
by his faith and obedience he sealed to himself the great 
Abrahamic Covenant, which God had previously promised 
should be his, upon this condition. (Gen. 12:1-7.) And, 
since the period from the making of this Covenant to the giving 
of the Law was 430 years (Gal. 3:17), it follows that the 
first feature of the Law, which was the Passover, was instituted 
in the year 2513 

(See Exod. 12:40-51 and MILLENNIAL DAWN VOL. II., 
pp.45-47.) 

PERIOD FROM THE LAW TO THE DIVISION OF THE LAND. 



A.M. 

Israel's day of trial in the wilderness was 40 years— from 
"the self-same day" that the 430 years ended, on the fourteenth 
day of the first month, four days after they entered 
Canaan in 2553 

There the Jubilee cycles began to count.— Compare Joshua 4:19 
and 5:10; Lev. 25:2. 

Six years were consumed by Israel in conquering the land 
and dividing it amongst the tribes. These preceded the first 
Sabbath year, and ended with the year 2559 

(Josh. 14:7,10; MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., p.48.) 

PERIOD OF THE JUDGES. 



A.M. 



St. Paul, discussing this subject, says (Acts 13:19,20): 
"He [God] divided their land to them by lot; and after that 
he gave them Judges about [during+] the space of four hundred 
and fifty years [i.e., they had Judges off and on during that 
space of time], until Samuel the Prophet [inclusive]. And 
afterward, when they desired a king, God gave unto them 
Saul," at the close of the year 3009 

(Compare MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., p.49.) 

PERIOD OF THE KINGS. 



A.M. 



Saul's 40 year ' 


'space" 


of reigning (Acts 13:21) ended 3049 


David's reig 


;nof40 


years (1 Chron. 29:27) 


3089 


Solomon's " 


40 


" 2 Chron. 9:30 " 


3129 


Rehoboam's 


17 


" 12:13 " 


3146 


Abijah's " 


3 " 


" 13:2 " 


3149 


Asa's 


41 " 


" 16:13 " 


3190 


Jehoshaphat's 


25 


" 20:31 " 


3215 


Jehoram's " 


8 ' 


" 21:20 " 


3223 


Ahaziah's " 


1 " 


" 22:2 " 


3224 


Athaliah's " 


6 " 


" 22:12 " 


3230 


Jehoash's " 


40 ' 


" 24:1 " 


3270 


Amaziah's " 


29 


" 25:1 " 


3299 


Uzziah's " 


52 " 


" 26:3 " 


3351 


Jotham's " 


16 ' 


" 27:1 " 


3367 


Ahaz's 


16 " 


" 28:1 " 


3383 


Hezekiah's " 


29 


" 29:1 " 


3412 


Manasseh's ' 


55 


" 33:1 " 


3467 


Amon's 


2 " 


" 33:21 " 


3469 


Josiah's " 


31 " 


" 35:1 " 


3500 


Jehoiakim's ' 


11 


" 36:5 " 


3511 


Zedekiah's " 


11 


" 36:11 " 


3522 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., p.54. 

+The Greek word here rendered "about" is hos, and has the significance 
of during or while. The same writer, Luke, uses the same 
word in Acts 1:10; 10:17; Luke 24:32; and in each of these cases 
it is translated "while," in our common version. The Syriac reads 
thus,— "And for four hundred and fifty years he gave them Judges, until 
Samuel the Prophet"— the last of the Judges. 

The record of 1 Kings 6:1 is evidently a transcriber's error, 480 
being stated instead of 580. The latter agrees perfectly with the 
Apostle's statement (Acts 13:19,20), and is in accord with the lapping 
and broken periods of the Judgeships and captivities recorded in 
the Book of the Judges. 

The Emphatic Diaglott has the following footnote on Acts 13:20: 
—"A difficulty occurs here which has very much puzzled Bible chronologists. 
The date given here is at variance with the statement found 
in 1 Kings 6:1. There have been many solutions offered, but only one 
seems entirely satisfactory; i.e., that the text in 1 Kings 6:1 has been 
corrupted by substituting the Hebrew character daleth (4) for hay (5), 
which is very similar in form. This would make 580 (instead of 480) 



from the exode to the building of the temple, and exactly agree with 
Paul's chronology." 

R1980 :page 113 

PERIOD OF THE "70 YEARS DESOLATION OF THE LAND." 



A.M. 

This period began after Zedekiah's kingdom was overturned 
when the land was left desolate (Jer. 40:6-13; 40:10-18; 
43:5-7) 3523 

It ended 70 years later, in 3593 

PERIOD FROM THE RESTORATION UNTIL THE ERA A.D. 



A.M. 

The date of the restoration of Israel to their own land, 
which terminated its seventy years of desolation "without an 
inhabitant," is clearly fixed in the Bible as the first year of 
the reign of Cyrus the Mede (2 Chron. 36:21-23), which 
was therefore, as above shown, the year 3593 

Here the Bible chronology ends, giving us a good 
connection with secular history; for the first year of Cyrus 
is recognized by all competent judges as a clearly fixed 
date, 536 years before our era known as Anno Domini. (And 
it should be remembered that no earlier date than this can be 
clearly and unquestionably associated with Bible history and 
chronology.) Since the year 3593 was the same year as the 
first year of Cyrus, to add 535 years to it would show that the 
year B.C. 1 was the year 4128 

Our A.D. era followed. 

To complete 6000 years would require 1872 years (to 
Oct. 1872 A.D.) 1872 

Hence, the year ending Oct. A.D. 1872 was the year 6000 



l* 



The date marked by the Jubilee cycles as the beginning 
of the Times of Restitution (Acts 3:19-21), Sept. 20th, 1874" 

was therefore the year 6002 

The year which ended Oct. 1895 was 6023 

The year ending Oct. 1900 A.D. will be 6028 

The year ending Oct. 1914 A.D. will be 6042 

and the full forty year "day of wrath" from October, 1874, 
will end Oct. 1914 A.D., the full limit of Gentile Times 
to tread down Jerusalem and its people. 

All students of chronology may be said to be agreed, 
that the first year of Cyrus was the year 536 before the beginning 
of our Anno Domini era+. But there is, and can 
be, no agreement as to the dates of previous events, for 
several reasons: 

(1) The records of secular history are fragmentary, 
and all hopelessly tangled. The Bible record is by far the 
most clear; yet, as we have seen, its Old Testament records 
would be insufficient without the inspired assistance of 



the New Testament writers. 



*Two years in Eden, free from sin, may be reckoned as 
belonging to the Millennium, and thus the two years discrepancy 
between the end of the 6000 years and the beginning of the 
Times of Restitution be accounted for;— Man's week of evil, 6000 years, 
being measured in full. See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III., p. 127. 

+Much confusion will be saved by remembering that between B.C. 
and A.D. is a fixed point which marks a new era chronologically; 
(not the birth of Christ, but that point of time once assumed to have 
been the date of his birth). Hence, whether our Lord was really born 
one and a quarter years earlier, or four and a quarter years earlier, 
would not alter the number of the years. Whatever would be added to 
the A.D. would come off the number of B.C. years, and the total years 
would be in every case the same. See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., p.55. 

R1981 :page 113 

(2) In endeavoring to harmonize the statements of 
the Bible with the tangled statements of secular history, 
Bishop Usher (and nearly all more recent chronologists 
have followed his lead in this matter unquestioningly) 
counted the "seventy years" upon Israel to be years of captivity 
to Babylon and have dated them from the first year 
of Nebuchadnezzar, when he carried Jehoiakim and many 
of the people and the valuable vessels of the Temple to 
Babylon. The chronology arranged upon such a false 
supposition is of course incorrect; for, as we have 
shown, the Bible explicitly declares that those were "seventy 
years desolation of the land," without an inhabitant. 

Our method, of taking the Bible figures only, and 
exactly, is the only proper course; and we are thus assured 
that we neither deceive ourselves nor others. God 
will in due time vindicate his Word abundantly;— meantime 
we trust it implicitly. Whatever may be said of others, 
the chronology as given in the Bible itself is, in our judgment, 
the only one worthy of consideration by the child 
of God who believes that 

"God is his own interpreter, 
And he will make it plain." 



R1981 :page 113 

THE TEMPLE OF GOD. 



"For the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are."— 1 Cor. 3:17. 

THE usual Hebrew term applied to the Jewish 
temple was heykal, which signifies a royal residence. 
It was also often qualified by the term kodesh, sanctuary, 



to indicate its sacredness as the visible dwelling place of 
Jehovah among his people. The same significance also 
attached to the movable tent or sanctuary of Israel, the 
tabernacle in the wilderness. The idea thus visibly expressed 
was that God was in the midst of his people, as he 
said, "And there will I meet with the children of Israel, 
and the tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory. And I 
will sanctify the tabernacle of the congregation and the 
altar: I will sanctify also both Aaron and his sons, to 
minister to me in the priest's office. And I will dwell 
among the children of Israel, and will be their God."— 
Exod. 29:43-45. 

In fulfilment of this promise, as soon as the tabernacle 
was finished, the glory of the Lord filled it, as we read:— 
"So Moses finished the work. Then a cloud covered the 
tent of the congregation and the glory of the Lord filled 
the tabernacle. And Moses was not able to enter into the 
tent of the congregation, because the cloud abode thereon, 
and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle. ...The 
cloud of the Lord was upon the tabernacle by day, and 
fire was on it by night, in the sight of all the house of 
Israel throughout all their journeys"— Exod. 40:33-38. 

So also at the dedication of Solomon's temple there 
was the same divine recognition of this more permanent 
structure:— "So was ended all the work that king Solomon 
made for the house of the Lord. And Solomon brought 
in the things which David his father had dedicated, even 
the silver and the gold and the vessels did he put among 
the treasures of the house of the Lord.. ..And it came 
to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy place, 
that the cloud filled the house of the Lord so that the 

R1981 :page 114 

priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud; 
for the glory of the Lord had filled the house of the 
Lord."-l Kings 7:51; 8:10,11. 

The idea conveyed by the several accounts of this 
glory of the Lord, as it appeared in the Tabernacle, in the 
Temple, on Mount Sinai, and as it guided and protected 
Israel in coming out of Egypt, is that of exceeding brightness, 
enveloped, and usually concealed, by a thick cloud, 
from which, on special occasions, it shone forth. Thus we 
read, "And the glory of the Lord abode upon Mount 
Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days.. ..And the 
sight of the glory of the Lord was like devouring fire on 
the top of the mount in the eyes of the children of Israel." 
-Exod. 24:16,17. See also 19:9,18,19; 40:34,35; 
1 Kings 8:10,11. 

But the tabernacle and temple of God, built by divine 
direction and under the divine supervision, and thus honored 
with the visible, typical manifestations of the divine presence 
and glory, were only types of that grander tabernacle, not 
made with hands, of which fleshly Israel could have no 
conception, and of that holy temple which should by and by 
eclipse the grandeur of the earthly temple with all the gold 



and precious stones that adorned it. Let us, then, look away 
from, or, rather, let us look through, the typical temple of 
God to its antitype. The Apostles tell us that the Gospel 
Church, both individually and collectively, constitute the 
antitypical temple:— "For the temple of God is holy, 
which temple ye are." 

Considering the matter first in its individual application, 
we hear Paul say to the consecrated people of God, 
"Know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy 
spirit which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are 
not your own?. ..Ye are the temple of the living God, 
as God hath said, I will dwell in them and walk in them; 
and I will be their God and they shall be my people." (1 Cor. 6:19; 
2 Cor. 6:16; Lev. 26:12.) Thus every faithful, consecrated 
child of God in whom God, by his holy spirit, 
dwells, is a temple of God, a royal residence of the King 
of kings, a holy sanctuary, this high privilege being ours 
through Christ, who first redeemed us by his precious blood, 
and thus made us eligible to the call of God to be thus sanctified 
and set apart wholly to his use— "for a habitation of 
God through the spirit." 

It was to this that our Lord also referred, saying, "If 
a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will 
love him, and we will come unto him and make our abode 
with him.... The comforter which is the holy spirit, 
whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you 
all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever 
I have said unto you." (John 14:23,26.) Thus 
each individual saint becomes "a habitation of God 
through the spirit," a holy temple, a royal residence. 

How precious is the thought, how great the condescension 
of our God in thus honoring his chosen ones who 
believe and trust in him and are fully consecrated to his 
will and service. "Ye are the temple of the living God"; 
and "ye are not in the flesh [in the old carnal condition], 
but in the spirit, if so be that the spirit of God dwell in 
you." (Rom. 8:9.) And if the spirit of God dwell in 
us, it is to sanctify and glorify these temples of his, that 
even now we should show forth the praises of him who 
hath called us out of darkness into his marvelous light. 

It is in this view of our relationship to God that Paul 
would impress upon our minds the sanctity of these temples of 
the holy spirit, saying, "Know ye not that ye are the temple 
of God, and that the spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any 
man destroy the temple of God, him will God destroy." That 
is, if, after he has been made a partaker of the holy spirit, and 
consequently, through the enlightening and guiding influences 
of that spirit, has tasted the good word of God and 
the powers [privileges of divine instruction, etc.] of the 
coming age, he should stifle all these blessed influences, refusing 
to be further led of the spirit of God, and turn again, 
either suddenly or gradually, to the spirit of the world, 
such a one is destroying his spiritual life— destroying the 
temple of God, which was holy and consecrated to God. And 
if such a one should hope thereby to have his portion in the 
coming age with the restitution class, let him quickly undeceive 



himself, for the judgment against all such is, "Him 
will God destroy." The Lord has "no pleasure" in any 
who "draw back" from such high privileges. "But, beloved, 
we are persuaded better things of you, and things 
that accompany salvation.... We are not of them who 
draw back unto destruction, but of them which believe to 
the saving of the soul."-Heb. 6:4-9; 10:38,39. 

It was in allusion to this same thing that our Lord, 
addressing his disciples, said, "Whosoever shall seek to 
save his life shall lose it; and whosoever shall lose his life, 
shall preserve it"; and that Paul also said, "If ye live 
after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye, through the spirit, 
do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live." (Luke 17:33; 
Rom. 8:13) It is to those who appreciate the 
sanctity of these temples of God that all the blessings of 
divine grace belong; for God shall dwell in them and 
walk in them, and his glory shall be manifested in them 
and to them. It is their blessed privilege, in reverent humility, 
to realize the condescending favor of God in recognizing 
them as his temples, and making his abode with them, 
and to profit by all the hallowed influences of his presence 
and favor. And if indeed these bodies of ours be the 
temple of the holy spirit, what manner of persons ought 
we to be in all holy conversation and godlikeness? and 
how ought these mortal bodies to be quickened by his spirit 
that dwelleth in us?— quickened into active and diligent 
service and to the bringing forth of all the fruits of holiness. 
-2 Pet. 3:11; Rom. 8:11. 

But while the saints are thus individually the temples 
of God, they also collectively constitute the great temple 
in which Peter likens each individual to a living stone, and 
Christ to the chief or foundation corner stone, "To whom 
coming, as unto a living stone,. ..ye also, as living stones, 

R1982:page 114 

are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer 
up sacrifices* acceptable to God by Jesus Christ." (1 Pet. 2:5.) 
Paul also refers to this same thought, saying, "Ye 
are. ..of the house of God, and are built upon the 
foundation of the apostles and prophets [the foundation of 
hope in which they trusted, and which they pointed out to 
us], Jesus Christ, [he] being a foundation corner stone of 
it; in whom all the building fitly framed together, groweth 
unto an holy temple for the Lord: in whom ye also are 
builded together for a habitation of God through the 
spirit."— Eph. 2:20-22. 

The fact of the chief corner stone being also the foundation 
stone of this building, as well as the "head-stone," 
the crowning glory of it, as suggested by the prophets 
(Zech. 4:7; Psa. 1 18:22), calls to mind the form of the 
Great Pyramid whose top stone is the chief corner stone, 
and whose internal structure corresponds so perfectly with 
the Tabernacle and its symbolism. + And further, if Christ 



*Sinaitic MS. omits "spiritual" before sacrifices. 
+See Millennial Dawn, VOL. III., Chap. 10. 

R1982:page 115 

be the chief corner stone, the top stone and also the foundation, 
as he surely is (1 Cor. 3:11), the manifest suggestion 
is that the foundation of this building of God is laid 
in the heavens, not on earth, and that all the other living 
stones built upon this foundation are drawn and cemented 
to it by heavenly and not earthly attractions. Yes, "ye 
are God's building"— "ye," both individually and collectively, 
consecrated sons of God who have become the 
habitation of God through the spirit, ye are the temple of 
God. Howbeit, though now it is but a tabernacle in the 
flesh, and though in this tabernacle we often groan, being 
burdened, we know that when this tabernacle is destroyed 
we have a building of God, "a house not made 
with hands, eternal in the heavens."— 2 Cor. 5:1,2. 

Though the Church, like a tabernacle in the wilderness, 
is now a habitation of God, owned by him, and 
blessed by his presence, and filled with a large measure of 
his glory, yet enveloped, as it generally is, by clouds of 
trouble, etc., which hide the glory from others, except as 
occasionally manifested, it is not always to be a moving 
tent with its glory concealed. By and by her glory will 
be manifested without the enveloping cloud;— "She shall 
shine forth as the sun." (Matt. 13:43.) The prophet 
Isaiah joyfully anticipates that blessed time when the finished 
temple of God shall displace the present tabernacle, 
saying, "Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory 
of the Lord is risen upon thee,. ..and his glory shall 
be seen upon thee. And the nations shall come to thy 
light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising."— 
Isa. 60:1-3. 

What a hope is thus set before the faithful ones, who, 
as living stones, come to Christ to be built upon this foundation! 
From the eloquent imagery of prophets and 
apostles we catch the inspiration of that holy joy which shall 
be fully realized when all the living stones of the glorious 
spiritual temple of God shall noiselessly come together 
without the sound of a hammer— in the first resurrection, 
and when the headstone shall crown this glorious building 
of God, amid shoutings of "Grace, grace, unto it." 
(Zech. 4:7.) What tongue can tell or pen portray the 
glory to be revealed in the saints by and by, when the 
sacrifices of this day of atonement (the Gospel age) are all 
over? and what plummet can sound or line measure 
the wealth of blessing that will flow to redeemed humanity 
from the glorified temple of God? 

But, aside from this inspiring theme, let us return to 
the thought which the Apostle would impress upon the 
minds and hearts of all God's people; viz., the sanctity 
of the temple of God,— "Know ye not that ye are the 
temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwelleth in you? 



If any man destroy the temple of God, him will God destroy; 

for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye 

are." 

If the spirit of God does not dwell in us, then we are 
not of the class addressed; "for if any man have not the 
spirit of Christ, he is none of his." And those who have 
that spirit are led by it in the paths of righteousness and 
truth. And not only so, but those who have and who are 
led by the spirit of God have therein an earnest or pledge of 
their future inheritance as the sons of God, as the Apostle 
tells us, saying, "After that ye were sealed with the holy 
spirit of promise which is the earnest of our inheritance 
until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto 
the praise of his glory."— Eph. 1:13,14. 

Yes, our present divine recognition as sons of God is 
the surest evidence we can have of his recognition when 
we shall have finished our course. If to-day we have his 
manifest approval and fellowship, and if these mortal bodies 
are quickened into loving, active zeal both to know and to 
do the will of God, we may also look forward with joyful 
anticipation to that blessed time when we shall see the Lord 
and be like him. 



R1982:page 115 

PARABLE OF THE VINEYARD. 

-MAY 24.-Luke 20:9-19.- 

Parallel accounts-Matt. 21:33-46; Mark 12:1-12. 

Golden Text— "The stone which the builders rejected, the 
same is become the head of the corner."— Luke 20:17. 

THIS parable formed a part of our Lord's discourse on 

the last day of his public ministry. He had been 

teaching daily in the Temple, and the people, much impressed 

by his mighty works and his wonderful words, 

"were very attentive to hear him." (Luke 19:47,48.) 

But the more his fame spread abroad and the people were 

influenced by his teaching, the more the envy and opposition 

of the scribes and Pharisees increased and intensified 

into a settled murderous hatred, which plotted and schemed 

to accomplish his death. It was in this spirit and intent 

that the chief priests and scribes and elders of Israel came 

upon him with what they esteemed puzzling questions, seeking 

to entrap him in his words and thereby to gain some 

pretext for his arrest. 

The shrewdness with which our Lord met their attacks 
commands the admiration of all. He was more than a 
match for all the gainsayers, putting them to silence and 
to shame. Then he spoke this parable, which they perceived 
to be against them, and which the more angered 
them, so that they would have laid hands on him then had 



they not feared the people.— Verse 19. 

In the parable, the owner of the vineyard represented 
God, and the "vineyard" represented the Jewish nation as 
described under the same figure in Isaiah 5:1-7.— "For 
the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, 
and the men of Judah his pleasant plant." God had done 
much for his vineyard in the way of planting and care and 
cultivation; and in view of this he inquires (Isa. 5:4), 
"What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I 
have not done in it?" But nevertheless it repaid him wild 
grapes instead of good grapes,— "and he looked for judgment, 
but behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold 
a cry, etc." And the "husbandmen" to whom the vineyard 
was let were the divinely constituted religious 
leaders of the nation. These husbandmen had this stewardship 
from the time of the exodus down to the time of the 
coming of Messiah, a period of nearly nineteen centuries. 

At various seasons during the age God specially looked 
for fruits of righteousness, sending to them his faithful prophets, 
who were lightly esteemed and illy treated— especially 
by the husbandmen. -Matt. 23:31,32. 

Last of all, in the harvest or end of the age, God sent 
unto them his Son, saying, "It may be they will reverence 
my Son." But no, in their selfish ambition to retain their 
stewardship, they said among themselves, "This is the heir: 
come, let us kill him, that the inheritance may be ours." 
"So they cast him out of the vineyard, and killed him." 
The application of the parable was too manifest to be misunderstood. 
The guilty consciences needed no further accusation. 
The self-righteous hypocrites perceived that the 

R1982:page 116 

great Teacher had read their hearts and was aware of their 
dark designs. 

In the further progress of the parable was the prophecy 
of his own final triumph, even though they should kill 
him; for he was the stone of which the Psalmist prophesied, 
saying, "The stone which the builders refused is become 
the headstone of the corner" (Psa. 118:22), the 
building of God being referred to as a pyramid, of which 
the topstone is the chief corner stone. (See also Zech. 4:7.) 
This stone might indeed be rejected by them then, but 
that would not hinder its exaltation in God's due time as 
the chief stone in the glorious spiritual temple of God. 

In stumbling over Christ at his first advent, the Jewish 
nation was indeed broken to pieces; and ever since they have 
been a nation scattered and peeled (Isa. 18:2), all the 
world being witness to the fact. The world is also witness 
to the fact that those wicked husbandmen who crucified the 
Lord were destroyed as such. They lost their prestige and 
power and honor and office (and many of them doubtless 
perished literally in the destruction of Jerusalem), 
and were superseded by the more worthy apostles and 
teachers of the gospel of Christ. 

Such was the testimony of Christ against fleshly Israel 



R1983 :page 116 

as a people, and against their religious leaders and teachers; 
and as we read the prophecy and mark how true 
to the letter has been the fulfilment, we should not 
fail to mark also another prophecy, pointing to a double 
fulfilment,— first, upon fleshly Israel, and, secondly, upon 
nominal spiritual Israel, or the nominal Christian Church. 
It reads,— "And he shall be for a stone of stumbling and 
for a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel." (Isa. 8:14.) 
In this as in other things the two houses of Israel, 
the fleshly of the Jewish age, and the spiritual of the Gospel 
age, stand related to each other as type and antitype; 
and the likeness is striking. The attitude of the public 
teachers of to-day, like those of the Jewish age, is against 
the Lord and the truth now due in these days of his presence. 
They are closing their eyes to the light that is now 
shining, and, as a result, both they and all who follow their 
leading are stumbling into the ditch of infidelity; and soon 
they will all be overwhelmed in the great tribulation of 
which the Lord and the prophet forewarn us.— Matt. 24:21; 
Dan. 12:1; Rev. 18:4. 

The result of the stumbling of the nominal gospel 
Church over this stone will be the same as in the case of 
the Jewish Church: they will be broken; the whole institution 
will be disintegrated, and only the faithful remnant 
of this age (as of that) will be gathered into the Kingdom of 
God— a "little flock" to whom "it is the Father's good 
pleasure to give the Kingdom." 

But when this corner stone crowns the finished temple 
of God, the Church glorified, when the Kingdom is established 
in glory and power, upon whomsoever this stone 
falls it will grind him to powder; it will utterly destroy him. 
"Every soul that will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed 
from among the people."— Acts 3:23. 

With the example of the stumbling of fleshly Israel in 
view, how careful should every Christian be to see to it that 
he is not among those of this age who form the antitype— 
either of the blind leaders or of the blind multitudes who 
follow their leading into the yawning ditch which shall surely 
ingulf all of the unfaithful. 



R1983 :page 116 

THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM FORETOLD 

-MAY 31. -Luke 21:20-36.- 

Golden Text— "Heaven and earth shall pass away, 
but my words shall not pass away.— Luke 21:33. 

IT should be remembered that this lesson is but a fragment 
from our Lord's long discourse, in answer to 



three distinct questions propounded by the disciples:— 
When shall these things [the destruction of the Temple, 
etc.] be? What shall be the sign of thy [second] coming? 
What shall be the sign of the end of the age? 

Verses 20-24 have reference primarily to the destruction 
of Jerusalem and the Jewish polity in the close of the 
Jewish age, altho they have a secondary reference to events 
in the end of the Gospel age, the antitype of the Jewish 
age. This, however, is no part of our present lesson. 

The literal fulfilment of this portion of the prophecy 
is disputed by none. The Roman army besieged the city, 
and then suddenly withdrew (A.D. 69). Vespasian, the 
Roman general, learning of the death of the Roman emperor, 
and that insurrection prevailed at Rome, hastened 
thither and assumed the emperorship. Meantime, before 
Titus had assumed command of the army and renewed the 
siege of Jerusalem, the Christians of the city acted upon 
our Lord's instruction, fled from the doomed city and 
thus escaped the awful horrors of its siege, in which it is 
claimed that 1,100,000 Jews perished. Josephus, the Jewish 
historian, says of this event: "The misfortunes of all 
men from the beginning of the world, if they be compared 
to those of the Jews, are not so terrible as theirs were"; 
"nor did any age ever produce a generation more fruitful 
of wickedness, from the beginning of the world." As a 
nation, the Jews had experienced great blessings and privileges, 
and these being misused brought great darkness and 
ultimately a terrible national judgment, as predicted. (Verse 22 
and 1 Thes. 2:16.) All of these things correspond to 
the conditions in the "harvest" or end of this Gospel age. 
Here the light of the Lord's second presence rejected will 
bring special responsibility upon nominal "Christendom," 
whose wickedness at the time will be very great, proportioned 
to its light; and its fall will be in the midst of a 
time of trouble still greater than that which overwhelmed 
the typical city and nation. 

Our Lord's prediction, when uttered, seemed most improbable: 
the city and country were more prosperous than 
for a long time, and the temple, after forty-six years of 
building, had just been completed and was truly magnificent. 
Yet within forty years it was an awful ruin. (See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 4.) 

Verses 25-31, leaping over centuries, point to events 
near the close of Gentile Times, and mention the signs of 
the close of the Gospel age, and connected with the revealing 
of the Son of Man in glory. The signs in the sun, 
moon and stars were to give a general idea as to the time 
when the Kingdom would be nigh. We will not here particularize 
respecting these signs, but will mention them:— 
The remarkable darkening of the sun and moon, May 19th, 
1780; and the notable falling of stars or meteoric shower on 
the morning of Nov. 13th, 1833. While we believe also in a 
symbolic fulfilment of the darkening of the sun and falling of 
the stars, yet we cannot overlook the literal fulfilment, and 
hence expect, in harmony with 

Verses 32,33, that some of the generation which saw 



the falling stars will continue to live until God's Kingdom 
shall be fully established. 

Verses 34-36 are a general exhortation, as applicable 
to us to-day as to the disciples eighteen centuries ago. 



page 117 