VOL. XV. DECEMBER 1, 1894. NO. 23. 



THE FREEDOM OF CHRIST'S BOND-SERVANTS. 



"If the Son therefore shall make you free, 

ye shall be free indeed."— John 8:36. 

"For the slave, being called by the Lord, is the Lord's 

freedman; in like manner, the freeman, being called, is 

Christ's bond-servant."— 1 Cor. 7:22. 

THE love of freedom is inherent in all of 
God's intelligent creatures. And under 
certain limitations it was manifestly the divine 
purpose that all enjoy liberty, the limitations 
in every case being those of righteousness: of 
respect for and submission to divine law, and 
mutual love and respect for the rights and liberties 
of fellow-creatures. Within these metes and 
bounds, and within these only, is the rightful 
exercise of individual liberty. 

But many have very different ideas of freedom 
from this, and are anxious to cast off all 
restraints of God and man and to pursue a selfish 
course untrammeled and without regard 
to either their obligations to God or the rights 
of their fellow-men. Such ideas of freedom 
lead only to riot, anarchy and destruction. 
And those who hold them look upon all the 
wholesome restraints of law and order as infringements 
of their rights and consider themselves 
in bondage under them. This is the 
rapidly growing sentiment all over the world 
to-day among the masses of men. And this is 
what makes the outlook for the future so ominous, 
threatening the utter wreck of the present 
social order in world-wide anarchy. 

The reason for all this is that men have 
neither perfect hearts nor perfect heads. Having 
imperfect hearts, which do not love God 
supremely nor their neighbors as themselves, 
each is selfishly grabbing after all the advantages 
and privileges he can get without regard 
to the interests of his neighbor. And having 
also imperfect heads, they seem unable to reason 
correctly and to judge rightly between self 
and the neighbor. In fact, the whole human 
family is mentally unbalanced and morally deformed. 
We cannot therefore expect that, without 
superhuman aid, they will reach correct 
conclusions and learn to deal righteously. 

Among men there are many grades of intellectual 
ability: some are broad minded, and, 
reaching out, can compass many conditions and 
their operations and foresee the ultimate results; 
while others are by inheritance narrow minded 



and can only view present circumstances apart 

from their general bearings and relationships. 

Then again, some minds are deep, able to 

probe and solve intricate problems with accuracy; 

while others are shallow, merely skimming 

the surface of great questions, not seeing nor 

seeking foundation principles. The broad and 

deep minds are but few, while the narrow and 

shallow are far more general; consequently, 

men are very far apart in their ideas and conclusions 

on every subject, and generally far 

astray from sound judgment. These things 

are, however, a part of our undesirable inheritance 

through sin, which polluted the fountain 

of our being, and left the entire race in this 

deranged condition. 

Our only help under these circumstances is in 
God, who will give us the spirit— disposition— 
of a sound mind, if, in his appointed way, we 

R1737: page 372 

come to him for it. (2 Tim. 1:7.) In his Word 
he lays down certain principles to guide us in 
judgment (Psa. 25:9) and help us to right 
conclusions. He tells us first that as a race we 
have fallen from our original perfection through 
the sin of our first progenitor, and that in consequence 
we are imperfect and unworthy of 
eternal life; but that through Christ he has redeemed 
us, so that if we repent of our sins and 
believe on him, we may now have eternal life, 
being made free from the condemnation which 
passed upon all men through Adam. 

Thus we are made free from condemnation 
to death; and not only so, but now it is also 
our privilege to be liberated, through Christ, 
from the bondage and tyranny of Sin. As a hard 
task-master, Sin is driving all men to deeper 
degradation and death, and Christ undertakes 
to loose his fetters from all those who submit 
themselves to him for this purpose. 

Dearly as we may love liberty, there is no 
man that actually possesses it now; for as the 
result of the fall all men became the slaves of 
Sin, and, to a great extent, the tools of Satan; 
and never, until the promised restitution of all 
things is completed, will men enjoy the precious 
boon of liberty in its full sense. This is 
one of the elements of the gospel— that Christ 
is to bring liberty to the captives of sin and 
death, and to let all the oppressed go free.— 
ha. 61:1. 

To fully emancipate all the slaves of Sin and 
Death is a work which will require the full 
thousand years of Christ's promised reign on 



earth; and the blessings of that emancipation 
will therefore not be fully realized until the 
thousand years are finished, when sin and Satan 
will be destroyed, never again to mar the face 
of God's fair creation. Then men can again 
be entrusted fully with the precious boon of 
liberty; and the liberty of one will not infringe 
upon the liberties of another. The perfect freedom 
of the entire race necessitates such restraints 
upon each individual of the race as brotherly 
love would dictate; and such restraint every 
man will impose upon himself when he has regained 
the original likeness of God, for God 
is love; and then it may also be truly said that 
man is love. And when man is love, it is 
God's purpose to give him fullest liberty to act 
out every impulse of his loving nature. And 

R1738: page 372 

since "love worketh no ill to its neighbor," 
but delights itself rather in deeds of kindness 
and benevolence, this glorious liberty will fill 
the earth with peace and joy. And since love 
also delights in rendering honor to whom honor 
is due, and adoration to whom adoration, and 
praise to whom praise, and gratitude to whom 
gratitude, such will be the attitude of all men 
toward Jehovah, the giver of every good and 
perfect gift, and toward our Lord Jesus, whose 
self-sacrificing love became the channel for 
Jehovah's grace toward us, even while we were 
yet sinners. 

Thus earth will be filled with the music of 
according hearts; and heaven and earth will be 
in perfect harmony when love, which is the fulfilling 
of the law of God, reigns supreme in every 
heart. Then the natural impulse of every heart 
will be to love God with all the heart, soul, 
mind and strength, and the neighbor as itself. 
This supreme love to God, even beyond the 
love of self, is entirely presumable when we 
consider that the elements of reverence and 
adoration must enter so largely into the love 
that is centered upon such a glorious object- 
glorious in his personality, glorious in his character, 
glorious in his wisdom, glorious in his 
power, and glorious in his benevolence and love 
and grace. 

"Oh! what beauty 
Beams in his all-glorious face." 

Then indeed, and not till then, will the whole 
human race enjoy fullest liberty: a thing which 
will be simply impossible until then. Now, 
liberty to one class of men brings slavery to 
another; and the striving of classes, of nations 



and of individuals in the past, to throw off 

the yoke of bondage which the selfishness of 

others imposed upon them, has resulted occasionally 

to such classes and nations in a measure 

of release from the hand of tyranny; but 

individual liberty is still unrealized. Though 

the world has made some progress in this direction, 

so that limited monarchies have displaced 

the absolute, tyrannical monarchies of former 

ages, and republican forms of government have 

in some notable instances superseded these, yet 

R1738: page 373 

Sin, as a hard master, still rules the world. 
Even under this republican government— the 
most free and liberal civil institution in the 
world— witness the party strifes and animosities, 
and the tyranny of class rule, and hear how the 
cry of the oppressed individuals comes up and 
enters into the ears of the Lord of armies. The 
whole world is oppressed under the hard taskmaster, 
Sin, who rules everywhere. He takes 
his seat in legislative halls, in executive mansions, 
in all political, financial and social counsels, 
and even in the solemn assemblies of God's 
professed children; and everywhere his tyranny 
is felt and his subjects suffer. 

This tyrant, Sin, must be routed, before the 
world can ever enjoy the boon of liberty— of 
liberty to appropriate, manage, rule and enjoy 
their God-given possessions in the earth. 

While the actual freedom or liberty of the sons 
of God is not yet enjoyed by any, the inheritance 
of it being lost by the fall, a few have regained 
their title to that inheritance through faith in 
Christ, who purchased it with his own precious 
blood for all who will accept it as the free gift of 
God's grace, through faith in him. And these 
few have, by faith, passed from death unto life 
(John 5:24; 1 John 3:14), and are now, therefore, 
reckoned free— free from sin and its condemnation, 
death, the righteousness of Christ 
being imputed to them by faith. Thus they 
hold a sure title to this glorious liberty, which 
all the sons of God will possess when fully restored 
to the divine likeness. Those who have 
this title the Apostle Paul urges to hold it fast, 
saying, "Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty 
wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not 
entangled again with the yoke of bondage." 
-Gal. 5:1. 

This exhortation can mean nothing more nor 
less than to hold on, by faith, to our justification 
—our title to life through Christ our Redeemer. 
This he was urging the Galatian 



Church to do, the exhortation being prompted 
by the efforts of some Judaizing teachers to 
bring them again under the bondage of the Law 
Covenant. —Gal. 3:1. 

But while the full liberty of the sons of God 
is not yet ours, except by faith, let us consider 
what measure of that liberty is ours now. While 
in Christ we are reckoned of God as free from 
sin, and while we are therefore free from condemnation 
—justified— yet actually we realize the 
law of sin still working in our members, so that 
while our purpose and effort are to be perfect, 
the law of sin working in our members makes 
us realize continually that our actual liberty as 
sons of God is not yet possessed. And in this 
painful realization even we who have the firstfruits 
of the spirit, do groan being burdened.— 
Rom. 8:23. 

But we have in Christ not only a Redeemer 
who paid our death penalty, but a Savior who 
in due time will deliver fully from every element 
of imperfection all who put their trust in 
him. The work of emancipation he will 
do for the world in the appointed times of the 
restitution of all things; and he will begin it 
at once with all those who then willingly and 
patiently submit themselves to his leading, acknowledging 
him as their Lord and King, as 
well as their Redeemer. In thus acknowledging 
Christ as Lord and King, both Christians 
now, and the world in the times of restitution, 
will, if fully loyal, render to him prompt and 
loving obedience, and that without questioning 
either his authority or his wisdom, in the full 
assurance of his loving purpose to finally and 
fully deliver from the terrible bondage to 
Sin, which has become so interwoven with the 
very fiber of our being that the process of 
emancipation must of necessity be long and 
painful. 

In other words, before we can fully realize 
the actual liberty which God designed for all 
his sons, we must first become the willing servants 
of a new master, Christ, in order that he 
may accomplish our deliverance. 

But although Christians are now, of their 
own free will and choice, under the authority 
of Christ, and their constant effort should be 
to bring every thought into captivity to his 
perfect will, even in this sort of bondage they 
are able to realize their freedom to the extent 
that they are able to partake of the spirit or 
mind of Christ; for, "Where the spirit of the 
Lord is, there is liberty." (2 Cor. 3:17.) In 
the same way, when a man is sick, he must give 
up his will and personal liberty to the physician 



R1738: page 374 

who undertakes to restore his health. The 

physician may prescribe nauseous doses; he may 

forbid certain coveted articles of diet; or he may 

subject his patient to painful surgical operations: 

but to all this severe treatment the man 

willingly submits, in hope of regaining his 

health. He and the physician are of the same 

mind, having the same object in view. Consequently, 

the patient does not feel that he is a 

slave forced under this treatment; but, having 

the same mind or spirit in the matter as the 

physician, he realizes his personal liberty. A 

child, on the contrary, unable to see the necessities 

of the case, and therefore unable to enter 

fully into the spirit of the physician and of 

the parents who must act for him, does not feel 

this liberty of his own will, but realizes that he 

is compelled to submit by those in authority 

over him. Such will be the case with the world, 

especially in the early experiences of the Millennial 

age. A difference will be that unless 

their wills are ultimately submitted restitution 

cures will never be granted. But with the consecrated 

children of God now, the case is more 

like that of the matured and intelligent patient. 

Let us, then, while we willingly submit ourselves 
to Christ our Lord, partake largely of his 
spirit, and fully co-operate with him as a wise 
and skilled physician; and in so doing we will 
surely realize our liberty of mind as sons of 
God, even while we are undergoing the tedious 
and painful processes which are designed to accomplish 
our complete emancipation from the 
bondage of Sin. 

"If the Son shall make you free, ye shall 
be free indeed"— even now while our standing 
as free men in Christ is only a reckoned one. 
The freedom which we gain through Christ is 
( 1 ) freedom from the condemnation of sin, and 
consequent access to God in whose favor is life 
eternal; (2) freedom from the bondage of fear 
concerning the future, and consequent rest and 
reliance upon him who has said, "Cast thy 
burden upon the Lord, and he will sustain 
thee;" (3) and daily as we submit ourselves to 
Christ we come to realize more and more of a 
release from the hereditary bondage of Sin. 
One after another, under the treatment of the 
Great Physician, we find the symptoms of the 
old disease of Sin disappearing, and we rejoice 
to find it so. 

We find healing for our unsound minds in 
the balm of divine counsel. We find unerring 



standards of judgment by which to measure our 

own; and from the unerring precepts of righteousness 

and truth we drink in the spirit of a 

sound mind. And with this sound mind viewing 

all the experiences and conditions of life 

from the standpoint of the divine plan of the 

ages, we are enabled to weigh and properly estimate 

all present values and to count the good 

things of this present life as of no consequence 

in comparison to that for which we have covenanted 

to sacrifice them. We can even rejoice 

in tribulation for righteousness' sake. 

But while we enjoy this blessed freedom in 
Christ, we are nevertheless under strictest bondage 
to Christ. As the Apostle Paul states it, 
we are bond-servants of Jesus Christ, and, like 
him, we glory in being so branded. (Gal. 6:17.) 
We realize that we are not our own, but that 
we are bought with a price, and that the 
consecration of our lives to him who purchased 
us is but a reasonable service. 



R1739: page 374 
"PERFECTING HOLINESS." 



"Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us 
cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and 
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God."— 2 Cor. 7:1. 

HOLINESS is moral purity; and it is written 

that "without holiness no man shall see 

the Lord" (Heb. 12:14); and again, "Blessed 

are the pure in heart, for they shall see 

God." (Matt. 5:8.) Purity of heart signifies 

purity of the will or intention, the main-spring 

of life. To be perfectly holy or pure in every 

sense of the word would signify absolute perfection, 

which no man can now claim; but 

those who by faith are clothed with the righteousness 

of Christ are now reckoned "holy and 

acceptable unto God" (Rom. 12:1), the righteousness 

of Christ being imputed to them by 

faith. These, whose hearts are fully consecrated 

R1739: page 375 

and loyal to the Lord, are "the pure in heart," 
whose privilege it is to see God. 

While the heart of every accepted child of 
God must be pure from the very beginning of 
his Christian life (otherwise he is not accepted 



or owned as a child), yet, as the Apostle suggests 
above, there must be from that time onward 
a gradual work of perfecting holiness in 
the fear (filial fear) of God. That is (being 
graciously reckoned of God as holy through 
Christ, from the hour of our entire consecration 
to his will, because our will and effort are to be 
so), we are to go on striving daily against our 
natural imperfections, and endeavoring as nearly 
as possible to make the reckoned holiness more 
and more actual. Thus we should continue to 
grow in grace and in the actual likeness of the 
Lord. 

Some Christians make the very serious mistake 
of supposing that they, as merely passive subjects, 
may receive instantaneously the blessing 
of holiness as a mark of God's special favor. 
But such a conception is very far from the 
Apostle's idea, as expressed above. He represents 
the attainment of holiness as a life 
work, and the individual Christian as the active, 
and not as the passive, agent in accomplishing 
it. From the standpoint of a reckoned holiness 
he is to go on, day after day, and year after 
year, in the work of actual cleansing of himself 
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit— of 
person and of mind— "perfecting holiness in 
the fear of the Lord." 

In the exceeding great and precious promises 
we have abundant incentives to strive daily to 
perfect holiness; but these must be held before 
the mind that they be not crowded into the 
background by the cares of this life and the deceitfulness 
of its pursuits. The pure in heart 
—whose will is only to serve and please him— 
do see God by faith and with the eyes of their 
understanding. They see him in his Word and 
his plan, as he graciously opens it up to their 
minds as meat in due season; they see him in 
his mighty works— of creation, and of redemption 
and salvation; they see him in nature, 
whose open book is ever eloquent in his praise 
to those who have eyes to read; by faith they see 
him in the secret closet communions when there 
is no eye to see and no ear to hear but God's, 
where the heart may freely unburden itself of 
its load and lay down its cares and feel that unutterable 
sense of divine sympathy and love 
which only those can understand who have 
taken the Lord as their personal friend and 
counselor. They see him, too, in his providences; 
for, having entered into their closets 
and shut to the door and prayed to their Father 
in secret, the open reward of his sure and safe 
leading always follows, according to his promise. 

How blessed it is thus to see God— to realize 



his presence and power and his abiding favor 
in all the vicissitudes of life; to watch him and 
see how, as the days and years go by, he makes 
all things work together for good to them that 
love him, and to see also, from the grand standpoint 
of observation he gives us, how glorious 
a destiny he has carved out for us and for all the 
willing and obedient subjects of his authority. 

If we cultivate acquaintance with God and 
with our Lord Jesus, communing with them 
through the divine word and prayer, almost 
unconsciously to ourselves the work of 
perfecting holiness progresses. To be thus in 
communion with them is to receive more and 
more of their mind and disposition. And having 
the mind of God thus in us, as the controlling 
principle of our actions, to what purifications 
of the flesh it will also lead! 

It begins at once to clean up the whole man. 
Old unclean, as well as sinful, habits are put away; 
unseemly conversation is not permitted to pass the 
door of the lips, or if, by force of old habit, slips 
of this kind occur, they are promptly repented 
of and rectified; and unholy thoughts are not 
entertained. The same spirit of holiness prompts 
also to the cleansing and purifying of the body, 
the clothing, the home, and all with which we 
have to do; for the outward man must be in 
conformity with the pure heart within, and with 
the heavenly guests that make their abode with 
us.-John 14:23. 

It is quite possible, however, that the more 
we succeed in purifying ourselves of the old 
carnal nature, the more we may realize the imperfections 
that still remain; for the purifying 
process is also an educating one: we learn to 
appreciate and admire purity, holiness, the more 

R1739: page 376 

thoroughly we assimilate it, until "the beauty of 

holiness" becomes the most desirable of all possessions, 

that which is lacking of its glory is our 

deepest concern and the great work of perfecting 

holiness becomes the chief business of life. 

Let the good work go on, dearly beloved, and, 

in the end, the Lord himself shall be your exceeding 

great reward. 



THAT I MAY KNOW HIM. 
--PHIL. 3:8-10.-- 

Lord, let me talk with Thee of all I do, 



All that I care for, all I wish for, too. 
Lord, let me prove Thy sympathy, Thy power, 
Thy loving oversight from hour to hour! 
When I need counsel, let me ask of Thee: 
Whatever my perplexity may be, 
It cannot be too trivial to bring, 
To one who marks the sparrow's drooping wing, 
Nor too terrestrial since Thou hast said 
The very hairs are numbered on our head. 
'Tis through such loop-holes that the foe takes aim, 
And sparks, unheeded, burst into a flame. 
Do money troubles press? Thou canst resolve 
The doubts and dangers such concerns involve. 
Are those I love the cause of anxious care? 
Thou canst unbind the burdens they may bear. 
Before the mysteries of Thy word or will, 
Thy voice can gently bid my heart be still, 
Since all that now is hard to understand 
Shall be unraveled in yon heavenly land. 
Or do I mourn the oft-besetting sin, 
The tempter's wiles, that mar the peace within? 
Present Thyself, Lord, as the absolving priest, 
To whom confessing, I go forth released. 
Do weakness, weariness, disease, invade 
This earthly house, which Thou, Thyself, hast made? 
Thou, only, Lord, canst touch the hidden spring 
Of mischief, and attune the jarring string. 
Would I be taught what Thou wouldst have me give, 
The needs of those less favored to relieve? 
Thou canst so guide my hand that I shall be 
A liberal "cheerful giver," Lord, like Thee. 
Of my life's mission do I stand in doubt, 
Thou knowest and canst clearly point it out. 
Whither I go, do Thou Thyself decide 
And choose the friends and servants at my side. 
The books I read, I would submit to Thee, 
Let them refresh, instruct and solace me. 
I would converse with Thee from day to day 
With heart intent on what Thou hast to say; 
And through my pilgrim walk, whate'er befall, 
Consult with Thee, O Lord, about it all. 
Since Thou art willing thus to condescend 
To be my intimate, familiar friend, 
Oh, let me to the great occasion rise, 
And count Thy friendship life's most glorious prize. 
Selected. 



R1739: page 376 

THE PROGRESS OF RELIGIOUS UNION. 



THE movement in the direction of religious 



union, which received such a marked impetus 
from the World's Parliament of Religions 
last year, has been making very rapid strides 
for some months past. 

Last spring an important movement began 
in the Episcopal churches of Cleveland for the 
purpose of unifying the various Christian denominations. 
A little later a plan for the 

federation of the various branches of the Presbyterian 
church was agreed upon by a representative 
committee at their meeting in Philadelphia 
to be recommended to their appointing 
bodies for adoption. 

"In Australasia, by the action of the General 
Quadrennial Methodist Conference, a committee 

R1740: page 376 

was appointed to carry into effect the 
proposals for the reunion of the various Methodist 
divisions, so that there, as in Canada, the 
consolidation of the various Methodist sects into 
one church will soon be completed. 

"The manifesto of the Congregational State 
Association of New Jersey, issued last spring, 
is another important contribution to the reunion 
movement. It practically proposes an alliance 
of the Reformed and Presbyterian churches, five 
in all, and a basis of formal union with the Free 
Baptist and 'Christian' churches, and in its 
'Quadrilateral' formulates also a plan for the 
federation at least of the various Protestant 
churches of the United States. 

"The federation of churches for common religious 
and social work has gained a decided 
impetus in recent months, especially in England, 
and to some extent in this country. In the 
former, the Nonconformist churches of Surrey 
and Hampshire, and in the midland counties 
about Nottingham, in municipal centers like 
Birmingham and Manchester, have united for 
federated efforts. 

"Still another sign of the progress of the desire 

R1740: page 377 

for union is found in the wide appeal made 
for the observance of last Whitsunday as a day 
of special intercession for the reunion of the 
churches of Christendom. The archbishop of 
Canterbury and the archbishop of Dublin, together 
with four bishops of the English church 
and a number of dignitaries of the Irish church, 
joined in this appeal. The moderator of the 
church of Scotland, the presidents of all the 
Methodist conferences, the chairman of the 



Baptist Union, and leading Congregational 
ministers, preached on the subject. 

"The Grindewald Conference for 1894 discussed 
the subject of reunion and related church 
problems. As on similar occasions, representatives 
of all branches of the Protestant church 
spoke on this absorbing theme; and the new 
contribution thus made to the literature of the 
question serves to augment the interest already 
awakened throughout Christendom. 

"The American Institute of Christian Philosophy, 
at its summer meeting, July last, at 
Chautauqua, devoted two days of its session to 
the reunion question." 

CARDINAL GIBBONS ON THE SUBJECT. 



Not only are the various subdivisions of the 
leading Protestant denominations of Christendom 
drawing together, but they are seeking also 
a closer affiliation with the church of Rome, 
which also strongly reciprocates the sentiment, 
and with all its characteristic subtlety and energy 
is enlisted in the scheme. 

Cardinal Gibbons recently preached at the 
Cathedral in Baltimore on the subject of Christian 
unity. He said:— 

"Thank God there is a yearning desire for 
the reunion of Christianity among many noble 
and earnest souls. This desire is particularly 
manifested in the English speaking world. It 
is manifested in England and in the United 
States. I myself have received several letters 
from influential Protestant ministers expressing 
the hope of a reunion, and inquiring as to the 
probable basis of a reconciliation. Reunion 
is the great desire of my heart. I have longed 
and prayed for it during all the years of my 
ministry. I have prayed that as we are bound 
to our brethren by social and family and by 
natural and commercial ties, so may we be 
united with them in the bonds of a common 
faith." 

Addressing the "prodigal" protestants, whose 
return to the Catholic fold he invites, he says: 

"The conditions of reunion are easier than 
are generally imagined. Of course there can 
be no compromise on faith or morals. The 
doctrine and moral code that Christ has left us 
must remain unchangeable. But the church 
can modify her discipline to suit the circumstances 
of the case. 

"Every well-organized society must have a 
recognized head. The mayor and governor 



hold this position in the municipal and state 
governments; the President is the head of the 
republic; the Pope is the head of the church. 
The Papacy is as necessary to the church as the 
Presidency is to the republic. 

"In coming back to the church, you are not 
entering a strange place; you are returning to 
your father's house. The furniture may seem 
odd to you, but it is just the same as your 
fathers left three hundred and fifty years ago. 
You worship as have your fathers worshiped. You 
kneel before the altar at which they knelt. You 
receive the sacraments which they received.... 
You come back like the prodigal to your father's 
house, and the garment of joy is placed 
upon you, and the banquet of love is set before 
you, and you receive the kiss of peace as a 
pledge of your filiation and adoption. You 
can say with the Apostle, 'we are no longer 
strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens 
of the saints [of the calendar of the Roman 
church].' 

"One hearty embrace of your tender mother 
will more than compensate you for all the sacrifices 
you may have made. The leaders of the 
Reformation... dismembered the Christian 
flock. They scandalized the Gentile world by 
the dissensions which have prevailed, and have 
retarded the onward march of Christianity.... 
May the day be hastened when the scattered 
hosts of Christendom will form an army [literally, 
no doubt— EDITOR] which infidelity and 
atheism cannot long resist; and they would 
soon carry the light of faith and Christian civilization 
to the most remote and benighted 
parts of the earth." 

PAPACY AND THE EASTERN CHURCHES. 



The most recent remarkable feature of the reunion 
movement is seen in the efforts now being 
made for the reunion of the various branches 
of the Catholic church. 

"Pope Leo XIII. has recently been occupied 
with a conference in Rome of the patriarchs of 
the oriental churches, the final intent of which 
is the reunion of all churches in the East with 
the church of Rome. This, if accomplished, 
will be the greatest achievement of the pontificate 
of the present pope, and will make the 
name of Leo XIII. one of the most famous of 
this century. 

R1740: page 378 



"The most important oriental churches now 
separate from Rome are the Chaldean, under 
the patriarch of Babylon, which has its adherents 
in Mesopotamia, Persia and the island of 
Malabar, and which separated from the Catholic 
church in the fifth century; and the Abyssinian 
church, with branches in Egypt, depending 
on a patriarch in Cairo, which separated in 
the fifth century also. There are also other 
sects from Mesopotamia and Armenia. The 
most important of all, however, is the Greek 
church, which extends through Greece, European 
Turkey, Asia Minor, Syria, Egypt, and 
Palestine. She has still her four patriarchs at 
Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem, 
each being independent. This church 
was united to Rome until the twelfth century 
and reunited by the councils of Lyons and 
Florence. When Turkey took Constantinople 
there was a definite separation. 

"The Eastern or Greek church is really the 
parent stock; the Catholic church seceded from 
it when the Eastern patriarchs refused to acknowledge 
the supremacy of Rome. Some small 
conflicts of doctrine precipitated the division; 
but the main reason why the Christian church 
split in two in 1054 was the claim of the Eastern 
patriarchs for absolute independence, and 
the contention of the Pope that he was the 
paramount authority in matters ecclesiastic. 

"In the main the doctrines of both were the 
same. In form and rites differences crept in 
and a wide gulf between the two was opened 
by the final settlement of the controversy over 
the marriage of priests. Before the eleventh 
century celibacy or marriage were open questions 
which each Bishop regulated in his own 
diocese according to his judgment of the best 
interests of the church. Some time after that 
date the church of Rome adopted the law of 
priestly celibacy and made it obligatory. The 
patriarchs of Alexandria, Antioch and Constantinople 
took a different view. They not 
only allowed priests to marry, but unmarried 
priests could not be ordained: though, if their 
first wives died, they could not marry again. 
But it was established as a rule of the church 
that a Bishop must be a monk sworn to celibacy. 
Both rules are in force to-day. 

"The effect of a reunion of the two churches 
would be to add about 90,500,000 members to 
the Catholic church and to cause the Greek 
church to pass out of existence. 

"The Russian government has recently ordered 
all priests of the Roman Catholic faith 



now imprisoned in Siberia to be liberated. 

Orders have been given to stop all interference 

with the Catholic churches in Poland. At 

Athens, Belgrade and Bucharest, which are headquarters 

of the Greek church, the scheme is 

noticed approvingly. On the other hand the 

Pope has endowed a Greek church seminary in 

Italy with a large annual sum. Pope Leo has 

also endowed the Armenian and Greek colleges 

at Rome and the Greek church seminary 

of St. Anne's at Jerusalem. Cardinal Vanutelli, 

one of the most eminent prelates of the 

Papal court, has recently published a book going 

to show that reunion, far from weakening 

either church, would strengthen them both. 

"The general belief that the Czar is the head 
of the Russian church is not exact, he being 
simply her protector. 

"To the Greek faith belong the Russian, 
the Servian, the Roumanian, the Georgian, and 
the Bulgarian churches. She even has adherents 
among the Slavs in Austria. 

"Finally, there is a Greek- Albanese sect, 
which has a small number of believers in Sicily 
and Calabria, in the south of Italy. 

R1741 : page 378 

"This immensely important meeting, which 
now takes place, is one of the greatest events in 
the history of the relations between Rome and 
the East. There is no precedent to compare 
it to in the annals of Catholicism. To obtain 
this reunion of the oriental churches with 
the Roman the pope intends to create a special 
congregation for them, quite separate from the 
propaganda, with a cardinal for prefect whom 
he would nominate. The pope would leave to 
the oriental churches all their privileges and 
rites, only demanding that the patriarchs elected 
by the synod of bishops should submit their 
elections for the approbation of the Roman 
pontiff, to whom the examination of all questions 
of dogmatic and ecclesiastic rights would 
be reserved. For asking so little it is believed 
that Leo XIII. will succeed, as the principal 
point of discussion in the eastern churches has 
always been the fear of being sacrificed to Rome 
and the Latins. The pope wishes to show that 
the papacy is neither Latin nor western, but 
universal. After the meeting he will issue an 
encyclical to the eastern church, which will be 
a development of what he recently wrote in the 
Praeclara encyclical about the union of the 
churches. 

"The union would be followed by the institution 



of three great papal-oriental colleges at 
Corfu, Athens, and Smyrna. 

In addressing the conference on Oct. 24, '94 
the pope said: 

"Above all we note the absence of the Patriarch 
of the Armenians. We shall not on this 
account, however, recede from our purpose.... 
Nothing will prevent us from solving the grand 
problem from the religious side, while awaiting 
more propitious times for the rest of the work." 

R1741 : page 379 

PROSPECTIVE CHARACTER OF THE PROPOSED 
RELIGIOUS UNION. 



While we thus view the rapid strides in the 
direction of religious union, it is no less interesting 
to note the prospective character of the 
proposed great organization, or church of the 
future. 

The points to be specially noticed are, (1) 
The willingness of Catholics as well as Protestants 
to make concessions in the interest of reunion. 
This might be considered a favorable 
sign, were the motives and considerations good 
ones. But they are selfish motives. Not brotherly 
love, but fear, is the mainspring of this desire 
for union. The fear is that mentioned by 
our Lord in his prophecy concerning our day. 
"Men's hearts failing them for fear, and for 
looking after those things which are coming on 
the earth: for the powers of heaven [religious 
powers] shall be shaken." (Luke 21:26.) It 
is a part of the general fear that has taken hold 
of the leaders in financial, political and religious 
circles. The leaders of Catholicism note the 
shaking as surely as the leaders among Protestants, 
and all feel that union is the only means 
of increasing their influence, or even of preserving 
their existence. 

Especially is this true on the part of the 
Church of Rome. She still boasts of the infallibility 
of her teachings, which declare most 
positively that there is no escape from everlasting 
torment outside of her communion. Does 
she confess the errors of her past course and 
teachings, and claim to be reforming? If so, 
that would be a step in the right direction. 
But no, she still boasts of her unchangeableness; 
and consequently we must believe that 
her present attitude and recent utterances respecting 
Protestants and the Bible are Jesuitical 
and hypocritical, and for her own purposes 



merely. 

Protestants have less policy and more sincerity 
in their desire for union. They too, however, 
desire it chiefly for strength and prestige 
before the world, and not from heart- love of 
Christian fellowship. Each sect is anxious to 
hold to its own traditions and doctrines and 
name, although all confess that there is really 
little in their confessions of faith worth contending 
for anyway. Indeed, we could rejoice 
in this feature were it not that with the mass of 
musty error they are discarding also the very 
root and essence of Scripture doctrine; viz., 
faith in Christ as the Redeemer who paid the 
ransom for all at Calvary. But all is going, 
good and bad, and gentility and morality are 
soon to be the only tests of Christian name and 
fellowship— all this to keep nominal Christianity 
popular with the world and to insure the 
continuance of its outward show of prosperity, 
in which thrifty "tares" are mistaken for 
"wheat." 

The leaders of the World's Parliament of 
Religions, of a year ago, it will be remembered, 
suggested even the dropping of the name Christian, 
and the use of the term Religious Union, 
so as to unite, not only all the denominations 
called Christian, but also the various heathen systems, 
in a universal church; and this suggestion 
should awaken all true believers to the real situation. 
As they see all the "tares" being thus 
bound together, they should the more forcibly 
realize the meaning of our Lord's words, "Come 
out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers 
of her sins, and receive not of her plagues." 

But all this only confirms us in the correctness 
of our interpretation of prophecy. It will 
be remembered by old readers that, so long ago 
as 1880, we pointed out in these columns that 
the Scriptures foretold a combination or federation 
of Protestants and their subsequent cooperation 
with Papacy. Every step of the way 
now, as this union develops, will be watched 
by us all with interest. 

But from the same Scriptures we learn that 
the union will last but a short time, and that 
instead of its being favorable to the truth and 
the Lord's saints, it will be the reverse, except 
as He shall overrule it in their special interest. 
Therefore,— "Say not ye [God's consecrated 
people], a confederacy [a union], neither fear 
ye their fear nor be afraid."— Isa. 8:12-16. 

Since writing the above we have received the 
following important announcement. 

Rome, Nov. 29.— "The Pope has appointed 
a theological commission to inquire into the 



validity of ordinations in the Anglican church 

R1741 : page 380 

from the view point of the Roman doctrine. 
His Holiness has invited Cardinal Vaughan to 
Rome to discuss the union of the Anglican and 
Roman churches. He also proposes to submit 
a specific scheme to a conference of Cardinals, 
as in the case of the Eastern churches. The 
Pope is still engaged on the encyclical on the 
English church question." 

We learn also, upon good authority, that it 
is the intention of the Pope to issue in January, 
1895, two or three encyclical letters; one freeing 
the Papal delegate of the United States (at 
present Satolli) from the supervision of the 
congregation of the Propaganda of Rome, 
making him responsible to the Pope only; another 
relating to the relationship of the Roman 
church in South America to secular governments; 
and another to the Bishops in England, discussing 
the position of the church of Rome, possibly 
suggesting terms of union with the church 
of England. 

A few days ago the "Guild of St. James the 
Apostle" was organized in Cincinnati, O. The 
Cincinnati Enquirer says:— 

"Their endeavors will be to bring the Episcopal 
churches back to the old ceremonial of the 
mediaeval days, when the church was still in 
communion with the Roman Catholic church, 
and a very considerable and influential part of 
it. They do not disguise the fact that it would 
be their highest realization to have all the Catholic 
churches reunited under one and the same 
head—the Pope of Rome— the Greeks, who for 
several centuries have been separated from it by 
schism, and the Episcopalians, who were separated 
from the Mother church during the reign 
of Henry VIII. 

"Rev. Robert A. Gibson, pastor of Christ 
Episcopal church was seen and said: 'The 
proposed movement is not for a consolidation of 
the Episcopalian, Greek and Roman churches 
alone, but of all denominations, Catholic and 
Protestant. It is in the distant future, and we may 
not live to see it, but it will come. The Episcopal 
church first proposed it 1886 and asked for a 
general conference to come to an understanding 
upon the matters of baptism, sacrament and 
local episcopate. At first none of the churches 
gave it much consideration, but now the Presbyterians 
have appointed a committee to confer 
with the Episcopalians, and it is receiving the 
careful attention of other denominations.' 



"The Episcopalian church and the church of 
England, numbering 10,000,000 people, are 
virtually pledged to it. The object is, organic 
union of all denominations, to present a solid 
front against heathenism. We are a long way 
in advance of the days when heretics were burned, 
and are rapidly approaching the time when 
a universal church will be possible, although it 
may take a good while yet." 



R1741 : page 380 

CHRIST TEACHING BY PARABLES. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON X., DEC. 9, LUKE 8:4-15. 
Golden Text— "The seed is the Word of God."— Luke 8:11. 

This parable needs no further explanation 
than that which the great Teacher gave. 
But his words should be carefully pondered 
and should lead to self-examination, as not 
the hearers only, but the doers of the Word, 
are acceptable with God. 

It is worthy of special notice, however, 
that the Lord expected his disciples to see 
the drift of this parable without inquiring 

R1742: page 380 

for an explanation. "And he said unto them, 

Know ye not this parable? and how then 

will ye know all parables? Unto you it is 

given to know the mystery of the kingdom 

of God, but unto them that are without, all 

these things are done in parables, that seeing, 

they may see and not perceive; and 

hearing, they may hear and not understand, 

lest at any time they should be converted 

and their sins should be forgiven them."— 

Mark 4:10-13. See also Isa. 6:9,10; Matt. 13:12-17; 

John 12:39,40; Acts 28:25-28; 

Rom. 11:7. 

While our Lord thus indicated that his 
disciples should have been able to interpret 
this parable, because of their knowledge of 
the truth it was designed to illustrate, it is 
not to be inferred that all his parables were 
so simple as to be promptly understood at 
the time they were spoken. Many of them 
illustrated truths not revealed at that time, 
and hence they could not be understood 



then. The expression, "To you it is given," 
etc., applies, not only to the disciples of 
that day, but to the disciples all through the 
age. While the truth is made manifest 
gradually, more and more, as meat in due 
season, the parables which illustrated those 
truths can only be seen as illustrations as 

R1742: page 381 

the truths they illustrate become manifest. 
To "them that are without"— outside the 
pale of the believing disciples— which included 
the whole nation of Israel except a 
small "remnant," these illustrations of the 
truth were, of course, as dark as were the 
truths themselves to which they allowed 
their prejudices to blind their eyes, greatly 
to their own detriment. And it was for 
this very reason— because their hearts were 
not right, and they were therefore unworthy 
of the truth and its blessings— that the 
Lord opened his mouth in parables and 
dark sayings, so that they might fail to perceive 
the blessings of which they were proving 
themselves unworthy. It was because 
of this unworthiness that blindness came 
upon Israel, and that it will continue until 
the fulness of the Gentiles shall have come 
into possession of those blessings which 
were first offered to Israel and rejected by 
them. 



R1742: page 381 

THE TWELVE SENT FORTH. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON XL, DEC. 16, MATT. 10:5-16. 

Golden Text— "As ye go, preach, saying, The 
kingdom of heaven is at hand."— Matt. 10:7. 

In this lesson we have an account of the 
method which the Lord pursued in the 
harvest work of the Jewish age. This 
is a topic which should be of very special 
interest to those who recognize the 
present as the harvest time of the Gospel 
age, and who believe that the same Lord of 
the harvest is now present directing and 
superintending the work of this harvest as 
he did that (See Rev. 14:14; Matt. 13:30; 



Mark 4:26-29); and who see further, that 
the two ages correspond to each other as 
type and antitype.* 

In the two harvests we see a remarkable 
correspondence, not only in the exactly 
equal time allotted to each— 40 years— but 
also in the character of the work to be done 
and the methods of doing it. The present 
harvest work has now been in successful 
operation for twenty years (1874-1894), 
and the methods which the Lord's providence 
has indicated and blessed have been 
very similar to those of the Jewish harvest. 
Though the Lord is not visibly present here, 
as he was there, we have the assurance of 
his Word, as above cited, that the work is 
his— under his direction, supervision and full 
control; and he who does not believe this 
has no authority for engaging in it; he is 
not sent. But he who is sent, and who goes 
under the Lord's direction, is appointed to 
one of the grandest privileges that was ever 
offered to any man, although now, as in the 
Jewish harvest, the present reward is nothing 
that the world would envy.— 
Matt. 10:16-28,34-36. 

While the methods in this harvest and 
the Jewish have been similar, there is no 
reason to believe that they ought to be exactly 
alike; for the Lord of the harvest is 
surely at liberty to adopt in either case the 
methods that please him best: and in each 
case he has evidently taken cognizance of 
the conditions and circumstances of the 
times, and adapted his methods accordingly. 
The following points of similarity and 
dissimilarity in the methods of the two harvests 
are worthy of comparison as indicating 
first, the similarity of the work, and, secondly, 
the freedom of the Lord in adapting his 
methods to the circumstances of the times. 

In the Jewish harvest the Lord sent out 
first the twelve, and then the seventy, and 
was ready to send as many more as might 
become ready; for, said he, "The harvest is 
great, and the laborers are few." (Luke 10:1-12.) 
He sent them out two and two under 
his direction and supervision. He also 
gave them a message to declare and instructions 
how and to whom to declare it, and 
required that those going forth should be 
fully consecrated to the work, being filled 
with his spirit. Indeed, such were his forewarnings 
of the present wages they should 
receive, that none would undertake it except 
such as had learned to walk by faith, 



who were willing to "endure hardness as 
good soldiers," and whose "treasure" was 
"laid up in heaven." 

In the present harvest the same course is 
manifest. Since its beginning in 1874, the 
Lord has been instructing his consecrated 
disciples in the truths of another new dispensation, 
revealing the glorious harmony 
and beauty of his plan in outline and detail, 
and also its orderly times and seasons; and 
as they have become prepared he has been 
sending them out— generally two and two, 
where they have been able to give their 



♦MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. vii. 

R1742: page 382 

whole time to the work— to declare, "The 
Kingdom of heaven is at hand!" (in its 
glory and completeness now, as, at the time 
of the Jewish harvest, it was at hand in its 
embryo condition) and to explain and 
prove the truth of the message. 

As in the Jewish harvest the Lord's instructions 
confined the special work of those 
messengers to the lost sheep of the house 
of Israel, so his instructions here confine 
the special work of his messengers to the 
household of faith— spiritual Israel.— Gal. 6:10; 
Isa. 52:7. 

Here, too, as there, they have been forewarned 
of that which their experience bears 
out; viz., that there is no earthly gain in it, 
no ease or worldly honor, no present reward 
except the blessed consciousness of 
being a co-worker with God and of knowing 
the fellowship of the sufferings of Christ, 
the joys of heart-communion with him now, 
and the hope of future glory in his presence. 
Only those who accept of these conditions, 
and who are willing to endure hardness as 
good soldiers, being impelled thereto by the 
spirit of the Lord abiding in them, have 
any desire or incentive to this service; and 
if any such grow weary in well doing and 
look longingly back to the things left behind, 
it is not long before they drop out by 
the way. 

In the respects just mentioned the methods 
in the two harvests are very similar; but 
there are also points of dissimilarity which 
we should not fail to note. For instance: 

(1) Those sent out in that harvest 



preached the truth orally, and attention was 
drawn to them and their message by reason 
of the miracles which they were empowered 
to perform; while in this harvest the preaching 
is done largely by the printed page, disseminated 
through the agency of traveling 
colporteurs sent out generally two and two 
to bear the message. 

The propriety of this feature of the change 
is very manifest, since now education has 
become general and the printing press has 
largely multiplied the influence of every 
one of the harvesters. By taking advantage 
of this modern invention they magnify 
the influence of the truth a thousand fold. 
And in consequence of these improved facilities 
of printing and of general education, 
and the still greater advantage of nineteen 
centuries of gospel privilege and blessing, 
the truth now needs no such endorsement 
as the miracle-working power given 
at first, and so necessary then to the awakening 
of attention and the confirmation of 
the truth. In fact such methods now would 
be out of harmony with the thief-like presence 
and mission of the Lord here. (Rev. 16:15; 
Matt. 24:43,44; 1 Thess. 5:2.) If he 
comes as a thief, it is not to sound a trumpet 
before him, calling the world's attention 
to his work. Those gifts gradually disappeared 
from the Church as the necessity for 
them decreased. When faith gained a sure 
and substantial footing, such helps were 
taken away, and believers were expected to 
walk by faith, and not any longer by sight. 

(2) Those sent out in that harvest were 
instructed to depend upon the people to 
whom they went for support in temporal 
things, while the reapers of this harvest are 
independent of such means, greatly to the 
advantage of the work. The reason for 
this variation is also manifest. In the Jewish 
harvest the reapers were sent exclusively 
to a consecrated people. The entire nation 
had bound itself by a solemn covenant 
to the Lord (Exod. 19:8), and in consequence 
had been specially favored in many 
ways, but chiefly in that to them were committed 
the oracles (the law and the testimonies) 
of God. (Rom. 3:1,2.) According 
to their covenant, therefore, it was the duty, 
and it should have been esteemed by them 
a privilege, to receive and entertain any 
messenger of the Lord whose credentials 
warranted such a claim and thus protected 
them from impostors— as theirs did, their 



personal character and demeanor and the 
divine testimony of miracles thus endorsing 
them. It was because of this preparation 
of Israel as a people for the reception of the 

R1743: page 382 

gospel (whether they had profited by it or 
not), that they were expected to recognize 
both the harvest message and the appointed 
and attested messengers; and their opportunity 
for either receiving or rejecting them 
was the first applied test of their worthiness 
of the special favors then about to be offered 
to them. It was on this account that the 
harvesters were instructed to go to that 
people in a manner to impress them with 
a sense of their obligations as a covenant 
people to receive and gladly to entertain the 
messengers of the Lord to them. Throughout 
the whole nation the fame of the Messiah 
and the divine attestations of his power 
and authority had spread (Matt. 4:23-25; 
Mark 1:28,32-34,45; 6:31-34; 8:26,27; 
Luke 4:14,15,36,37; Matt. 9:26,31; 14:1,2), 

R1743: page 383 

and these now sent forth in his name 

represented him, so that in receiving them 

they were receiving him, and in rejecting 

them they were rejecting him. Hence the 

blessing promised on their reception, and 

denunciations that followed their rejection. 

(Verses 1 1-15.) When they departed out 

of the city or house that rejected them, they 

were to shake off the very dust of their feet 

for a testimony against them, because that, 

in so doing, they were violating their most 

solemn covenant with God and bringing 

upon themselves the just condemnation of 

such a course. That condemnation, however, 

was not to eternal death, but to deprivation 

of the privileges and blessings of 

the new dispensation then about to be offered 

to them, but of which they proved 

themselves unworthy. Nor was the condemnation, 

either then or at the full end of 

their age, an individual one; for although 

the nation as a whole was cast off from divine 

favor and blinded, and destined to remain 

so until the gospel favor had passed 

over to the Gentiles, yet, during this time, 

if any individual of the nation repented and 

severed his ties with the nation and family 

(which the persecuting spirit of the nation 



has always compelled), he might, through 
such tribulation, enter into the embryo kingdom 
—the Gospel Church. 

In this harvest the circumstances attending 
the work are in many respects quite 
different. Though here also the Lord has a 
consecrated people— nominal spiritual Israel 
—they are not a local nation within a circumscribed 
boundary, but they are scattered 
here and there as wheat in the midst of 
tares. The reapers here must therefore 
search them out singly, while there they 
were grouped in cities and families and as 
an entire nation. 

Again, the circumstances here are the reverse 
of those there in that the testimony 
to the truth is given in the midst of a very 
babel of voices, all claiming to teach the 
truth; and so great is the confusion that only 
the consecrated and faithful souls, whose 
practised ears know the Master's voice from 
all others, are able to discern it. They have 
an affinity for the truth: the holy spirit 
within them recognizes the same spirit in 
the message, as well as in the messengers, 
and it satisfies their longings as nothing else 
can do. 

Thus the harvest message becomes a test 
of faithfulness to God's covenant people 
here, and as a sickle it accomplishes the 
reaping. These different circumstances and 
conditions of this harvest make necessary 
the very reverse of the former method of the 
dependence of the messengers upon the hospitality 
of the people. Now, in order to make 
manifest that no mercenary motives, or motives 
of indolence, or love of ease, or popularity, 
or of desire to impose on others prompt 
the reapers of this harvest, the Lord in his 
providence has so arranged the work here 
that all such motives are manifestly eliminated 
from the harvest work; and it is seen 
to be a self-sacrificing labor of love, prompted 
by that devotion and zeal which the truth 
alone inspires. And this of itself commends 
the truth to the attention of the Lord's people 
where the messenger comes in contact 
with them, though often it reaches them 
through the printed page alone, where the 
luster of the truth is its own commendation. 

This difference in the two harvests was 
aptly illustrated by the Lord when he likened 
the Jewish nation to wheat and chaff, 
and his work there to a fan for blowing the 
chaff away— thus indicating the compactness 
of that people; while here his professed 



people are likened to wheat and tares, thus 
indicating their scattered and confused condition 
and the necessity of careful searching 
and gathering out. 

It would therefore be entirely out of order 
for the reapers in this harvest to denounce 
or shake off the dust of their feet for a testimony 
against any city now, for no city 
or community as such is now in covenant 
relations with God as was Israel; and so different 
are the customs and circumstances 
of this time that a man might brush the dust 
and denounce the people for a week and 
not be noticed, or, if noticed, merely considered 
as of unsound mind, so intent are the 
masses of the people on pursuing their own 
course and grasping after gain. 

The consequence now to those who recognize 
and yet reject the truth will be very 
similar to those which followed Israel's rejection 
(their complete overthrow in the 
midst of great tribulation), excepting that 
the increased light and privilege of this time 
will merit and receive the greater punishment 
--"a time of trouble such as never was 
since there was a nation." (Dan. 12:1.) 
Surely, then, it will be more tolerable for the 
land of Sodom and Gomorrah (Matt. 10:15) 
in the day of judgment (the Millennial age) 
than for the condemned house of Israel, either 

R1743: page 384 

fleshly or spiritual, which are judged unworthy 

of the grace of God, because they 

cast it from them. The judgment upon condemned 

fleshly Israel was a terrible overthrow 

in the midst of harrowing scenes of 

war and desolation and famine, leaving 

them utterly desolate and scattering them 

as fugitives among all nations; while that 

which is shortly to come upon nominal 

spiritual Israel is described as a time of unparalleled 

trouble, such as never has been 

and never again shall be. 

Another point of contrast which this lesson 
suggests is that between the Lord's 
methods for the harvest work of the Jewish 
age and the subsequent methods of the 
inspired Apostles, equally under the Lord's 
direction and supervision, which not only 
winnowed the grain of that harvest, but also 
sought to systematically store it. The 
wheat of that dispensation was to form the 
nucleus of the Christian Church— the embryo 
kingdom of heaven— which as a compact 



and sympathetic body subject to Christ, 

imbued with his spirit, and representing his 

truth, was to stand before the world as a 

living testimony to his truth and to the 

power of his grace for nearly two thousand 

years. It was necessary, therefore, as believers 

multiplied in the days of the apostles, 

to adopt some simple method of recognition 

which would serve to unify them 

and to make them helpful one to another as 

members of one body. 

But as that work of organizing the Church 
of the new Gospel dispensation was no 
part of the harvest work of the old Jewish 
dispensation, so the present harvest work 
or reaping of the Gospel dispensation is also 
separate and distinct from the work of 
the new Millennial dispensation now drawing 
on. But there is this difference between 
our days and those of the apostles: the 
wheat of the Gospel age is not to form the 
nucleus of another Church for the Millennial 
age; and those gathered out from among 
the tares are not beginning, but are finishing 
their course on earth, and the time of 
their sojourn in the flesh is very short and 
cannot go beyond the twenty years of harvest 
yet remaining. Their organization for 
the work of the new dispensation will be 
beyond the vail, when they are changed to 
the glorious likeness of the Lord. 

In view of these facts and also of the nature 
of the harvest work, and the additional 
fact that each one so gathered is expected 
to enter into the harvest work as a reaper, 
and will do so to the extent of his ability 
and opportunity, it is plain that the forming 
of a visible organization of such gathered 
out ones would be out of harmony with the 
spirit of the divine plan; and, if done, would 
seem to indicate on the part of the Church 
a desire to conform to the now popular idea 
of organization or confederacy. (See Isa. 8: 12.) 
The work now is not organization, but 
division, just as it was in the Jewish harvest 
proper (Matt. 10:34-36.) And this harvest, 
as illustrated by the natural, is the 
busiest time of all the age, because the time 
is short and the "winter" is fast approaching. 
What is to be done must be done quickly, 
and there is abundant room in the great 
field for every member of the body of 
Christ to reap. 

While, therefore, we do not esteem a visible 
organization of the gathered ones to be 
a part of the Lord's plan in the harvest 



work, as though we expected as an organization 

to abide here for another age, we 

do esteem it to be his will that those that 

love the Lord should speak often one to another 

of their common hopes and joys, or 

trials and perplexities, communing together 

concerning the precious things of his Word, 

and so help one another, and not forget the 

assembling of themselves together as the 

manner of some is; and so much the more 

as they see the day approaching.— Mai. 3:16; 

Heb. 10:25. 

Let us, then, give ourselves diligently to 
the great harvest work, observing and carefully 
following the providential lines for 
the guidance of the work as indicated by 
the Lord of the harvest— the same Lord, 
and just as truly present and active in this 
harvest as in the Jewish harvest, though invisible 
to mortal sight. What dignity and 
grandeur and blessed inspiration does the 
realization of this truth give our humble 
services! Truly it is not a glory which the 
world can discern, but faithfulness to the 
end of our course will bring an exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory which will appear 
to all God's intelligent creatures of 
every name and order; for in the ages to 
come he will show forth the exceeding 
riches of his grace in his loving kindness 
toward us who are in Christ Jesus (Eph. 2:7); 
and, praise the Lord ! our exaltation and 
glory will be for a grand and benevolent 
service— even the privilege of scattering 
universal blessings. 



page 386 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



"GOOD HOPES" FOR 1895. 



The Supplement which accompanies this issue 
is not to be considered "an appeal," nor "a request," 
for money for the Tract Fund. It is 
nothing of the kind. It is merely sent out as a 
convenience for such of our readers as are anxious 
to have a hand in the good work which the 
Lord is now doing, and who appreciate the privilege 
of being co-workers with us in it. 

The name may be original with us, but the 
plan is not. It is the Lord's arrangement 
through the great Apostle Paul. (See 1 Cor. 16:2.) 
It is not given as a law; there is no such 
bondage— no tithing under the New Covenant. 
But as a suggestion it certainly is a good one, 
and has, so far as we are aware, proved a blessing 
to all who have observed it. It has not 
only enlarged their contributions to the Lord's 
cause, but it has correspondingly enlarged their 
hearts, and increased their love and deepened 
their interest in the truths which they thus 
practically confess. 

The "Good Hopes" enable us to judge, 
somewhat in advance, of the amount of money 
at our disposal for the year, and permit us to 
contract accordingly; and where large quantities 
and low prices are factors, this is of considerable 
importance. 

True, many failed considerably of what they 
had "hoped" to do for the cause during this 
year; but they received the blessing which always 
comes from willingness to render the Lord 
service and trying to do it. On the whole, as 
will be noted from the Reports in this issue, our 
Great Provider made up from other sources what 
he did not see best to entrust to their disposal. 



R1744: page 386 
JERUSALEM TO BE PROBED. 



Excavations certain to add to the knowledge 
of the old city of Jerusalem are soon to be 
made. The Sultan has granted a firman to the 
Palestine Exploration Society, of London, giving 
a long-sought privilege. The permission 
to dig includes a generous strip of land all 
around the walls on the outside, excluding only 
Moslem burying-grounds and holy places. 

The work is to be done under the direction 
of Frederick Bliss, a young American of considerable 
reputation as an archaeological explorer. 
Shafts are to be sunk on the hill of 
Ophel, where were the royal gardens and the 
tombs of the kings. It is hardly possible that 
this ground can be turned up without valuable 
discoveries being made. One thing hoped for 
is that the old wall that swept around the 
southern brow of Zion may be found. 

The imperial firman grants a two years' privilege, 
time enough to make the old city of 
Solomon and the Jebusites tell some of its long 
hidden secrets. — N.Y. World. 



R1744: page 387 
