Will You Be Present​—Friday Evening, April 9?
PRESENT where? At the local Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Christian witnesses, after 6 p.m., Standard Time.
For what purpose? To celebrate the Lord’s evening meal or “Lord’s Supper.” This was commanded by our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, on the last evening before his death.
Last year more than 3,225,000 persons attended this celebration that was held in upward of 26,000 congregations throughout the world. Will you be among those in attendance this year?
Has your interest in religious subjects been limited to your perusing this magazine or other publications of Jehovah’s witnesses? Why not widen out by attending the celebration of the Lord’s evening meal at the local Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses? You will doubtless be impressed with the sincerity of the presentation as well as the simplicity and the reasonableness of what is said on that occasion. But that is something that you can prove to yourself only if you attend.
Are you one of those who are studying the Bible with the help of a witness of Jehovah? If so, we earnestly invite you to attend. It will enhance your understanding and appreciation of God’s Word and purposes. More than that, you will see just how Jesus Christ directed that the Lord’s evening meal be celebrated, and this will aid you to grasp the meaning of it all.
Or have you recently begun to share in preaching the good news of God’s kingdom? Then you will certainly want to be present with all others who have been preaching this good news in your locality for many years. It will strengthen your faith to continue as a proclaimer of the good news.
Do you happen to have one or more members of your family who are witnesses of Jehovah, while you yourself are not? Why not join them as they attend the Lord’s evening meal at the local Kingdom Hall? It will make them happy to have your company and you are sure to reap a spiritual blessing.
Of course, all Christian witnesses of Jehovah, whether they have a heavenly hope or an earthly one, will be present; they would not think of missing out on such an occasion. And not only will they be there themselves, but before then each one will be busy inviting others to attend. Among such ones will be those with whom they are conducting Bible studies, or upon whom they make return visits from time to time, as well as those they know to be subscribers for this magazine.
The Bible, at 1 Corinthians 11:23-25, tells just how Jesus Christ instituted this memorial of his death. It says: “The Lord Jesus, on the night of his arrest, took bread and, after giving thanks to God, broke it and said: ‘This is my body, which is for you; do this as a memorial of me.’ In the same way, he took the cup after supper, and said: ‘This cup is the new covenant sealed by my blood. Whenever you drink it, do this as a memorial of me.’”​—New English Bible.
What benefits can you expect to derive from attending the Lord’s evening meal? Since Jesus commanded its observance​—“Do this as a memorial of me”—​there is certain to be a blessing for obedience to his command. This occasion builds up one’s appreciation of what Jehovah God did in giving his only-begotten Son so that all who believe on him may not perish but gain everlasting life.​—John 3:16.
In particular does the Lord’s evening meal remind us of what Jesus Christ did for us. And what did he do in our behalf? First of all, as the Word of God he left heavenly glory, came to earth as a human and gave his life as a ransom for the sins of the world. (Matt. 20:28; John 1:1, 29) Jesus not only said, “There is no greater love than this, that a man should lay down his life for his friends,” but exemplified this great love by doing that very thing. (John 15:13, NEB) So his death is of keen interest to all of us.
Secondly, as the Great Teacher he revealed God’s will to us. He taught his followers the truth, which truth sets them free from bondage to sin, to the fear of man, to false religion. He helped them to get better acquainted with Jehovah God and His righteous requirements. Rightly he referred to himself as “Teacher.”​—Matt. 23:8; 22:36-39.
And thirdly, Jesus Christ set the pattern, giving us a model to follow. He did not seek to please himself. He did nothing of his own originality; he put God’s will ahead of his own. As we read: “To that you were called, because Christ suffered on your behalf, and thereby left you an example; it is for you to follow in his steps.”​—1 Pet. 2:21, NEB; John 14:10.
All who attend the celebration of the Lord’s evening meal, with the right mental attitude, and who pay close attention to the truths there presented will surely benefit greatly. Their gratitude to Jehovah God and Jesus Christ will grow; they will gain a better understanding of God’s will for them and they will be strengthened in their determination to do what is pleasing in God’s sight. They will also discern better than ever before how Christians can truly be at unity.
The celebration of the Lord’s evening meal will open with words of welcome and the singing of a sacred song by the congregation, followed by prayer. Then you will hear an upbuilding Biblical talk about the meaning, purpose and benefits to be derived from this celebration. This will be followed by blessings asked upon the bread and the wine, and the serving of first the unleavened bread and then the red wine. Comparatively few will partake, for last year, of the more than three million attending, only some 10,500 partook. After further appropriate remarks the meeting will close with sacred song and prayer.
There will be no collection taken nor will anyone be pressed to contribute or to join something. All who are conscious of their spiritual need will truly want to be on hand for this occasion, April 9, 1971. Will you be present? We warmly encourage you to do so.

