VOL. XIX. JULY 15, 1898. No. 14. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 210 

"Purify Your Hearts, Ye Double 

Minded 211 

How the New Mind Should Rule 214 

Poem: What Became of a Lie 216 

Interesting Queries 216 

Christadelphian Proof-Texts 216 

Immortal Vs. Incorruptible 218 

The General or First Resurrection? 219 

The Sin of Covetousness 219 

Elijah's Successor, Elisha 221 

Interesting Letters 223 

page 210 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 

OUR NEW TRACT-NO. 41. 



This tract comprises the article "Must We Abandon Hope 
of a Golden Age?" (recently published in this Magazine) and 
three pages of Scripture texts, from "all the holy prophets since 
the world began," and from the New Testament, showing that 
there will be "Times of Restitution." It is very suitable for 
general distribution. 

R2335 : page 210 

"THE DAY OF VENGEANCE" --IN GERMAN. 

We have quite a few calls for the fourth volume of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN series in the German language. It was not our intention 
to publish this volume in any language except the English. 
We would say, however, to the friends who are anxious 
to have it in German that, if interest enough is developed to 
guarantee the purchase of sufficient books to amount to the 
cost of the typesetting (say $500) we will, on the strength of 
such subscriptions, proceed to get out a German edition of VOL. 
IV. One dear brother and sister in Germany are so certain that 
it is just the thing the Germans there need, that they have, in 
spite of our protests, proceeded to translate the volume; and 
they are now quite well on with the work. No money need be 
sent at present, but those interested may inform us at once what 
amount of money they wish to invest in this manner, at the 
same prices as the English editions. Postal cards will serve the 
purpose. 



R2335 : page 211 
"PURIFY YOUR HEARTS, YE DOUBLE MINDED." 



"A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways."— Jas. 1:8. 

BY NATURE all mankind have the depraved 
mind or will, whose chief characteristic is 
selfishness. And it is the desire to gratify this depraved 
will, including all selfish desires, that leads into sin in 
its every form. But those who have tasted of divine 
grace, and have come unto the Father through the 
Son and the merits of his sacrifice, and whose eyes 
have been opened to discern the difference between 
righteousness and unrighteousness, and the natural 
result of both under the operation of the divine law, 
and who have consecrated themselves to the Lord, are 
said to have a new mind, a new will,— sometimes called 
a clean heart and a right spirit. The natural, fallen 
disposition or will or mind is Scripturally termed "the 
mind of the flesh," while the renewed mind, disposition 
or will is termed "the mind of the spirit," because 
it is the result of the influence or spirit of the truth. 



Nevertheless, this new mind or will, based upon 
more proper views of right and wrong, is evolved 
through the very same brain as the other; and these 
brains by which we do our thinking and reasoning and 
willing are very closely and sympathetically allied to 
our depraved physical conditions, so that it is more 
natural, more easy, for us under present conditions to 
exercise the will or mind of the flesh than to exercise 
the will or mind of the spirit. Nor can this connection 
between our depraved physical conditions and our 
wills be completely broken up: so long as we are in 
the flesh it will be impossible for us to completely 
deaden its influence upon our minds and wills: consequently 
the will of the flesh and the works of the flesh 
would be the most easy and the most natural to us— 
the thoughts, words and deeds of the fallen disposition 
coming without seeking and without effort. 

On the contrary, as the new mind or will was begotten 
or implanted in us by an outside influence, foreign 
to ourselves and our depravity, it, like all invaders, 
for a long time at least must hold its control, if at 
all, as would an invading foreigner— by force. The 
force or power by which the spirit of truth, the spirit 
of righteousness, the spirit of our God, gained a foothold 
in our hearts, was through the enlightenment of our 
minds and the quickening or revivifying of certain 
organs of the mind which had for many generations 
lain dormant and consequently become dwarfed and 
weak, and of other organs which for many generations 
had become distorted and perverted through misuse, 
under the domination of error, superstition, etc. 

The spirit of truth, the spirit of the Lord, entered 
our minds as a great general might land upon a foreign 
shore, and recruit his army from amongst those whom 
he desires to conquer,— by lifting up and encouraging 
and enlightening the rightly disposed, and drilling 
these and arming them in his service, for the overthrow 
of a bad government, and the establishment of a righteous 
government. Such a new government, seeking 
the best interests of every citizen, and willing to have 
the cooperation of each, would nevertheless find it extremely 
difficult to control the lower elements of society, 
except by putting all of its affairs fully in charge 
and under the control of the rightly disposed: and so, 
too, in our minds, we find that there are certain lower 
organs or propensities which have maintained their 
strength and vigor, while some of the higher organs 
of our nature have lost their vitality and power to rule, 
and become dwarfed under the control of sin and ignorance. 
The spirit of truth, the spirit of the Lord, 
having gained entrance to our minds, has enlightened 

R2335 : page 212 

and quickened and is constantly drilling these better 
elements of our natural dispositions, and seeks to restore 



to them the control originally theirs, over the 
baser or lower propensities of our nature. 

Nothing else need be expected than warfare between 
the new mind seeking under the Lord's direction 
to regain the control, and the depraved mind 
which obtained the control under the reign of sin and 
death. The Apostle mentions this warfare, saying:— 
"The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit 
against the flesh; and these are contrary the one to the 
other; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would." 
(Gal. 5:17.) The inspired Apostle here puts the matter 
very strongly, and yet experience proves to all 
Christians that he puts it very truthfully, "Ye cannot 
do the things that ye would." 

So far, then, from being discouraged that our new 
minds cannot conquer an absolute peace, and come into 
such perfect conditions that a wrong thought could 
never rise up to assert itself and to tempt us, we 
should, on the contrary, while prompt to crush the 
slightest uprising of the mind of the flesh, nevertheless 
realize that our condition is the very one which 
the Lord designs as best for us. We should realize 
that our faithfulness to righteousness is attested, not 
by the fact that we have no trials or besetments from 
the evil mind of the flesh, but that by the grace of God 
we have a holy will, a holy desire to promptly resist 
and by the Lord's grace to overcome every evil 
suggestion. 

There are a few people in the world, we believe, 
who claim to have become so dead naturally and so 
alive spiritually that they have no "motions of sin in 
the flesh;"— so that no evil thought or desire ever so 
much as suggests itself to them. In our judgment 
these people are deceiving themselves; not only because 
their alleged experience is different from the experiences 
of other Christian people, faithfully battling 
against every motion of the flesh to the end of life's 
journey, but more particularly because their alleged 
experiences are contrary to the Word of Truth which 
in many places assures us (concerning the new creature 
with the new mind, seeking to overcome the mind 
of the flesh, and to bring every thought and word and 
act into subjection to the will of God in Christ), saying, 
"Ye cannot do [perfectly] the things that ye 
would." 

This implies not only that the Lord's people, the 
new creatures in Christ, will be liable to besetment on 
the part of the mind of the flesh, but it implies also, 
that the mind of the flesh (in spite of our best efforts 
to down it, to mortify it), while not succeeding in accomplishing 
its evil purposes, will nevertheless hinder 
us in divers ways from accomplishing all the good and 
great and noble things to which the new mind will 
prompt us. He who thinks that he is accomplishing 
great things, he who succeeds in accomplishing all 
that he would, all the things that he wills to accomplish, 



may be sure that he is not willing on a high 
enough plane; just as he who fancies that he has no 
besetments of the flesh is merely deceiving himself, 
and is so asleep as respects his new mind that he does 
not recognize sharply the distinctions between the new 
mind and the old mind, nor discriminate closely between 
truth and error, righteousness and sin. 

THE DOUBLE MINDED. 



A double-minded man or woman is one who has 
received the new mind and recognizes the difference 
between the mind of the flesh and the mind of the 
spirit, but who, instead of giving over the control of 
his life to either one, thinks erroneously that he can 
succeed better by dividing matters. The double mind 
is the compromising disposition. The old nature, as 
soon as it recognizes the presence of the new, is inclined 
to dissimulate, and to propose compromise and 
peace, fearing its own extermination. The new mind 
urges right, truth, the spirit, disposition, of God; and 
that these should have free course, and that every 
thought daring to assert itself in opposition to these 
recognized principles of righteousness should be summarily 
dealt with and put to death as a rebel. The 
mind of the flesh trembles at such thorough-going law 
and discipline, and raises various objections: 

(1) It would cause an awful rupture and a lifelong 
war between the new mind and the tendency, 

mind or will of the fallen flesh. It would mean self-denial; 
it would mean the risk of breaking of tender 

R2336 : page 212 

ties, and the rupture of long cherished hopes and 
ambitions. 

(2) It objects that such a course would be fanatical; 
that such is not the course of the world in general, 
nor even the course of the most respectable among 
those who are classed as Christians; and that to follow 
the course proposed would, therefore, mean, as gauged 
by worldly wisdom and customs, to become a fool for 
Christ's sake, and to be considered such by all the 
worldly-wise. 

(3) It urges its own claims and rights: it admits 
that at one time it usurped full control improperly, 
but declares that it is reformed now. Its proposal, 
therefore, is that there should be a lasting peace as 
between the old mind and the new, that the new mind 
shall have the full right to control in all matters pertaining 
to religious worship, Sabbath observance and 

outward deportment, and that the old mind (reformed) 
shall continue to have full charge of business and secular 



R2336 : page 213 

affairs; and that in matters of conscience, respecting 
dress, amusements, etc., there shall be a compromise 
between the two minds, which, it suggests, would 
really be the happy medium and more desirable and in 
better taste than the extremes of either. 

This is the condition represented by the Apostle, 
when he says, a double-minded man is inconsistent in 
all his ways. And alas, how many Christians are in 
this very condition of inconsistency: they profess on 
the one hand to be renewed in mind, and are actually 
so to some extent; yet on the other hand, in many of 
the affairs of life they are walking not after the spirit's 
direction but after the will of the flesh. They more 
or less feel this inconsistency, and their lives are not 
satisfactory to themselves, and far from satisfactory 
from the divine standpoint. Nor does the world appreciate 
them; for frequently it calls them hypocrites, 
pointing to their inconsistencies as proof. Their course 
is thoroughly disapproved by the Lord's Word which 
declares that none such shall constitute the Kingdom 
class, which shall be composed only of "overcomers," 
in whom the mind of the spirit has the control, the 
mastery, bringing even the thoughts of the heart into 
subjection to the will of God in Christ. 

The double-minded man, the man who has two 
wills in control, and who is obliged to compromise 
matters continually, by "splitting the difference" between 
the two minds, will be apt to find the old mind 
more and more securing control in his heart;— until 
finally his mind or will becomes as fleshly as it was before 
grace and truth reached him— full of selfishness. 
The only trace of the "new mind" remaining in such 
will be an outward semblance of respect for righteousness, 
truth and honesty, a "form of godliness" which, 
as a mere veneer, will serve to keep up outward appearances 
and respectability, while inwardly the heart, 
the will, is completely reprobate. Such have reached 
the condition of the scribes and Pharisees of old— they 
have become mere hypocrites, "whited sepulchres, full 
of all manner of corruption." 

What then is the right attitude of mind, what is the 
proper course to take? We answer that the proper 
course is to have only one mind, one will— the will of 
God— to permit the new mind, the new spirit, the new 
disposition, to have full control. As the Apostle says, 
"Let the mind of Christ dwell in you richly and 
abound," and it will bring forth good fruit, that will 
be a blessing to yourself and to others, and pleasing 
to the Lord: and such will be neither barren nor unfruitful 
in the knowledge of the Lord. We are to 
place ourselves in every particular under the control 
of the new mind, and as the Apostle again declares, 
"Make no provision for the flesh, to fulfil its desires." 
(Rom. 13:14.) The mind of the flesh, the desires of 



the flesh, are to be considered as mortal enemies,— to 
be fought against and exterminated so far as possible, 
and with them there is to be no compromise, no terms, 
no covenant, no agreement. "Mortify [kill, deaden] 
therefore your members [your mental members, your 
depraved tendencies] which are upon the earth."— 
Col. 3:5. 

This same thought of the necessity of having only 
the one will, the one set of principles before our minds, 
if we would be successful in making our calling and 
election sure, was enunciated by our Lord, when he 
said, "If thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be 
full of light." That is to say, if our eyes be focused 
in harmony together as one, the object before us will 
be seen in its true, proper light and shape, but if we 
were cross-eyed, our eyes glancing in different directions, 
every object looked at with both eyes would 
seem distorted. So with the eyes of understanding: 
if we attempt to look at matters from the heavenly 
standpoint, and at the same time from the earthly 
standpoint, the result will be unsatisfactory— confusion, 
uncertainty, incorrectness of judgment. 

As we have found that the old nature, if permitted 
to have a voice at all, would eventually capture the 
citadel of the heart, so we find also that if the new nature 
be granted full sway to overcome the will of the 
flesh, to bring every thought and word and deed into 
subjection to the will of God, this also means a gradual 
development, a growth in grace and in the knowledge 
and the will of God. It means that the entire 
heart is thus seized in the name of the Lord, and reckoned 
as his, and reckoned a pure heart on this account; 
but it means also a progressive battle with and a progressive 
victory over the weaknesses, the frailties of 
our mortal bodies; and it means additionally the establishment, 
in every quarter of our beings, of fortified 
defences against the besetments of the world, the flesh 
and the devil. Thus the developed Christian, whose 
eye is single to the pleasement of God, and whose mind, 
purpose or will is single to the service of the one Master, 
shall, by the grace of God, day by day, month by 
month, year by year, find the ability, more and more, 
to hinder his flesh from rendering service to Sin. And 
not only so, but his flesh, once the willing servant of 
sin until mortified, rendered dead to Sin, shall more 
and more be quickened, energized, by the new mind, 
to its service, and thus more and more become a servant 
of righteousness and of truth: so that it not only 
will be passively the Lord's, in the sense of not being 
an opponent of truth and right and purity, but so that 
it will be the Lord's in a positive sense, aggressively 
and actively engaged in opposition to sin and error, 
and in the service of truth and righteousness.— 
Rom. 8:11. 

R2336 : page 214 



HOW THE NEW MIND SHOULD RULE. 



Many gibes and taunts are thrown at the present 
House of Congress, whose Speaker and representative 
is the Hon. Thomas B. Reed, who is styled "the Czar 
and autocrat of the House." Nevertheless, and without 
attempting any discussion of the merits or demerits 
of the arrangement criticized, from their political and 
human standpoint, we see there a most fit illustration 
for our subject under consideration. 

The human brain is scientifically, phrenologically, 
subdivided into various organs, representative of various 
propensities or dispositions: these may be illustrated 
by the various representatives of the various States, 
assembled in the House of Congress. Each different 
organ has its own particular thought or interest, yet 
the will is not the expression of any one organ merely, 
but the voice of the majority. When a motion or 
bill is offered in Congress, it may be of special interest 
to only a few of the members, and the State interests 
which they represent. In such event, if personal or 
sectional selfishness ruled amongst the members, the 
matter in question could not be passed, because the 
majority would not be sufficiently interested to favor 
it; and hence, to accomplish its end it would be necessary 
to appeal to the selfishness of the various other 
members, by agreeing to favor certain interests of 
theirs in return for their cooperation. Thus, Congress, 
if each member and each state stood entirely separate, 
and without any combination, would be comparatively 
powerless, unless a degree of patriotism should be 
shown larger than we would have any reason to expect. 
Hence the tendency has always been to party division 
and party cooperation; the party in the majority having 
the control of the situation, and being held responsible 
accordingly for the results. So with our 
minds: if each organ stood wholly separate from the 
others, it could move only on lines of selfishness, unless 
it were perfect, which we know it is not. Hence 
in the human mind, as in Congress, party lines have 
been established, and for very much the same purpose. 
In the mind of the Christian the party lines are, the 
old mind and the new mind, the old self and the new 
self, the old creature and the new creature, the old 
will and the new will, the mind of righteousness, and 
the mind of sin, the mind of love and the mind of selfishness. 
All these various names describe the same 
two minds. 

In Congress it was found that as its number of 
representatives increased there was an increased tendency 
on the part of minorities to baffle or hinder the 
accomplishment of anything by the majority: the minority 
party would discuss the subject for hours, days 



and weeks, if permitted to do so, rather than let the 
matter go to a vote, in hope that in the end the will of 
the majority should be frustrated. But Speaker Reed, 
cooperating with the leaders of his party, concluded 
that it was not the intention of the law to hinder legislation, 
and that consequently the dominant party 
should have opportunity to proceed to enact the laws 
which it, as the majority of the body, deemed to be 
the proper laws. Consequently rules were laid down 
giving the Speaker, as the representative of the majority, 
certain privileges and powers, by which the opposition 
would be limited in its discussion of the various 
subjects, and the will of the majority more speedily 
and more thoroughly enacted. 

Now this is exactly the condition of things in the 
human heart, where the teachings of the Lord have 
been accepted, and where the propensities or organs 

R2337 : page 214 

of the mind have come to a strict party division;— the 
one the party of truth and righteousness and love, in 
harmony with the Lord, and the other the party of sin 
and selfishness, with contrary sentiments. If conversion 
has taken place it means that the higher organs 
of the mind, sufficient in number or in influence, have 
gained the control of the mind; that these preponderate 
in number or in influence; that they constitute the 
majority, and the evil propensities the minority. Any 
heart in which the evil propensities are in the majority 
and in control is an unconverted heart. 

And what was found in Congress respecting the 
disposition of minorities to baffle the will of the ruling 
majority is found also in our minds, namely, the disposition 
of our natural mind not only to be heard, 
but to foil and baffle and render void the will of the 
new mind, in respect to the control of the affairs of 
life. What the Scriptures propose to us, therefore, is 
illustrated again in Congress: the Scriptures propose 
that the new mind, having obtained the control, shall 
elect a Speaker, a head,— and that that head or Speaker 
for our every talent, directing all our interests and all 
our efforts, shall be Christ Jesus our Lord. They propose 
that we shall place full authority and power in 
the hands of the Lord, so that his word and will shall 
be our will, our law. And how safe it is for us to admit 
such a Czar, such an autocrat, to control us, 
since we have learned to know him as the very embodiment 
of justice, wisdom, and love. Safely we can 
trust our affairs in his hands. 

There are other analogies which might be drawn: 
for instance, the power of the Speaker of the House 
rests solely in the fact that it is the power of the majority. 
If the majority which placed him in power 
and gave him the authority which he exercises should 
become a minority, his power would immediately terminate; 



and the opposition party might give its representative 
equal power in an opposite direction. So 

R2337 : page 215 

with our hearts; only as our hearts voted to have the 
Lord in control, did he take charge; and if our wills, 
the preponderance of our propensities, our judgments, 
cease to be on the side of the Lord, he no longer retains 
his power in our hearts and lives, and the evil 
majority appoint a successor, in line with the selfish 
propensities, favoring everything selfish. 

In Congress, when any matter is brought up, 
each representative has an opportunity for expressing 
himself, either directly or indirectly, either on the floor 
personally, or through representatives in committee. 
And so with our wills: when a matter is presented by 
one organ of the mind, the other organs have a chance 
to respond, and to seek to influence the majority, and 
to overthrow the rule of righteousness. For instance, 
a suggestion is made to the mind by the organ of Combativeness, 
to the effect that there is a good, proper 
cause why the whole being should be angry, and undertake 
vengeful retaliation; and under the influence 
of the eloquence of Combativeness, various other of 
the lower organs would most surely be aroused; namely, 
Pride, Self-esteem, Destructiveness, Selfishness, 
etc., and in addition perhaps some of the higher organs 
might be temporarily swayed by the old sympathies, 
prejudice, antipathy, etc., to favor the angry, malicious 
and resentful course. Conscientiousness might 
excitedly declare that it was a righteous cause of indignation; 
Caution might join, and claim that if the 
thing were not now opposed violently, worse results 
would follow; even Spirituality and Veneration might 
be swayed into favoring the angry course, with suggestions 
that it was in the service of God, and a duty 
towards God, and toward righteousness, to be angry 
and to crush the opponent with retaliation and vengeance. 
Thus, for a moment the entire mind might 
be swayed toward the side of evil, yet without previous 
wilfulness or sin— because of the hereditary tendencies 
of the mind. 

But here the gavel of the Speaker is heard, Memory 
calls attention, and points out that the will of the 
majority has already been expressed to the contrary of 
such a course; and calls attention to the rules already 
adopted;— namely, to put away all anger, malice, hatred 
and strife, as being in general works of the flesh 
and of the devil. Memory calls attention to the fact 
that the majority adopted as the rule of action the 
words of the Speaker, Christ, "Love your enemies, do 
good to them that hate you, and speak evil of you." 
Commit your way unto the Lord, remembering that 
he has said, "Vengeance is mine, I will recompense." 
Where the will of the majority of organs is loyal to 



its own previous decision, the effect of Memory's calling 

attention to that law will be instantaneous: at once 

Conscientiousness, Veneration, Spirituality, Caution, 

and all the higher organs realize that they were about 

to make a mistake; and immediately they change front, 

fully supporting the law of the Speaker, Christ. Selfishness, 

Combativeness, Pride, etc., may attempt to 

argue the point, but immediately they are called to 

order and reminded that by vote of the majority they 

are strictly under the law of Christ, and all further 

discussion of the subject is forbidden. 

Similarly, illustrations might be drawn as representing 
other passions, tastes or desires of the flesh, 
which temporarily might seem to gain some control; 
but from the moment that Memory calls attention to 
the proposal as being in conflict with the law of the 
Master, there should be an instantaneous surrender. 
Such a course would prove that the will had all along 
been thoroughly loyal to the Lord, and that he reigns 
there. It proves the reign of Christ in that heart far 
better than if no suggestion to the contrary course had 
come up. And who cannot see that a life thus ordered, 
and under strictest control of the will of our Head, 
Christ Jesus, is not only the only proper life (the only 
one in which the new mind is properly exercised), but 
in addition to this the only mind which is a "sound 
mind." People who are continually carried from their 
moorings by their emotions show that their minds are 
unsound; such are continually proving to those around 
them that they have poor judgment. They are frequently 
angry, troubled, vexed, hurt; or continually 
falling into one wrong act or another, as they confess 
afterward. Indeed, the majority of the things at 
which they take offence, become angry, etc., prove to 
have been mistakes, nothing having been done or intended 
to anger, hurt, or injure them. And we know, 
not only from the Scriptures, but also from our own 
observation, that the world of mankind in general is 
thus of unsound mind; and, as the Apostle explains, 
the only ones in all the world who have even the spirit 
or disposition of a sound mind are the new creatures 
in Christ Jesus, who have the new mind, the new will, 
in control. These, as we have seen, would be liable 
to be carried away also, by evil passions, evil surmisings, 
etc., but those who have put themselves fully 
and completely under the control of Christ and his law 
of the New Covenant are kept from the extremes to 
which otherwise they would be as subject as others. 

The Apostle's exhortation to the double minded, 
is in place, and should be heeded promptly by all who 
realize that they have a double mind or will which can 
never please the Lord nor bring joy and blessing either 
now or hereafter: "Purify your hearts, ye double 
minded;"— purge your consciences by hearty obedience 
to the truth, by the washing of water through 
the Word. 



"Grant, Lord, a heart, submissive, meek, 
My great Redeemer's throne, 

Where only Christ is heard to speak, 
Where Jesus reigns alone; 

"A heart in every thought renewed, 

And full of love divine, 
Perfect and right, and pure and good, 

A copy, Lord, of thine." 

R2342 : page 216 

WHAT BECAME OF A LIE. 



"First somebody told it, 
Then the room wouldn't hold it, 
So the busy tongues rolled it 
Till they got it outside. 
When the crowd came across it 
They onward did toss it, 
Till it grew long and wide. 
From a very small lie, Sir, 
It grew deep and high, Sir, 
Till it reached the sky, Sir, 
And frightened the moon; 
For she hid her face, Sir, 
At the dreadful disgrace, Sir, 
That happened at noon. 

"This lie brought forth others, 
Dark sisters and brothers, 
And fathers and mothers 

A terrible crew. 
And while headlong they hurried, 
The people they flurried, 
And troubled and worried 

As lies always do. 
And so evil boded, 
This monstrous lie goaded, 
Till at last it exploded 

In smoke and in shame. 
While from mud and from mire 
The pieces flew higher, 
And hit the sad liar, 
And killed his good name." 

—Mrs. M. A. Kidder in Jewish Gazette. 



R2337 : page 216 

INTERESTING QUERIES. 



Question. The fact that our Lord received worship 
is claimed by some to be an evidence that while 
on earth he was God the Father disguised in a body of 
flesh and not really a man. Was he really worshiped, 
or is the translation faulty? 

Answer. Yes, we believe our Lord Jesus while 
on earth was really worshiped, and properly so. While 
he was not the God, Jehovah, he was a God. The 
word "God" signifies a "mighty one," and our Lord 
was indeed a mighty one. So it is stated in the 
first two verses of the gospel of John. It was proper for 
our Lord to receive worship in view of his having been 
the only begotten of the Father, and his agent in the 
creation of all things, including man. 

Besides, he had come to earth under the divine 
arrangement and accepted the condition of Messiahship, 
presenting himself to God as fallen man's sin-offering; 
besides, at his baptism he was anointed of the 
holy spirit as the Messiah, and authorized to carry out 
the great divine plan and to receive homage from both 
angels and men. This alone would have rendered 
worship proper even aside from his pre-human greatness 
as "the only begotten of the Father." 

CHRIST ADELPHIAN PROOF-TEXTS. 



Question. Some "Christadelphians" offer the following 
texts in proof that death ends all for a large 
majority of the human family— that the majority will 
never be awakened from the sleep of death.— Psa. 88:4,5; 
49:14. Isa. 26:14; 43:16,17; Obad. 16. 

Please let me have your explanation of the meaning 
of these texts. 

R2338 : page 216 

Answer. These texts should be interpreted in 
harmony with the holy spirit's interpretations given 
us in the words of our Lord and the apostles recorded 
in the New Testament. These declare that the hour 
is coming in which all that are in the grave shall hear 
the voice of the Son of Man and come forth, some unto 
the resurrection of life and some unto a resurrection 
by judgments. (John 5:29.) And we are assured by 
the Apostle that it is the will of God that "All should 
come to a knowledge of the truth that they may be 
saved;" and that to this end "Christ died for the ungodly," 
"gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified 
[to all] in due time." (1 Tim. 2:6.) Indeed, the 
Apostle assures us that the Kingdom class (the Church) 
now being selected is appointed to "judge the world" 
(1 Cor. 6:2); and that "God hath appointed a day" 



(an epoch or age) in the which this judgment or trial 
shall take place (Acts 17:3 1); and the picture of this 
in the symbols of Revelation shows the dead, small and 
great, standing before the great white throne of justice, 
mercy and love, and being tried (during the thousand 
years of Christ's reign), according to the law 
written in the Book and according to their works. 
(Rev. 20:1 1-13.) In interpreting any of the Old 
Testament Scriptures we need all the light and help 
which God has deemed proper to throw upon them 
through the New Testament revelations. If we did 
not observe and use this New Testament key furnished 
us by the holy spirit, all of the prophecies and types 
of the Old Testament would be meaningless or worse 
to us. Looking at the passages you cite, from this the 
proper standpoint, we find as follows:— 

Psa. 88:4,5. The writer is not declaring his own 
opinion, but is merely saying how he is regarded by 
others, "I am counted with them that go down into 
the pit: I am [counted] as a man having no strength 
—a cast away among the dead; [counted] like the slain 
that lie in the grave, whom thou rememberest no more: 
and like them that are cut off by thy hand." 

The Lord reveals the fact, in the Old Testament 
as well as in the New, that there will be some who 
will be utterly cut off from life in the second death. 
But none will be in this class whose hearts are in the 
attitude of the Psalmist. The only ones who will be 
of this class will be such as have spurned the grace of 
God, after it has been made known to them. (Heb. 6:4-6.) 
The Psalmist is saying that he is disesteemed 
and disowned, as one who is the subject of divine displeasure, 

R2338 : page 217 

counted unworthy of any future life, remanded 
to the second death. 

Psa. 49:14. "Like sheep they are laid in the 
grave; death shall feed on them; and the upright shall 
have dominion over them in the morning." The 
prophet David is here speaking of a certain class who 
vainly think to build up fortunes and to make their 
names endure, without realizing what is the true 
wealth of character which should be sought. But, there 
is nothing in this to indicate that death will end all 
for these. Quite to the contrary, the statement that 
"The upright shall have dominion over them in the 
morning," proves that death does not end all for these; 
but that in the morning of the Millennial Day, when 
Christ and the Church shall be granted the Kingdom 
under the whole heavens, then these shall be awakened 
and come under his dominion. This will be God's 
method of bringing them under the blessings of the 
seed of Abraham which he has promised shall come 
"to all the families of the earth." 

Isa. 26:14. The first nine verses of this chapter 



are a prophetic description of the Millennial day,— 

when the land of Judah has been reclaimed (verse 1) 

and when the nations of earth are walking in the light 

(teaching) of the glorified Church— the New Jerusalem. 

(Compare verse 2 and Rev. 21:24-26 and Isa. 60:11,18-22.) 

Verse 5 describes the humbling of the 

proud and the fall of mystic Babylon. Verse 9 shows 

how some (the body of Christ) have desired and 

prayed "thy Kingdom come" throughout the "night" 

of the Gospel age while waiting for the Millennial 

dawning; and how the judgments of the "day of 

trouble" which introduces the Millennial reign are 

necessary to teach the world righteousness. Verses 10 and 1 1 

show, however, that even those terrible lessons 

will be insufficient for some who, even in the land 

of uprightness (the Millennial or "new earth" state), 

will be unjust still, and refuse to recognize the mighty 

"hand" of God. Yet they shall see, and eventually 

all enemies of the Lord shall be destroyed. 

Verses 12-15 represent the faithful taking a glance 
backward, and acknowledging that the deliverance has 
been wholly God's work. "O Lord our God, other 
lords [rulers, powers] have had dominion over us [Sin, 
the great task -master, and his representatives in civil, 
ecclesiastical and financial despotism, including trusts, 
combines and every evil system which oppresses men 
at the present time;— some of which are now highly 
esteemed among the oppressed]; but of Thee only 
would we make mention [now as our ruler]— of thy 
name. They are dead, they will not live again; they 
are departed, they will not arise again: because thou 
hast visited and destroyed them and made every memorial 
of them to perish."— See Leeser's Translation. 

Ah, yes! every power of evil and oppression shall 
be destroyed forever, never to rise again, when the 
kingdom is the Lord's and he is the Governor amongst 
the nations. 

Isa. 43:16,17. "Thus saith the Lord,. ..who 
maketh a way in the sea and a path in the mighty 
waters; which bringeth forth the chariot and the horse, 
the army and the power; they shall lie down together, 
they shall not rise: they are extinct, they are quenched 
as tow." Nothing in this statement bears upon the 
case of any individual in the world: it is a statement 
respecting horses, chariots and armies. The Lord will 
bring low, even to destruction, all the implements of 
war; as is written, "He maketh wars to cease, unto 
the ends of the earth." When once the armies of 
strife have been overthrown, they shall never rise again; 
but the individuals who compose those armies are 
members of the Adamic race, whose redemption was 
secured by the great sacrifice for sin; and in due time 
each and all who have not yet come to a knowledge of 
the truth, must be brought to that knowledge, and 
have the opportunity of believing, obeying, and obtaining 
everlasting life through Christ. 



Obad. 16. "For as they have drunk upon my 
holy mountain so shall all the nations drink continually, 
yea, they shall drink, and they shall swallow 
down, and they shall be as tho they had not been." 

The Lord through the prophet describes (verse 15) 
the events of "the day of the Lord," the approaching 
time of trouble, in which all the nations (improperly 
translated heathen) shall come into judgment, and be 
caused to drink of the cup of the Lord's anger. (Jer. 25:28,29.) 
When the nations fall during the coming 
time of trouble it will mean their utter destruction, as 
was illustrated in Nebuchadnezzar's image of these 
nations (Dan. 2:35,44,45). The same destruction of 
the nations is pictured in Daniel's dream respecting 
the same Kingdoms (Dan. 7:11-14,27). But altho 
the nations shall never rise up again, and altho only 
God's Kingdom will thereafter be recognized, yet the 
people who composed the various nations, "all the 
families of the earth," shall come forth from the grave 
to be blessed by God's kings and priests— "the holy 
nation, the peculiar people, the Seed of Abraham." 

Question. Please refer me to any of your writings 
explanatory of Zech. 13:6. 

Answer. We have nothing treating Zech. 13:6. 
From the connection of verse one with the preceding chapter, 
it would seem to imply that in this day of 
trouble already commenced, there will be a general 
change of front on the part of religious teachers who 
will be so greatly ashamed of the false gospel which 
they have proclaimed, that they will desire to disavow 
their previous occupation. In this view the wounds 
would seem to indicate severe usage received by them 
from their former flocks. The hand is a symbol of 
power, and the wounding of the hand would seem to 

R2338 : page 218 

imply injury or destruction of the power or influence 
once exercised by these "shepherds." The wounds 
here mentioned seem to have no reference to the 
wounding of the hands of our Lord at the crucifixion: 
there is no connection apparent. 

Verse seven seems to begin a totally different subject, 
no longer treating of the false shepherds and reprobate 
prophets, but of the true servants of God and 
the fact that God would permit trial and tribulations 
to come against such for their proving and development, 
nevertheless covering the little ones, the weak 
ones, with his hand— power. 

Question. Is not the denomination known as 
"Disciples" on a proper basis of freedom? Is there 
any cause for considering it a section or ward in "that 
Great City, Babylon," from which the call is, "Come 
out of her, my people? " —Rev. 18:1-5. 

Answer. The denomination known as "Disciples" 
professedly stands just where we stand and 



where the early Church stood, as respects its declaration 

that the Bible is the only standard for faith and 

practice. However, all will agree that very few churches 

of this denomination practice what they all theoretically 

profess. While they have no written creed, 

they very generally have an unwritten creed which is 

most positive and arbitrary in many respects and particulars. 

Were this not the case, every one of their 

gatherings would be very glad to welcome any servant 

of the truth who would attempt to prove his teachings 

by the Word of God only: and in such event, the 

"Disciple Denomination" would very speedily be 

thoroughly impregnated with what we denominate 

"present truth"— the "harvest" message. 

If you have been so fortunate as to find one of the 
few congregations of "Disciples" where the spirit as 

R2339 : page 218 

well as the theory of liberty prevails, you have been 
extremely favored and are to be congratulated. And 
if your articles to the Standard are received when full 
liberty has been exercised in their preparation, this 
will be another subject for congratulation. Perhaps 
the test for yourself, the congregation and the 
management of the paper, is still future. Perhaps, as 
you come to get clearer views respecting present truth, 
and as you do not shun to declare the whole counsel of 
God (wisely, but boldly), you may find that the attitude 
toward you may change. Let us hope that they 
may prove to be true "Bereans" and will search the 
Scriptures daily, to see whether these things be so: 
and that finding them they will lay hold of them with 
alacrity and zeal. If so, it will mean a great revival 
in the Church, a great blessing. But if the truth does 
not prove a savor of life unto life to the Church, it is 
very apt to prove the reverse— a savor of death unto 
death, and will mean violent opposition to you and to 
all others who in any manner or degree call in question 
the cherished dogmas of "Disciples." 

We advise that you put the matter to the test earnestly, 
courageously, calmly; casting all your care upon 
the Lord. Let him mark out your way by his 
providence; on your part merely making sure that you 
are faithful to him— faithful to the truth as he sends 
it to you. We caution you, however, not to put your 
light under a bushel, and not to refuse further light 
for fear of consequences. "The fear of man bringeth 
a snare." Remember, that our Lord put his Word 
and himself on a parity, saying, "He that is ashamed 
of me and my Word, of him will I also be ashamed." 

We shall expect to hear from you before very 
long, either that you have been greatly used and 
blessed to the good of the church you are connected 
with, helping them out of the darkness into the light 
of present truth, or that they have rejected your testimony 



and that you have stepped out of the system 

in order to preserve to yourself "the liberty wherewith 

Christ makes free." 

IMMORTAL VS. INCORRUPTIBLE. 



Question. The terms immortal, immortality, and 
incorruption, incorruptible are used in the Scriptures in 
a manner rather confusing to the average reader. 
Please state the distinction between them. 

Answer. The translators have helped to confuse 
this subject by rendering the same Greek word whiles 
one way and whiles another: and while there are two 
Greek words used and with different thoughts, yet our 
English words Immortal, and Immortality, really represent 
the thoughts of both Greek words,— Aphthartos 
and Athanasia. 

Coming down to the fine shades of meaning,— 
Athanasia signifies, deathless, death-proof, that which 
cannot die. Aphthartos signifies, that which cannot 
corrupt. 

(1) The following texts are the only ones in 
which Athanasia occurs:— 

"This mortal must put on immortality," i.e., deathlessness. 
-1 Cor. 15:53. 

"This mortal shall have put on immortality," i.e., 
deathlessness.— 1 Cor. 15:54. 

"Who [God] only hath immortality," i.e., deathlessness. 
-1 Tim. 6:16. 

(2) The following texts show all the Scripture 
uses of Aphthartos and its derivative Aphtharsia:— 

"Now unto the King eternal, immortal [aphthartos] 
—incorruptible]."— 1 Tim. 1:17. 

"A corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible 
[aphthartos]" one.— 1 Cor. 9:25. 

"The dead shall be raised incorruptible [aphthartos]." 
-1 Cor. 15:52. 

"To an inheritance incorruptible [aphtharsia]."— 
1 Pet. 1:4. 

"Not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible [aphthartos]. 
-1 Pet. 1:23. 

"Seek for glory, honor and immortality [aphtharsia— 
incorruption]."— Rom. 2:7. 

"Who brought life and immortality [aphtharsia— 
incorruption] to light."— 2 Tim. 1:10. 

"It is sown in corruption, raised in incorruption 
[aphtharsia]."- 1 Cor. 15:42. 

"Neither doth corruption inherit incorruption 
[aphtharsia]."- 1 Cor. 15:50. 

"For this incorruptible must put on incorruption 
[aphtharsia]."— 1 Cor. 15:53. 

"When this corruptible shall have put on incorruption 
[aphtharsia]."- 1 Cor. 15:54. 

Applying this information, we find that altho the 



two words represent in many respects the same thought, 
yet by antithesis the Apostle brings out their shaded 
differences in 1 Cor. 15:53,54, by using one word with 
reference to those saints who should be "asleep" or 

R2338 : page 219 

under the power of corruption and would put on a condition 
of incorruption by resurrection; while those saints 
who would remain until the "change" would pass from 
mortal to immortal (deathless) conditions. But both 
will be exactly alike, when the one group is resurrected 
and the other group is "changed" in the moment 
of death without an interim of sleep or corruption. 

IS IT THE GENERAL OR THE FIRST RESURRECTION? 



Question. Does the resurrection described in 
1 Cor. 15:42-53, include the whole world, or only the 
overcoming Church? 

Answer. It does not at all refer to the world, but 
exclusively to the first resurrection— the Church's. 
This is evident from the reading of the common version. 
All having a share in it get "immortality," 
"incorruption," "glory," "power," and "a spiritual 
body." See verses 42-44,53,54. None are to get 
such blessings but the overcomers, the "blessed and 
holy that have part in the first [chief] resurrection on 
whom the second death hath no power," the class 
which will live and reign with Christ a thousand 
years.— Rev. 20:4,6. 

Furthermore, the Greek text guards against the 
supposition that the resurrection described could be 
other than that of the Church by using emphasis 
which expressed in English would make verse 42 read, 
"Thus also is the resurrection of the dead." 

Question. Will deceased infants, begotten of justified 
parents in this age, have spiritual (angelic) being 
in the resurrection life? If not, what will differentiate 
them from other deceased infants? This question 
is suggested by the reading of the June 15th 
TOWER, page 181. 

Answer. "That which is begotten of the flesh is 
flesh." Children under the conditions you mention 
are not begotten of the spirit, and hence will not be 
spirit beings. Their perfection will be of the human 
nature, accomplished (as with the remainder of the 
world) through the processes of restitution, during the 
"times of restitution"— the Millennial age. There 
will be no difference between these and the remainder 
of the world (children of unbelieving parents) during 
the Millennial age, except whatever may come to them 
in the natural way, in that they may be better born, 
less depraved in their natural organism. The justification 



feature mentioned by the Apostle (1 Cor. 7:14) 

and by us in the TOWER of June 15, page 181, applies 

merely to the present age, and to children before they 

reach years of discretion and personal responsibility. 

It merely signifies that the children of believing parents 

are subjects of divine providence, as well as their 

parents, during the present life, until they reach years 

of discretion; and that such will be under divine providence 

and leading, to the intent that they may be 

the better prepared for becoming obedient children of 

God on their own account at maturity. All mankind 

will ultimately come to favorable conditions, physical, 

mental and moral. This will mean no less favorable 

conditions for the children of believers in the next age, 

but more favorable conditions for others. 



R2339 : page 219 

THE SIN OF COVETOUSNESS. 

--JULY 31.-1 Kings 21:4-16.- 

"Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's house."— Ex. 20:17. 

JEZEBEL is marked by the incidents of this lesson, 

if we had no other record of her evil way, 

as being a most diabolical woman. The tenderness 

which belongs to her sex had entirely given place to 

the feeling of envy, pride and ambition, incident to 

her great exaltation to power as the wife of King Ahab. 

She was ready to instigate perjury, and the foulest of 

murder, to gratify her whims, or to please those who 

truckled to her vanity. And the terrible degradation 

to which the people of Israel and their elders, who 

were presumably of average or more than average intelligence, 

had descended, is shown by their willingness 

to obey their wicked queen, in utter disregard of their 

own consciences and of justice. It is doubtful whether 

our disgust should be greater with the queen, who instigated 

the evil, or with the elders, who so supinely 

became her tools to accomplish it. This shows, however, 

that where a people lose sight of the grand teachings 

of the law of the Lord, and come under the influence 

of the devil, through other religions, there is no 

knowing where the corruption of morals will end— all 

sense of justice and right seems to become obliterated 

in proportion as people are separated from the Lord 

and from the word of his testimony. 

The fact that infidels of to-day are not always immoral 
is no contradiction of this thought, for altho they 
may reject the Lord in their hearts, they cannot reject 

R2340 : page 219 



nor get away from the influences of his law of justice 
which has come to be recognized throughout the entire 
civilized world, and made the basis of all civil law. 
Besides, they are continually in touch with Christian 
influences, and some of them (for instance, Robert 
Ingersoll) received from Christian parents a good 
moral basis of character, which would not exhaust in 
one generation, even tho the faith were lost from it. 

The beginning of this crime perpetrated by Jezebel 
and the elders of Israel— the murder of Naboth— 
was Ahab's sin of covetousness. He coveted Naboth's 
vineyard, and wished to purchase it, and, as the sequel 
shows, altho he did not perpetrate the crime of 
murder himself, he was quite satisfied with the crime 
and its results, and hastened to appropriate the murdered 
man's vineyard at the earliest opportunity. 
There is a great lesson here for Christian people to-day. 
While the crime of murder is recognized and 

R2340 : page 220 

thoroughly reprobated, the crime of covetousness is 
now not only general and common, but almost approved 
as proper. It seems to be generally practised, 
and almost without a suspicion as to its being wrong, 
sinful, condemned of the Lord, and fruitful of many 
evil works of the flesh and of the devil. 

We do not mean to charge as covetousness a desire 
to prosper as well as one's neighbor: desires are 
covetous when we wish to possess and enjoy that which 
we see in the possession of our neighbor: it implies a 
willingness to take from him a part or all of his prosperity, 
and to appropriate the same to ourselves. This 
spirit of covetousness may be readily discerned among 
business men and manufacturers; less readily discerned, 
but nevertheless present, in the ranks of labor, and in 
the social circle. It is unnecessary to point out how 
business people envy one another success, and seek to 
attract from one another the trade which brings the 
success. And in the ranks of labor, especially where 
competition is open, it is not infrequently the case 
that the workman will disparage the work or character 
of a fellow-workman, in order to have favor with the 
overseer or employer, or in hope of personal advancement. 
These are illustrations of covetousness in 
operation. 

In society it works very stealthily, very quietly, 
fearing that it should react upon the covetous one unfavorably; 
hence, in society, the effort to undermine 
the character of another and thereby to advance one's 
self in the good graces of others, is kept under cover, 
and ably assisted by its yoke-fellow, hypocrisy. When 
covetousness sees another occupying a preferred place, 
it stealthily conceals the dagger with which it would 
smite the Naboth that thwarts its ambitions. It 
sometimes assumes a mask of love, and strikes the dagger 



of scandal under professions of love and esteem, 
or of pity and sympathy. At other times it has the 
hypocritical mask of duty, religion, fidelity to God, 
etc., while it seeks to stab Naboth in his vitals, and 
to gain possession of the vineyard coveted,— or whatever 
it may be. 

Nor is the Church of God free from those who 
have this spirit of covetousness. It inspires many 
petty jealousies and envyings and strifes as to which 
should be greater, for honorable positions, etc. And 
how many large and small scandals have been the results 
of covetousness, and a desire to break down the 
influence of one, for the purpose of establishing the 
influence of another, or of himself or herself? 

Ahab's covetousness was of the most approved 
kind, in that it sought to act through others, and 
stoned Naboth to death by proxy, rather than directly 
by his own act. That Ahab fully endorsed the conduct 
of Jezebel is shown by his ready acceptance of the 
fruits of her villainy; and this fact, in connection with 
the fact that the Lord sent the reproof as much to 
Ahab as to Jezebel, leaves room for the inference that 
he had intentionally worked upon the feelings of Jezebel, 
with a view to getting her (more courageous for 
wickedness than himself) to devise and carry out plans 
for the satisfaction of his covetousness. So some to-day 
seem to feel free to covet the possessions of others 
—social, religious, financial or otherwise— and to take 
possession of these, if possible, but they strive to have 
the dirtiest part of the work done by others, or at least 
not directly by themselves. But such unquestionably 
are sharers in every crime to which their covetousness 
by any road may lead others. 

Let all who have named the name of Christ be 
especially on guard respecting this deceptive covert 
sin; and the best ounce of protection that we can take 
against it (far better than any pound of cure after 
it has entered in) is to have our hearts permeated with 
the spirit of love, of which we are told, "Love worketh 
no ill to his neighbor." And more than this, 
"Love envieth not, seeketh not her own [interests 
merely, but is concerned for the interests of others] 
is kind, helpful, generous, good." 

As an illustration of how hypocrisy usually accompanies 
covetousness, seeking to cover up the real 
motives and intentions not only from fellow-creatures, 
but from one's own conscience, and from the Lord, 
note in this lesson how Jezebel accomplished her purpose 
through the appointment of a feast, and the giving 
of Naboth, the victim, a seat of honor in connection 
therewith. Alas, that it must be said that religion 
has often been injured by being made the tool of 
hypocrisy and covetousness. And similar principles 
are still at work in the world, and the same great prime 
mover and instigator of evil is still master of ceremonies, 
and as willing as ever to help forward every wicked 



cause and to prosper the evil work and way of the 
covetous. "We are not ignorant of his devices." 
"My soul, be on thy guard, 

Ten thousand foes arise; 
The hosts of sin are pressing hard 

To draw thee from the prize." 
But while the Lord did not interfere to protect 
Naboth, nor to prevent the machinations of the Evil 
One and his servants, he nevertheless took note of the 
evil, and did not permit it to pass unpunished. Accordingly, 
when Ahab went in to take possession of 
the vineyard, and to rejoice his heart that his covetous 
desires had reached accomplishment, the Lord sent 
Elijah to meet him in the vineyard. Ahab recognized 
the prophet at once, and evidently smitten by his conscience, 
exclaimed: "Hast thou found me, O mine 
enemy?" And Elijah answered, "I have found thee, 
because thou hast sold thyself to work evil in the sight 

R2340 : page 221 

of the Lord." Then follows the prophecy of violent 
deaths to his children, and that the dogs should eat 
Jezebel; all literally fulfilled later. 

However, Ahab was learning to have great confidence 
in the word of Elijah, and in the power of Jehovah; 
and when he heard this prophecy, "he rent his 
clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, 
and lay in sackcloth and went softly." On account 
of this degree of repentance the Lord sent word through 
Elijah that the calamities prophesied would not be in 
Ahab's day, but in the days of his sons. The fact 
that sinners may for a time go unpunished, the Apostle 
Peter shows us, is a mark of God's patience and 
forbearance, and not an indication that he will not reward 
both the welldoer and the evildoer. 

Some one has said, "Covetousness is like drinking 
the salt waters of the sea, which only increase the 
thirst; or like piling wood on the fire, which only makes 
it burn the fiercer; or like climbing higher, which only 
enlarges the horizon of the desires." The only covetousness 
encouraged by the spirit of righteousness and 
the Word of the Lord is that mentioned by the Apostle, 
"Covet earnestly the best gifts"— the gifts of divine 
grace, which neither rob others, nor make God 
the poorer. 



R2340 : page 221 

ELIJAH'S SUCCESSOR, ELISHA. 

-AUG. 7.-2 KINGS 2:6-15.- 
"How much more shall your Heavenly Father give 



the holy spirit to them that ask it!"— Luke 11:13. 

IT WOULD appear that the lesson which the Lord 
taught Elijah by the wind, the earthquake, the 
lightning, and the still, small voice, was appreciated 
and acted upon. Elijah had expected the Reformation 
word to go forward like a terrific windstorm or 
like the earthquake, or like the fiery lightning, and 
when it did not take such form, he fled, discouraged, 
from the scene of his efforts, and wished to die. Now, 
he was to understand that the reformation was to work 
more secretly, more quietly, in the hearts of the people, 
before it would give great outward manifestations. 
The Lord's inquiry of him, "What doest thou here, 
Elijah?" evidently gave him to see that he had discontinued 
the Lord's work, and for the time was out 
of the service; but, under the Lord's direction, he returned, 
and began again his work in Israel, following 
more closely the lines indicated by his lesson, seeking 
to have the people hear "the still, small voice," the 

R2341 : page 221 

Lord's message to their consciences. Nor can we doubt 
that he was greatly encouraged to reengage in this 
work, by the Lord's assurance that altho his people 
were not courageous, not bold in defence of the truth, 
and in opposition to evil, but rather lacking in firmness 
and courage, nevertheless there were yet seven 
thousand persons in Israel who had not been so weak-kneed 
as to bow to Baal. 

After attending to his commission, to anoint Hazael 
and Jehu, and Elisha, the prophet seems to have given 
his special attention to the founding of "schools of the 
prophets" in various parts of the land of Israel. These 
would appear to have been prophetic schools, gatherings 
of religious men, faithful to Jehovah, who desired 
to learn his will and word and law more particularly. 
And these in turn, we may suppose, exercised in their 
various communities a wholesome influence for righteousness, 
and the worship of the true God. Thus the 
"still, small voice" was operating. The gain in influence 
and respect for the true worship, as opposed 
to idolatry, is manifest from the fact that Jezebel, altho 
still as bitterly opposed as ever, seemingly made 
no effort to interfere with Elijah, or with the schools 
of the prophets; whereas, before, she had caused the 
death of a similar class. Public opinion, altho not 
very pronounced at that time, nevertheless had to be 
respected, and that in proportion as the truth set the 
people free from the superstitions of error. 

There are many profitable lessons for us of the 
present day, along these same lines. The great antitypical 
Jezebel, "the mother of harlots," alarmed the 
reformers of the sixteenth century by her threats, and 
caused them to flee and to desert many of the prominent 



principles of the Reformation, for fear of the consequences; 
yet in the Lord's due time the antitypical 
Elijah— the Church— was refreshed in spirit, and 
learned the lesson that God's revolutions were not to 
be expected along the lines of wholesale conversions 
from sin to righteousness, from ignorance to knowledge, 
from error to truth; but that the truth was to be 
inculcated gradually, and was to do its work among 
the people, as the "still, small voice" of righteousness, 
of conscience, of God. It is along these lines that the 
truth has been progressing for the last three centuries. 

Moreover, in connection with the present "harvest 
truth," many of us have been at first inclined to expect 
powerful reactions, social upheavals, lightning-like 
transitions "out of darkness into his marvelous 
light," as it is now shining. And the failure of such 
expectations is inclined to send us away into the wilderness, 
discouraged, as was the case with our prototype, 
Elijah. We, like him, are to learn lessons, that 
the inculcation of truth, according to the Lord's plan, 
is to be a gradual work, and we, like him, are to perseveringly 
engage in its gradual spread. Now, as then, 
"those who fear the Lord speak often together"— 

R2341 : page 222 

come together as schools for the study of prophecy,— 
for the study of the "good, acceptable and perfect will 
of God." Now, as then, these schools or gatherings 
of persons sufficiently interested to desire to know the 
will of the Lord, are on the increase. 

The time came for the end of Elijah's work, and 
for Elisha to take his place and do the Lord's work 
along slightly different lines. Elijah and Elisha were 
men of totally different types; Elisha was an influential 
and comparatively wealthy farmer, as is indicated 
by the large number of oxen working under his supervision, 
and presumably upon his own farm— twelve 
yokes of oxen. We may presume him to have been a 
man of considerably more personal refinement than 
Elijah, and that he dressed differently accordingly. 
Elijah was known as the man with the leathern girdle 
about his loins, and a mantle, which sometimes he 
wore, and sometimes he removed,— generally living in 
wilderness places; and, we may presume that he had 
rather a rustic and wild appearance. 

Elijah's method of announcement to Elisha that 
he was invited to become an associate in the work, and 
his intimation that he might be the successor in the 
office of servant of the Lord, as prophet, was indicated 
by throwing his mantle over Elisha's shoulder, Elijah 
removing the mantle again, and continuing on his 
journey. Elisha understood the matter, and quite 
evidently was whole-hearted, inasmuch as we see no 
evidence of halting between two opinions. He decided 
at once that he would accept the opportunity; telling 



Elijah that he would be with him directly, as soon 
as he had bidden farewell to his parents. Then, by 
way of manifesting to the Lord and to the people his 
appreciation of this call to the service of a prophet, he 
made a feast to the people, and shortly after joined 
Elijah. 

As Elijah represents the Church of this Gospel 
age, so we understand that Elisha represents the successors 
of the Church of this age, the class which will 
take up the work of the Lord as successors to the Elijah 
class, after the latter has been joined to the Lord 
in the invisible heavenly Kingdom— "changed," translated, 
become spirit beings, according to the power of 
the first resurrection. In harmony with this view, we 
find that Elisha was not called until about the close of 
Elijah's service— "when the Lord would take up Elijah 
into heaven." 

Our lesson shows that, while Elijah had called 
Elisha according to divine direction, and while Elisha 
had started to keep Elijah company, yet the latter 
seemed bent on separating himself from Elisha, requesting 
him frequently to tarry at the different schools 
of the prophets which they visited, namely, at Gilgal, 
at Bethel and at Jericho. But no argument persuaded 
Elisha to desert Elijah; he seemed to understand that 
the degree of his blessing would depend upon the closeness 
of his company with Elijah, and this evidently 
was the truth, and the attempts to have him stop at 
the various places on the journey were with a view to 
testing his earnestness and fidelity. Had he stopped 
he would not have received the great blessing which 
he eventually got. 

Applying this as a type at the present time, we 
see that the time for the taking up of the Elijah class, 
"the overcomers," "the little flock," of this Gospel 
age, has arrived. An Elisha class mingles with the 
overcomers, yet is a separate class; and various trials, 
disappointments and sittings are encountered, the design 
of which is to have these, if they will, turn back, 
separate themselves from the Elijah company, and 
those who are sifted out by the way will neither be of 
the one class nor the other, according to our understanding 
of this type and also of the general Scriptures. 

Elisha's special desire, above all things, was to 
have a large measure of the spirit of the Lord, the 
same spirit which had operated through Elijah, and 
this was his prayer: "I pray that a double portion of 
thy spirit may be upon me." Elijah's answer to this 
request implies that the faithfulness of the Elisha class 
will have to do with the measure of the Elijah spirit 
which will descend to it. So we understand it will be 
with all who become the successors of the Gospel 
Church as representatives of the Lord and his cause in 
the end of this age. The larger the degree of their 
sympathy and fellowship with the overcoming Church, 
the larger will be the blessing which will come to them 



consequently and the larger will be their future privileges 
in connection with the work of the Lord. 

A chariot of the Lord, with horses as of fire, parted 
Elijah from Elisha. It is easier to understand the 
type than to fully comprehend what its antitype will 
be. The chariot of fire undoubtedly typified the chariot 
of glory— the change from human to spirit conditions, 
which will separate the little flock from humanity, and 
by which the Lord will receive them unto himself. But 
it may also signify more than this, for fire and brightness 
are not only used as symbols of glory, but also as 
symbols for the trials and difficulties by which the 
Lord's people are prepared for glory: thus, the Apostle 
speaks of "the fiery trials which shall try you." 
The chariot of fire may therefore signify also, that the 
last members of the Gospel Church will be separated 
from the world under very trying circumstances, fiery 
trials; but that these, nevertheless, will be merely the 
agencies, the chariots by which the Lord will receive 
them to himself. 

Furthermore, the record is that Elijah was taken 
up in a whirlwind; and applying this to the last members 

R2341 : page 223 

of the Church, would seem to indicate trouble 
also, because whirlwinds are used symbolically in the 
Scriptures to represent trouble. We will, therefore, 
not be surprised if the last members of the Church, 
the body of Christ to be taken to the Lord, should be 
taken in the midst of fiery trials and a whirlwind of 
trouble. This seems to be indicated by another type 
of the same class, given us in the Scriptures— John the 
Baptist, who was imprisoned and finally beheaded.* 

Having seen Elijah to the last, Elisha understood 
that his request was to be granted, and that a double 
portion of the spirit of the Lord, which was with Elijah, 
should be upon him. He took up the fallen mantle 
of Elijah as his own, and coming to the river Jordan, 
smote it with the mantle, as Elijah had done, saying, 
"Where is the Lord God of Elijah?" That is to say, 
Is not the Lord God of Elijah with me? If so, then 
the same power of God exercised through Elijah will 
be exercised through me. And his faith was rewarded, 
for Jordan was divided, as for Elijah. Thenceforth 
he was the chief teacher in the schools which Elijah 
had established, and was so recognized. 

We do not understand that Elijah was taken to 
heaven, in the same sense that the Gospel Church will 
be taken to heaven. Elijah was taken up into heaven 
physically, while the Church is to be "changed," because 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 8. 



R2342 : page 223 

"flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of 
God." But Elijah was flesh and blood, human; Elijah 
had no change of nature; he lived before the time 
of the call to the divine nature; which began with the 
Gospel age. He therefore did not go to heaven, in 
the sense that the Church will go to heaven. He was 
not greater than John the Baptist, of whom our Lord 
said, "There hath not arisen a greater prophet than 
John the Baptist, and yet I say unto you that the least 
one in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he." 
The Kingdom of Heaven class was not started until 
our dear Redeemer's first advent, when he gave himself 
a ransom for all, and began the selection of the 
little flock, the Kingdom class. And it was his own 
testimony through John, centuries after Elijah's day, 
that "No man hath ascended up to heaven save he 
which came down from heaven, even the Son of 
Man." (Jno. 3:13.) Elijah, therefore, according 
to the Scriptures, could have no higher position 
than that of the other prophets of his time, 
including John the Baptist, all honorably mentioned 
by the Apostle (Heb. 1 1:38-40): "of whom the world 
was not worthy: they wandered in deserts, and in 
mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth,... 
and these all having obtained a good report through 
faith, received not the promise [the things promised]: 
God having provided some better thing for us [the 
Gospel Church], that they without us should not be 
made perfect." Elijah, as one of these prophets, will 
be honored and blessed after the antitypical Elijah (the 
Gospel Church) has been glorified. 

Nor does the fact that Elijah appeared on the 
Mount of Transfiguration have any bearing upon the 
case, or in any manner or degree prove that he did not 
die; for, as we have already shown, the scene on the 
Mount of Transfiguration was a vision (see Lesson in 
TOWER, April 1). If there were anything to prove 
that Elijah had not yet tasted death in the full sense 
of the word, it would still not prove that he had been 
changed to spiritual conditions, but merely that he had 
been carried physically away from the earth, and miraculously 
preserved elsewhere for a season or time: but 
inasmuch as we see nothing to be accomplished by 
this, it is our understanding that, while he was taken 
up from Elisha in the chariot of fire, he no doubt was 
buried somewhere by the Lord, just as Moses was buried 
secretly. 

The story of Elijah, and especially of the record 
of the end of his career can only be understood properly 
when recognized as being typical of the matters 
connected with the Gospel Church, and the close of 
its career. Let each one who hopes to be of the glorified 
body of Christ seek to be faithful to the Lord, 
after the example of Elijah, and according to the instructions 



of his Word, and the leading of his spirit, 

to-day; that we may be among those who shall be accounted 

worthy to be changed, in a moment, in the 

twinkling of an eye, in death. Faithful is he who has 

called us, who also will do for us all that he has so 

graciously promised, ultimately transforming us to the 

perfection of his own divine nature.— 2 Pet. 1:4. 



page 223 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Texas. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I found a good 
interest at the last two points where I preached. 
To our joy the prejudice of many people is cooling 
greatly, while the bigots and self-willed are enraged 
wonderfully. 

At some places near here, where ten years ago I 
could not have gotten a hearing, they now invite me to 
meet them and preach for them. But those whose 
"craft" is in danger are not enjoying this. Our 
prayer is, Speed on the good work and let God's name 
be glorified. 

Yours in the work, S. WILLIAMS. 

Georgia. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your discourse in the 
TOWER, "Remember the Sabbath Day," presents a 
grand and wonderful view of the Christian Sabbath 
which my mind had never conceived. I truly join you 
in the earnest wish that all Christians could see it so: 
that our God is too gracious to us who are his to limit 
our Sabbath of rest to a single day of the week, but on 
the contrary extends it through all the days of all the 
weeks of all the years of our Christian life, during 
which we may rest in full assurance of the ransom 
paid for us by our great Redeemer, free from any passionate 
anxiety concerning our final deliverance, of 
which no man needs try to assure us, because God 
has been pleased to seal us with his own holy disposition 
—the earnest of our inheritance. It is marvelous 
light to me, giving me, if possible, a more exalted 
opinion of our infinitely gracious Heavenly Father. 

Arrangements for my future colporteur work are 

page 224 

quite satisfactory. The Lord continues to bless me in 
interesting some, and my course in the community 
produces great commotion, and a few have gone about 
to "trim their lamps." There is much here to be done. 



I find the leading "Reverends" among the most offended. 
But public ridicule and increase of opposition 
seem only to brighten the splendor of the prize 
which is spiritually discerned. 

Very truly, Yours in the service of our present 
Lord, J. A. BROWNE. 

Denmark. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It is some time now 
since I last wrote to you about matters here in Denmark. 
We have had much sickness all around among 
our little company this winter; so much that we have 
had to stop our meetings for several weeks. Now 
Springtime is here, and with it comes new energy and 
a better feeling, and we are now a good deal better in 
health. 

We are holding MILLENNIAL DAWN Meetings in 
a small hall every Tuesday evening, and these meetings 
are well attended. The people are glad to hear 
these good tidings we are proclaiming; the interest is 
constantly increasing among God's people here; many 
are reading the DAWNS and have accepted their teaching 
into good and honest hearts, and the fruit will 
surely come, in the Lord's own time, to his praise. 
I believe there are many of his true sheep here, many 
who realize the voice of the Shepherd; as Jesus says, 
"I know mine, and am known of mine." Yet, it is 
only a "little flock" that will be chosen and elected, 
out of these many millions of church people. 

The WATCH TOWER is received here regularly, 
and is ever warmly welcome. I know of nothing to 
compare with it, as a herald of the glad tidings to 
God's people. With much Christian love to you all 
and kind greetings, wishing you God's blessings, and 
upon the harvest work, 

Your brother and fellow-servant of Christ, 
I. S. WINTER. 

R2342 : page 224 

Pennsylvania. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have not written for 
a long time, but you have not been absent from my 
mind, and I now take this opportunity of thanking you 
for the benefit and pleasure received from perusing 
your last labor of love, DAWN, VOL. IV. I have read 
it carefully twice, and I received more pleasure and 
strength from the second perusal than the first. While 
I had already a very fair outline of the general features 
of the great time of trouble from the study of the TOWERS 
and DAWNS and God's Word in connection with 
them, and from observing the signs of the times through 
their light, yet I had no conception how much the 
leading thinkers of the world corroborated the prophetic 
evidences. It almost seems as if they were all 
ripe for the truth and must, perforce, accept it as soon 



as brought to their attention. But sober reflection, in 
memory of my poor success in interesting the most 
likely cases within my knowledge in the truth, endorses 
God's Word— that Satan is exerting a blinding influence 
on all but those whom God is calling. In this 
volume you have given us a systematic, logical, Scriptural 
and exhaustive presentation of this important 
subject; you have called up in evidence the opinion 
and conclusions and warnings of leaders of thought 
from every strata of society, and every creed and party 
and field of public life: and I hope that we shall all be 
blessed and edified and encouraged by the results of 
your labor and God's guidance: thereby realizing that 
we have not read God's Word amiss, not followed cunningly 
devised fables, but may in consequence be sure 
that our redemption draweth nigh. 

By what some might think an odd coincidence, 
during the last few weeks, a large number of pamphlets 
have come to my hand, the work of writers apparently 
disinterested and earnest for the well being of 
others, which completely harmonize with the teachings 
of Scripture on these times: but who have no 
knowledge of either DAWN or God's Word in connection 
with current events, and yet who can see the present 
trend of events with startling clearness, but each 
imagines that his remedy is the one thing needful. 

We have still some trouble occasionally here: 
chiefly from Mr. C. (I can no longer call him brother). 
For nearly two years at every possible opportunity he 
has forced us to listen to "holiness" theories and tried 
to compel us to accept a hash of present truth and 
Methodism until we were obliged to send him a written 
request to absent himself from our meetings and seek 
more congenial society, and this has been a rather unpleasant 
step. This he has declined to do on the 
ground that he is the father of the Church here and 
intends to look after us. He has often told us that 
none of our number were even justified, to say nothing 
of being consecrated, and has sometimes included himself 
in the same category. So far as I am capable of 
judging he held and taught the truth clearly some four 
years ago, but he has seemed to be getting gradually 
into denser darkness for half that time, and he seems 
to attend our meetings for the purpose of annoyance. 

Jude intimates, in his epistle, that the falling away 
during the Gospel age will be on three lines:— typified 
by Cain, Balaam and Korah. Does this mean (1) approaching 
God under the cover of a different sacrifice 
to the one he had appointed, (2) covetousness, and 
(3) envy? 

Your brother in Christ, SMITH WALKER. 

[It is for the Church (each little company meeting 
for communion, fellowship and the study of holy 
things) to decide the character of the meetings and the 
leaders of the same according to their best judgment 
of the Lord's will as expressed in his Word. Any attempted 



deviation from this Scriptural rule should be 
kindly but firmly resented. And, furthermore, only 
those who profess both justification and full consecration 
should be recognized as having a voice on such 
matters. Such as have not the Spirit of the Lord 
surely could not know the mind of the Lord. 

I think that you correctly interpret Jude's teaching. 
And who cannot see that these three points are 
the causes of stumbling in nearly every instance— and 
especially among those who have talents and who 
aspire to be used in the Lord's service. Let us beware 
of these seductions of the Adversary, (1) a rejection 
of the ransom, (2) covetousness of wealth or honor or 
fame, (3) envy, malice, hatred, strife as against others 
more liberally endowed with talents or more favorably 
situated for service.— EDITOR. 1 



page 225 