Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
Last month we mentioned that a number of brothers have been making zone visits in various parts of the earth. Since their return we have enjoyed hearing their reports. So, we want to take this opportunity to share some encouraging points with you.
Despite opposition from the clergy and certain local chiefs over the years, excellent progress is being made in the islands of the South Pacific. At times, when witnessing is done on islands where there are no Kingdom proclaimers, people plead with the brothers to stay longer and help them to learn the truth. Efforts are being made to reach all populated islands and atolls with the “good news,” but more workers are needed.
In parts of Australia where the population is very scattered, brothers may travel over a hundred miles to attend a meeting or to share in the field service. What an example they are setting in showing appreciation for spiritual things!
It was encouraging to hear what is happening in South America. In Ecuador, for example, when a family began to study the Bible, their relatives became greatly concerned. One of them, an ardent Catholic schooled in theology, agreed to visit the family with a view to encouraging them to stop their study. During the month’s stay in their home, the husband and wife invited the seminarian to share in their morning discussions of the daily text, attend their weekly family study and accompany them in the field service as well as to the weekly meetings at the Kingdom Hall. He was so delighted with what he learned that, upon his return home, he progressed to the point of baptism even before his relatives. This former seminarian is now a ministerial servant in his home congregation. Meanwhile, other relatives visited the family with the same intent as the seminarian. The result? Now thirty-nine people are in the truth!
Clearly, there is much work yet to be done in getting the “good news” proclaimed. May all of us seek to do our part as we look to Jehovah for increase. Rest assured of our prayers in your behalf.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

