Faithfully Pursue “The Way”
1 True worship is “The Way,” that is, it is a manner of life that centers around faith in Jesus Christ and imitating his example. (Acts 9:2; 24:14) Since the day of Pentecost of the year 33 C.E., this has been the best way of life. Have we not seen abundant evidence to this effect in the lives of our brothers and sisters? Think about your own life. Has not applying Bible principles brought good results? Have you not been encouraged and strengthened by Jehovah’s answering your prayers? Has not your Christian hope sustained you in times of stress? And how thrilling is the prospect of life in God’s new order, to be attained either by a resurrection from the dead or by surviving the “great tribulation”!
2 So, we have good reason to recommend “The Way” to others. It is a tried and tested way of life that has enabled many thousands to cope successfully with common problems of life and has also sustained them in times of trial—sickness, hunger and even torture. This is “The Way” that could help many more people today. It could save families from breaking up, youths from drug addiction and it would give all who accept the “good news” a real purpose in life and a solid hope for the future. Truly, our fellowmen urgently need the truth now. Are you zealously recommending it by your own example and by seizing the opportunity to witness?
3 Though this ungodly system has not yet ended, being a witness for Jehovah continues to be the right way and the best way of life. True Christians have always been confident that their approved standing with the Almighty is something worth enduring for, yes, dying for. They were happy to share in vindicating God’s name and in proving the adversary a liar. Surely the lives of thousands of Christians who suffered a violent death throughout the centuries, including our own twentieth century, were not spent in vain.
4 The fact that God’s righteous new order was not ushered in during the lifetime of first-century Christians did not mean that they could put the advancement of spiritual interests in a secondary place. Their time for proving themselves faithful and for helping their fellowmen was limited. That is why the apostle Paul and others worked so diligently during their lifetime to make disciples. As a result of their zealous activity, by the year 61 C.E., the “good news” was “preached in all creation that is under heaven.” (Col. 1:23) Do you likewise appreciate the need to prove yourself faithful, bearing witness to the truth?
5 The course before us, therefore, is clear. Our lives should always harmonize with the command of Jesus Christ: “Keep awake, then, all the time making supplication that you may succeed in escaping all these things that are destined to occur, and in standing before the Son of man.” (Luke 21:36) Yes, maintain fine conduct, continue to love your brothers from the heart, and declare the “good news” so that others can join you in faithfully pursuing “The Way.” Let nothing distract you from the all important goal—remaining in “The Way” as an approved witness for Jehovah God.

