Strive to Reach Hearts
1 Do you feel that you are in debt to the people living in your territory? The Christian apostle Paul did. He wrote: “Both to Greeks and to Barbarians, both to wise and to senseless ones I am a debtor.” (Rom. 1:14) Yes, the apostle keenly sensed that he was under obligation to declare the “good news” to all whom he could reach.
2 Like the apostle Paul, we today surely want to do all that we can to discharge our debt or obligation toward fellow humans. There should be an “eagerness” on our part to reach the hearts of others with the “good news.” (Rom. 1:15) What does this require?
3 For one thing, we need to have the right attitude toward unbelievers. Regardless of how unresponsive or unkind they may be, they are still persons for whom Christ died. It is our responsibility to do what we can to make them aware of this important fact. To this end, we should keep in mind the example of the apostle Paul: “To the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain Jews; . . . I have become all things to people of all sorts, that I might by all means save some.”—1 Cor. 9:20-22.
4 In keeping with the apostle’s example, we do well to think about the people in our territory. They may vary as to their outlook on life, their goals and their religious views. It may be helpful to talk with others as to how they approach people of various backgrounds and religious persuasions.
5 The publications certainly have played a vital role in reaching people’s hearts. So we want to make good use of the current literature offer. At times, however, the householder’s comments may indicate that he would be benefited more by another publication. When that is the case, it is best to be flexible. Also, while we want to make the literature available to others, we need not feel obligated to offer a publication in each case on the initial call. Sometimes it may be better to make arrangements for a future Bible discussion.
6 Since the preaching of the “good news” is really Jehovah’s work, we should look to him for direction. It would be most appropriate, therefore, to pray that Jehovah might open the hearts of people in the territory and grant us wisdom and insight to be able to make the truth clear to them. May our motivations and actions at all times reveal that we want to be used by Jehovah to aid all in our territory.—Acts 16:14; 1 Tim. 2:1, 2.

