Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING MAY 29
15 min: Song 66. Local announcements. Discuss with audience how Topic for Conversation has been received in the territory. Encourage publishers to bring the householder’s family into the conversation. Perhaps, after greeting the person, you might ask: “How are you? How is your family?” People usually respond well to such questions and may give you an opportunity to converse with them. Depending on the answer, you could acknowledge how hard it is for parents to provide for their families. You could also point out that God is aware of the situation of man and he has in store better conditions for families here on the earth. You may show how the fulfillment of the promise in Psalm 37 would contribute to happiness in family life. You could call attention to page 188 in the Good News book, and 2 Peter 3:13, 14, tying the text in with the illustration on the following page.
20 min: Warm discussion of article “Faithfully Pursue ‘The Way.’” Have well-prepared questions for audience participation, emphasizing that the important goal is to remain an approved witness of Jehovah God.
25 min: Teaching at Bible studies by emphasizing the Scriptures so that the student will see that he is studying the Bible. At Bible studies we teach Jehovah’s thoughts. It is important that, when people study the Bible, they understand what they are considering. (Neh. 8:8) There is no one specific way to accomplish this; not all people respond in the same way. Use what seems best to make the Bible understandable to those with whom you study. Highlighting scriptures, however, does not mean that every text in the lesson must be read and discussed. You may wish to develop with the audience some of the following suggestions and/or others that have worked well locally.
(a) During the first few studies, you may wish to look up quoted scriptures. The householder will then be able to compare what he is seeing in his Bible with what he is seeing in the book. Encourage student to incorporate texts in his answers. Example: When a student answers and there is a scripture that he could have used, you could ask: “How does [text] prove that point?”
(b) Ask additional specific questions. Simply asking, “What did you get out of that scripture?” may not be enough. Often the answer is so general that the real point is missed.
Example of better way: On page 12 of Good News book, the question on paragraph 6 is: “Why were these things written aforetime?” First Corinthians 10:11 is cited. After reading the text you could ask: “Why is it good to read the Bible?” “What statement in the text proves that?” You might ask audience for additional examples.
(c) Rather than just all general-knowledge questions, the review questions could consist largely of the type that require reasoning on the Bible to answer.
(d) Write on a card or paper the main points being considered in a particular chapter and the scriptures that support these points. This card or paper can be placed in the Bible and be used when the study is first started; it may be best to use only the Bible.
Remind audience that there is no set procedure to follow. Also, that there is no need to read every scripture. The above suggestions have been helpful to some publishers in the field. To conclude, you may want to have paragraph 8 on page 42 in the Good News book read, and have audience apply points (b) and (c). Song 20 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 5
20 min: Song 51 and local announcements. An experienced publisher discusses with a new publisher article “God’s Spirit Will Help You.” Handle it not as a review of the material, but as a natural conversation with a person needing encouragement in field activity.
20 min: Teaching at Bible studies by helping the student use information in his daily life. Discuss with audience the following observations of brothers who have been conducting studies for years. Good to allow person to make his own decisions rather than to tell him what he should do. It is not proper to force our beliefs on him. We should avoid an appearance of unduly prying into student’s private life with questions of a very personal nature.
(a) It may be that at the end of every study, questions such as these could be asked: “How do you feel about it? Do you think this would help you in your life?” If the student asks a particular question regarding his life, it may be necessary to cover material on that question right away in order to assist him.
(b) When it is appropriate, use your own example and the benefits you received from studying the Bible.
(c) To stimulate service activity you might want to ask periodically, “Have you discussed anything from the Bible with others?” or, as you study with him you might ask: “How could this scripture help to explain this point to someone else?”
(d) Prepare study with student and his needs in mind, and include him in your prayers.
20 min: “Take as a pattern . . . the prophets.” The ancient Hebrew prophets were men “with feelings like ours.” (Jas. 5:10, 17) It was not always easy for them to carry out their commission, since they often faced bitter opposition from their own countrymen. At times they were discouraged and had to adjust their thinking. Discuss the following questions with audience: (1) What did Jeremiah face when declaring God’s message to his own people? (Jer. 20:7, 8) (2) How did the attitude of the Israelites affect the prophet’s view of his assignment? (Jer. 20:9, 10) (3) Was Jeremiah able to continue in his own strength? (Jer. 20:11) (4) Why may we feel at times like Jeremiah, and how can this example encourage us? (5) How did Elijah come to feel about his assignment and why? (1 Ki. 19:4, 9, 10) (6) Was Elijah right in his thinking? (1 Ki. 19:15-18) (7) What does the case of Elijah illustrate as to our knowledge regarding how much work remains to be done and how many honest-hearted persons may yet be found? Song 39 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 12
15 min: Song 37 and local announcements. “Presenting the Good News—With Kindness.” Discussion using local circumstances.
25 min: Handling problems at Bible studies—When the person wishes to stop the study. Good to remember that our concern should be for him as a person and not merely as an individual who should not stop his Bible study. Even as early as your second visit, people may wish to stop studying. Sometimes publishers are unable to continue Bible discussions after the first contact with the householder. A number of factors may be involved. It is best to avoid any implication of trying to “pressure” the student into continuing his study. Use the Bible to reason with the student and encourage him. It may take more than one visit to find him home. Discuss with audience the following observations from brothers in the field.
(a) Discern true reason: For some people, “studying the Bible” presents an obligation, a commitment of themselves, their time or privacy. So the householder may not be at home when the publisher returns, or may frankly inform the brother that he does not want to “study.” This was the case with a Chinese man who told the publisher: “I don’t want a Bible study, but I would enjoy some discussions.” Others have felt that they were being indoctrinated because publishers were trying to teach too much, too soon. A good number receive opposition from relatives and friends. If this is the case, avoid being unduly critical or hard on those who have influenced the student to stop studying. Recognize that they believe they are acting in the best interests of the student.
(b) On the first study or very soon thereafter prepare student for opposition. One or two scriptures could be considered at the end of each study, forewarning him of possible opposition. It seems best to begin discussing opposition in a general way and then to become more specific.
(c) Become a friend of your Bible student. Being a friend and not just a cool, functional teacher, will aid him to cope with opposition. If it is learned that he has been sick, call him up to see how he is doing. Similarly, when members of his family (though they may manifest opposition) are not feeling well, stop to see them as a friend and not as a preacher. Encourage student to love the opposers, in harmony with Jesus’ words to “love your neighbor as yourself.” Keep in contact with him as much as possible, and not only at the time set for Bible discussions. Even if the study is temporarily discontinued, the teacher should stay in close contact with the student. Try to leave the door open for further discussions.
20 min: “Strive to Reach Hearts.” Talk by an elder. Tie in local field service activity, discussing hours spent and what could be done to reach more people. Song 70 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 19
10 min: Song 64 and announcements. Discuss Branch Letter in harmony with words of Acts 16:4.
20 min: Handling problems at Bible studies—Lack of preparation on student’s part. Good to recognize that majority of students do not study in advance. Problems and other responsibilities may interfere with preparation. Each student should be handled as an individual. Teaching, not necessarily the method used, is the important factor. Be adaptable in your approach. Do not force the student to follow a standard way if he can be taught better in another way. You may discuss with audience the following observations and/or others that apply locally.
(a) Although it is good to encourage preparation, if student does not prepare his lesson beforehand, it may be unwise to make a big issue of it. Some brothers do not emphasize advance preparation until the student really gets involved in discussing the Bible. Reading the scriptures and paragraphs first may help the publisher to keep the study moving. Even slow students, with limited education, may thus be aided to make progress.
(b) If appropriate, at a good opportunity, show the student how to study. Perhaps you could do this by preparing with him the following lesson. This may need to be repeated on future visits.
(c) Build up enthusiasm for next study. A few of the highlights in the following lesson might encourage student to prepare and to look forward with anticipation to next study.
15 min: “A Godly View of Debts.” Talk with audience participation on the scriptures that highlight God’s principles on this matter. Material found in April 1, 1977, Watchtower.
15 min: For local use: may discuss Question Box. Song 9 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 26
25 min: Song 32 and local announcements. Question and answer discussion of April 1, 1977, Watchtower article, “Shining as Illuminators in the World.”
15 min: A lively discussion between two or three publishers based on the article, “We Were Given a Goal in Life,” in the March 15, 1977, Watchtower. Could highlight importance of setting personal goals.
20 min: For local use. Song 92 and prayer.

