
Life in a Restored Paradise




JESUS confidently spoke of living again, and he told his disciples that this was a certainty. “In the re-creation,” he said, “[you] will inherit everlasting life.” What did Jesus mean by “in the re-creation”?—Matthew 19:25-29.
According to the parallel account by the Bible writer Luke, Jesus said that “in the coming system of things,” his disciples would receive “everlasting life.” (Luke 18:28-30) Why does the Bible speak of “the coming system of things” as being the same as “the re-creation”?
Evidently it was to emphasize that Jehovah God will see to it that his original purpose for mankind to enjoy eternal life in an earthly paradise will be realized. Humans will be restored to the perfection enjoyed by Adam and Eve prior to their sin. So “in the coming system of things,” there will be “the re-creation” of the Paradise conditions that existed in the garden of Eden.



How Paradise Will Be Restored

While on earth, Jesus taught his followers to pray for the very means that God will use to restore righteous conditions earth wide. Jesus said we should pray: “Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.” (Matthew 6:10) God appointed his Son to be the Ruler of this Kingdom, which will carry out God’s purpose that Paradise conditions be enjoyed everywhere on earth.
Regarding the One whom God has appointed as Ruler, the Bible said: “There has been a child born to us, there has been a son given to us; and the princely rule will come to be upon his shoulder. And his name will be called . . . Prince of Peace. To the abundance of the princely rule and to peace there will be no end.” (Isaiah 9:6, 7) Yet, how will this government under such “princely rule” carry out the will of God?
The Bible answers, saying: “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom [the princely rule] that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”—Daniel 2:44.
Let us consider the conditions that will prevail on earth in the restored Paradise, yes, “in the re-creation,” when God’s Son exercises his power as the ‘princely Ruler’ in his Father’s Kingdom.



What Life in Paradise Will Be Like

Resurrection of the dead
“The hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear his voice and come out.”—John 5:28, 29.
“There is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous.”—Acts 24:15.
No more sickness, old age, or death
“At that time the eyes of the blind ones will be opened, and the very ears of the deaf ones will be unstopped. At that time the lame one will climb up just as a stag does, and the tongue of the speechless one will cry out in gladness.”—Isaiah 35:5, 6.
“God himself will be with them. And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”—Revelation 21:3, 4.
Plenty of good things to eat
“The earth itself will certainly give its produce; God, our God, will bless us.”—Psalm 67:6.
“There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.”—Psalm 72:16.
Suitable homes and enjoyable work for all
“They will certainly build houses and have occupancy, and they will certainly plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. They will not build and someone else have occupancy; they will not plant and someone else do the eating.”—Isaiah 65:21, 22.
No more crime, violence, or war
“As regards the wicked, they will be cut off from the very earth.”—Proverbs 2:22.
“They will have to beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears. Nation will not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war anymore.”—Isaiah 2:4.
Freedom from fear, and peace everywhere
“They will actually dwell in security, with no one to make them tremble.”—Ezekiel 34:28.
“They will not do any harm or cause any ruin in all my holy mountain; because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.”—Isaiah 11:9.
What a pleasure it will be to live when such conditions prevail everywhere on earth, when everyone loves God and shows love for fellow humans! (Matthew 22:37-39) You can be sure that all the promises of God will then be fulfilled. “I have even spoken it,” God says, “I shall also do it.”—Isaiah 46:11.
There are many things you may yet need to learn about Jehovah God and his promised new world. For example, what evidence is there that this new world is near at hand? How will God’s Kingdom replace all the governments of the earth? And what events will lead up to its doing so? Jehovah’s Witnesses will be happy to help you to examine such questions. For more information, see page 32 of this magazine.
Man’s many years of yearning for a new world of righteousness are almost over. For the vast majority of humans who have died, death is not the end. Another life is not merely possible—it is God’s will. There truly is life beyond the grave! Yes, it is “the real life,” the one “which is to come.”—1 Timothy 4:8; 6:19.



