From Our Readers
Women’s Issues  Thank you very much for the articles dealing with the battering of women (November 22, 1988), help for the families of alcoholics (May 22, 1992), and respect for women (July 8, 1992). These articles show an amazing depth of understanding of the human psyche. On the night of my wedding, I was drawn into a whirlpool of traumatic experiences. I developed health problems and consulted doctors and mental-health professionals. A matter such as this is not easy for many to understand, and if you go to someone for help who does not know what to say, it becomes even more difficult. At any rate, I finally feel that the puzzle has been put in order and that the pieces fit into place, thanks to your articles.
N. H., Argentina
Niagara  I couldn’t help smiling as I read the article “Niagara Falls​—An Ageless Jewel of the Americas.” (October 8, 1992) We have small waterfalls here in the jungles, but the thought of such a stupendous sight made me contemplate Jehovah’s love for us and his desire for us to have full appreciation for his creation.
P. J. O., Nigeria
Respecting Women  During my childhood, I absorbed a cultural prejudice that made me a great woman-hater. Marriage was unthinkable for me! But thanks to the series of articles on the subject “Women​—Deserving of Respect” (July 8, 1992), I have changed my attitude toward women. I read the articles twice, and now I think that I someday may be an exemplary husband.
N. B. M., Côte d’ Ivoire
Phone Calls  I was impressed with your article “Young People Ask . . . What’s Wrong With Talking to Each Other?” (August 22, 1992) I too was talking to a member of the opposite sex on the phone. I was on cloud nine! But when I confronted this person and informed him of my feelings, I discovered that he was not serious about me at all. I was the victim of a flirt. I wish I had read your article a year ago. Maybe then my heart wouldn’t be so crushed.
L. R., United States
Space Exploration  I work for the Italian branch of the European Space Agency. On more than one occasion I have suggested that the press-review brochure prepared for our personnel include articles from Awake!​—but without results. However, the articles on “Space Exploration” (September 8, 1992) were used and took up nearly all the space in our press review! Thanks to Awake! I’ve had many opportunities to discuss the Bible with my colleagues.
P. B., Italy
Entertainment  I am 20 years old and have just finished the series “How Does Entertainment Affect Your Life?” (November 8, 1992) I found the information both timely and balanced. Some youths feel fenced in by all the restrictions and guidelines we must observe as Christians. My brother, for example, quit being a Christian because he felt that way. But I consider these guidelines to be a protection, and I feel very safe and loved knowing that Jehovah cares enough about us to keep us separate from Satan’s world.
D. C., United States
I greatly appreciated the issue on entertainment, but I would like to know where you get the information that enables you to describe the details of films like Basic Instinct?
A. A., Italy
The comments were based on news reports in reputable newspapers and magazines. It was not necessary for members of our research staff to view this objectionable film.​—ED.

