Receive Divine Teaching for Our Critical Times
How It Will Really Benefit You
YOU can receive it by attending a “Divine Teaching” District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Millions will be in attendance this summer in cities around the world. In the United States alone, over 150 of these four-day conventions will be held during June, July, and August.
Whether you are old or young​—a husband, wife, father, mother, teenager, or child—​you will receive teaching presented in a clear, appealing way that will benefit you. “Making Marriage a Lasting Union,” “Work Hard for the Salvation of Your Household,” and “Parents​—Your Children Need Specialized Attention” are just some of the subjects the program will feature.
Specific attention will be focused on the problems young people face and how they can deal with these during our critical times. They should be encouraged by the modern-day drama entitled Youths Who Remember Their Creator Now. Another well-rehearsed drama called Do Not Be Misled or Mock God will address the challenge Christian youths face because of today’s popular videos and music.
Indeed, we are living in critical times. Jesus foretold that “after the tribulation of those days the sun will be darkened.” (Matthew 24:29) The convention program will discuss evidence as to when that “tribulation” occurs, as well as when the sun is darkened.
In these critical times, many ask, What is the purpose of life? This subject will be thoroughly explored, and you will no doubt be delighted with what you receive on this subject. Yet another part of the program will review the record of Jehovah’s Witnesses in modern times and show what they have accomplished.
On the final day of the convention, the public discourse will feature the subject “Helpful Teaching for Our Critical Times.” The program will conclude with the admonition “Keep Holding Fast to Divine Teaching.”
Surely, you will benefit by being present all four days! You are cordially invited to attend. To find out the location nearest to your home, contact the local Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses or write the publishers of this magazine or see the June 8 issue of Awake!, which will contain the addresses of all convention locations in the United States, Canada, and Britain.

