The Sure Answer to the Crime Problem
WILL humans always live like prisoners in their own homes? Will they fear every time they go outside alone? No! There is a sure answer to the crime problem, and it will be realized very soon.
The answer is not the adoption of an oppressive police state. Nor is it any other proposal for reforming the present system of things. It is becoming obvious that any such reformation is futile, since crime is, indeed, woven into the very fabric of society.
What, then, is the answer?
The Answer Foretold
Jesus Christ pointed to the answer when he foretold the end of this system of things. He said: “There will be great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning until now, no, nor will occur again.” (Matt. 24:21) This “great tribulation” will wipe out this entire lawless society, but not all mankind. Thus the tribulation is directly linked with the sure answer to the crime problem.
That sure answer is God’s kingdom. This kingdom is a real government, with a heavenly king and with earthly subjects. Jesus’ earthly life as a grown man was devoted to declaring that government as the only solution to man’s problems. (Luke 4:43; 8:1) How it will eliminate crime is clearly shown in the Bible. Foretelling the very days in which we live, Daniel 2:44 says:
“In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”
Yes, God’s heavenly kingdom or government will completely destroy earth’s present governments, with all their crime and corruption. This will, indeed, be a “great tribulation” for all who are alienated from God.
Do not conclude, however, that such a world destruction is too harsh a measure for God to take. As we have seen, this system of things is irreformable; it is permeated with crime. Its ruler is Satan the Devil, “who is misleading the entire inhabited earth.” (Rev. 12:9; 2 Cor. 4:4) Mankind cannot get rid of him; only God can. Thus Jesus taught us to pray for God’s kingdom to come so that it might crush Satan and his crime-infested system out of existence.​—Matt. 6:9, 10.
But when will this occur?
How Near?
Jesus also answered this question. As noted in a previous article, he gave a “sign” that would mark the “conclusion of the system of things,” or the “last days.” Included in the “sign” would be such world woes as global wars, famines, pestilences, earthquakes and the increasing of lawlessness, to be followed by the “great tribulation” itself. Then Jesus said: “Truly I say to you that this generation will by no means pass away until all these things occur.”​—Matt. 24:3-34; 2 Tim. 3:1-5.
What did Jesus mean by that? Evidently this: That the generation that saw the beginning of world woes with the outbreak of global war in the year 1914 would also see the destruction of Satan’s entire earthly system of things. Some persons who were alive in 1914 would still be alive when the “great tribulation” strikes.
Think about those persons who, in 1914, were old enough to see with understanding the beginning of the fulfillment of the “sign.” They are not young anymore. That generation is well along toward its complete passing away. Yet it will not pass away until it sees God’s kingdom wipe out this wicked system of things.
Very near, then, is the answer to the crime problem! It will be realized within a very short time, before “this generation” passes away. What a marvelous relief it will be when this corrupt system is gone!
But who will be left to enjoy the crime-free world? What assurance is there that crime will not crop up again? What will life be like then?
A Crime-Free World
The Bible explains who will survive this world’s end, when it says: “Furthermore, the world is passing away and so is its desire, but he that does the will of God remains forever.” (1 John 2:17) Thus, only those who now learn what is God’s will and then do it will survive the “great tribulation” into the crime-free world to follow.
But there will also be others who gain life then, for the Bible promises: “There is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous.” (Acts 24:15) Eventually there will be thousands of millions of persons who will be brought back from the dead to live in God’s crime-free world.
‘Who are these unrighteous ones?’ you may ask. ‘Why will they be resurrected?’
We have God’s assurance that his new system will be righteous. After describing the destruction of this present system of things, the Bible says that it will be replaced with a new one in which “righteousness is to dwell.” (2 Pet. 3:13) Unrighteous persons will not be permitted to corrupt that new system! But what will prevent them from doing so?
At its start, righteous persons will be the only inhabitants of God’s new system, for only those doing the will of God will survive the “great tribulation.” Unrighteous ones will later be resurrected, likely only a relatively few at a time so that they will always be in the small minority. After their resurrection they will be individually instructed regarding God’s will. At that time the Bible principle will apply: “Righteousness is what the inhabitants of the productive land will certainly learn.”​—Isa. 26:9.
‘But surely,’ you may object, ‘not all the resurrected ones will respond to that instruction. Some will remain unrighteous. What will prevent them from corrupting that new system of things?’
Almighty God Jehovah will see to it that they do not. If all efforts fail to help persons to reform, then they will not be permitted to remain. God will see to it that they are destroyed. All who are resurrected will simply have to abide by God’s righteous standards if they are to live in his new system.
A Marvelous New System
How fine it will be to live on earth under that righteous new administration! The sure promise of the Bible will then be realized earth wide: “The meek ones themselves will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.”​—Ps. 37:11.
Think of it! No more will there be fear of crime or calamity. You will be able to walk on any street or through any park without fear of muggers or rapists. You will be able to leave your doors unlocked and possessions unguarded with the assurance that they will not be stolen or damaged. There will be no need of policemen, jails, handcuffs, safes, locks, keys, burglar alarms, hidden electronic listening devices or concealed television cameras. In God’s new system the deterrent to crime will be love for God and genuine concern for the welfare of fellow humans.
Motivated by such love, there will be no more “white collar” crime either, including embezzling, giving or taking of bribes, misappropriation of funds or other such forms of dishonesty. Nor will there be any industries that, to increase their profits, poison the air people have to breathe, or pollute the water they drink. In God’s new system there will be a fulfillment of the words of God’s prophet: “They will not do any harm or cause any ruin in all my holy mountain; because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.”​—Isa. 11:9.
Surely to enjoy a lifetime of seventy or eighty years in such a marvelous crime-free world would be a pleasure. Yet, with sickness and disease to endure and finally death to face, the pleasure at best would be fleeting. But Jehovah God will not permit this. He will completely satisfy mankind’s desires. The Bible assures: “The blessing of Jehovah​—that is what makes rich, and he adds no pain with it.”​—Prov. 10:22.
This blessing of God will eventually include the elimination of all suffering due to poor health. Cancer, heart trouble and all other diseases that cause humans pain and unhappiness will simply not exist in God’s new system. The Creator’s sure promise is: “No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’”​—Isa. 33:24.
The Creator’s blessing will even include the elimination of death! Citizens of God’s crime-free world will live forever! How this will come about is explained this way in the last part of the Bible: “The tent of God is with mankind, and he will reside with them, and they will be his peoples. And God himself will be with them. And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”​—Rev. 21:3, 4.
Would you not like to live forever in perfect health in such a marvelous crime-free world? This can be your certain prospect! But there are things that you must do if you are to enjoy these blessings under the righteous rule of God’s kingdom.
[Picture on page 18]
God’s kingdom will clean from the earth all lawlessness forever; righteousness will prevail eternally
[Picture on page 19]
1914
ONE GENERATION
Increase of lawlessness.
Nation against nation.
Love of greater number cooling off.
Anguish of nations, not knowing the way out.
Critical times.
Disobedience to parents.
Not open to any agreement.
Men without self-control.
“LAST DAYS”
[Picture on page 20]
Billions will be resurrected to life in God’s crime-free world
[Picture on page 21]
Grand blessings are in store for citizens of God’s new order. The Bible assurance is: “God . . . will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.”​—Rev. 21:3, 4.

