Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., OCTOBER 1, 1917 


No. 19 


THE CONCLUDING WORK OF THE HARVEST 

And another angel came out from the altar, which had power over fire, and cried with a loud voice to him that had a 
sharp sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sickle and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth, for her grapes 
are fully ripe. And the angel thrust in his sickle upon the earth and gathered the vine of 
the earth and cast it into the great winepress of the wrath of God." — Rev. 14:18, 19. 
It is the new creation that is gathered into the garner of Isaac, she became his wife, thus foreshadowing how Jehovah 


the Lord. It is the vine of the earth, composed of the tare 
systems of the earth, that must be gathered for destruction. 
Such were the words of the Master. 

For nineteen centuries God has been preparing the new 
creation. That work is now reaching a climax. Jehovah is 
a strict economist. He wastes neither time nor effort. The 
length of time and the expenditure of treasure is evidence 
all-sufficient of the great importance of the work of completing
 the new creation. This work has consisted of the 
purchasing, calling, begetting and transformation of poor, sad, 
dying human beings into perfect, joyful, spirit beings of 
superlative beauty and glory, possessing life immortal and 
powers for usefulness without limitation. 

Long ago, at great cost to himself — yea, at the cost of the 
dearest treasure to his own heart — Jehovah provided for the 
purchase of the entire human race. The purchase-price has 
been used for those who will compose the new creation, and 
they have been brought to a knowledge of that fact and joyfully
 accepted the benefits thereof. 

PICTURES FORESHADOWING DEVELOPMENT 

Long, long before the beginning of the actual development 
of the new creation, God caused many wonderful pictures to 
be made, foreshadowing the preparation for and the process 
of bringing to completion the great work in behalf of the 
new creation. To Abraham he made a promise concerning 
the same, designating that class as "the seed" from which shall 
go forth the blessings to all humankind. Abraham offered 
up his son in the mountain and received him as from the 
dead, picturing the death and resurrection of the antitypical 
Isaac, the Lord Jesus. (Hebrews 11:17-19} For many centuries
 God's typical people offered yearly sacrifices foreshadowing
 the great sin-offering on behalf of the church and the 
world. David in his experiences typified the church at war, 
while Solomon pictured the new creation in glory. 

The sin-offering on behalf of the church being finished, 
God issued a call for the election of the new creation. Mark, 
that this call began at Pentecost and not before; there the 
heavenly way was opened. 

God designates this class as his elect, as distinguished from 
the non-elect. Selected from amongst men, favored with a 
knowledge of his great plan and furnished with the rules 
governing the election, the catted ones have the assurance that 
if they conform themselves to these rules they will be elected 
judges and blessers of mankind, and thereafter forever be the 
recipients of Jehovah's favor. 

Again, Jehovah likens this class unto a glorious temple, 
of which Solomon's Temple was a type or picture. The material
 for Solomon's Temple was prepared in advance, and 
when the time came it was put together without noise or 
confusion. (1 ICings 6:7) So the new creation has been long 
in the course of preparation. Now it is being put in order 
and the glorious temple is being erected, without noise or 
confusion, and without the knowledge of the world. 

Long centuries ago God caused to be erected in Egypt a 
mighty pillar of stone, composed of many stones, all dressed 
and nicely shaped and fitted to the one chief corner stone. 
The entire structure constituted a grand building in the form 
of a pyramid, picturing the new creation in the likeness of 
God. 

St. Peter speaks of the new creation as living stones 
built up into a spiritual house. {1 Peter 2:4-9) The Lord's 
Prophet refers to the same as the ''jewel class," constituting 
the precious jewels of Jehovah. He divides the new creation 
into twelve tribes or companies, and then selects twelve of 
the most precious or rare jewels of all material creation to 
picture the respective tribes. (Rev, 21:19, 20) Another of his 
prophets speaks of this class as a crown of glory in the hand 
of Jehovah, a royal diadem in the hand of God. (Isaiah 62:3) 
Again, this class is pictured as a royal priesthood, meaning 
that they shall both reign with Christ and minister blessings 
unto the world. They were pictured by Melchisedec, whose 
priesthood had neither predecessor nor successor, signifying 
that the new creation will be in a class distinctive and alone 
in Jehovah's great realm. 

Many centuries ago Jehovah made another picture by 
causing Abraham to send his servant into a distant country 
to select a wife for Isaac, When Rebecca was brought to 


sent his Spirit into the earth to select from amongst men the 
antitypical Rebecca as the bride for the antitypical Isaac. 
The Lord has made the relationship of husband and wife 
picture the relationship between Jesus and his bride, — Ephesians
 5:25-32. 

It is a recognized rule that the antitype is greater than 
the sum total of all the types. The marriage of Jesu3 and 
his bride, which soon will be completed, will therefore, as the 
antitype, be far greater than all the marriages of earth. Call 
to mind all the happiness and joy manifested at all the weddings
 of all the ages that have occurred on earth, an,d then 
know that the sum total of these marriages is nothing as compared
 to the unspeakable joy that will pervade the universe 
on the festal day when Jesus and his bride shall be made one. 

WHO WIZiI. SHARE IN THIS FAVOR 

The elaborate program arranged by Jehovah, and the time 
and the treasure consumed in carrying it out, enable us to 
grasp in a measure the great importance of this work and 
the marvelous blessings that shall follow its completion. With 
his heart fired with a burning desire to attain unto the position
 offered, the Apostle said, "That I may know him, and 
the power of hi& resurrection, and the fellowship of his 
sufferings, and -be made conformable to his death: if by any 

means I might attain unto the .resurrection of the dead 

This one thing I do, forgetting the things that are behind 
and reaching forth unto those things which are before I press 
forward along the mark for the prize." (Philippians 3:10-14) 
Those who attain to this exalted position will be they who love 
the Lord supremely, who keep his commandments with a joyful
 heart and with delight submit to his holy will. The 
special commandments to the new creation are, That ye love 
one another, even as I have loved you"; "Thrust in the sickle 
and reap"; "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee 
the crown of life." To the faithful he says, "He that reapeth 
receiveth wages." — John 13:34, 35; Revelation 14:15; 2:10; 
John 4:36. 

It follows that the harvest work is of the greatest importance
. It may properly be divided into three parts: (1) the 
bride making herself ready for the marriage; (2) the bride 
class declaring the message of the kingdom to others, that 
they might be invited to the marriage feast; (3) the gathering 
of the grapes of "the vine of the earth." It is difficult to see 
how the bride could make herself ready if she failed or refused
 to declare the message to others; and particularly is 
this true if the opportunity to do the work of the harvest 
is granted and she fails to avail herself of such opportunity. 
Those who reap receive the wages. It follows that those who 
fail to reap in the manner prescribed could not expect to 
receive the wage. 

PERIOD OF THE HARVEST 

It is important for us to know when the harvest began 
and when it will end. We feel sure it is pleasing to the Lord 
that we make an effort to know. The Jewish and Gospel 
ages parallel each other, both in time and in events. Our 
thought once was that the Jewish harvest began with the 
eonsecration of our Lord, in A. D, 30, and ended with the 
destruction of Jerusalem, in A. D, 70 — a period of forty years. 
But, as pointed out by Brother Russell in The Watoh Tower 
last year (page 264), this view does not seem to be supported 
by the Scriptures. Jesus was not one who was harvested ; for 
he was always in harmony with Jehovah. During the three 
and a- half years of his ministry he recognized the law arrangement
 in force (Matt 23: 1-3) —that three and a half years 
was the period of preparation, the gathering of the loyal 
Jews together, and especially of preparing the apostles a3 
his instruments for the work of harvest that was to follow. 
The heavenly garner could not possibly be opened until Jesus 
had provided the ransom-pTice, and had ascended on high 
and presented it to the Father. — 2 Thn. 1:10. 

It was at Pentecost that the apostles received the holy 
•Spirit. Then it was that St. Peter stood up and spoke with 
authority to the Jews, and told them how that Jesus was the 
great Redeemer whom they had wickedly slain, but whom God 
raised up. "Now when they heard this, they were pricked 
in their hearts and said unto Peter and to the rest of the 
Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Then Peter 
said unto them, Repent and be baptized, every one of you, 


(291-292) 


[6148] 


Octobse 1, 1917 


T H E WA TCH TOWER 


(292-293) 


in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins; and 
ye shall receive the gift of the holy Spirit. For the promise 
is unto you and to your children and to all that are afar 
off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call." — Acts 
2:37-39. 

Here, for the first time, the call went forth to enter the 
race for the prize of heavenly glory, and on that same day 
about three thousand responded to the call. Prior thereto 
there was no garner. Not even the Apostles could receive the 
holy Spirit until that day. This would seem to establish 
beyond question of doubt that the Jewish harvest began at 
Pentecost. 

This conclusion in no wise interferes with our chronology, 
but instead confirms it. The year 1914 marked the end of the 
Gentile times, but did not mark the end of the harvest of 
the Gospel age. Many have consecrated and given evidence 
of spirit-begetting since 1914, which is the best evidence that 
the harvest is not yet closed. 

END OF JEWISH HAEVEST 

Just before his crucifixion Jesus was asked by his disciples 
three questions in one, namely: (1) When shall the temple 
be destroyed? (2) What would be the proof of his presence 
and (3) of the end of the age? These questions he answered. 
(Matthew 24 : 3-35) The historical facts show: ( 1 ) the 
destruction of Jerusalem, A. D. 70; (2) the complete subjugation
 of Judea, A. D. 73, and (3) the depopulation of Palestine, 
A. D. 135. Thus it follows that there were three different 
endings relative to the Jewish polity. Which one of these did 
the Lord intend should be our guide in the' harvest parallels? 
Jesus declared, "The harvest is the end of the age." 
(Matthew 13:39) Therefore we must find that when the 
harvest ended, the age is ended. He could not have meant 
A. D. 70 and its parallel date, 1915, as marking the end of 
the harvest, because the harvest did not end there. It is still 
going on. He could not have meant A. D. 135 and the parallel 
date, 1980, for the reason that such a conclusion would entirely 
destroy the parallel with reference to the harvest. 

In giving his answer with reference to the end of the 
age, Jesus said, "Let them which are in Judea flee to the 
mountains." Judea more particularly types Babylon. The 
date of the fall of Judea, therefore, is of great importance. 
In Volume 7, Studies in the Sckiptures, pages 23 and 24, 
we have collected seven historical authorities definitely establishing
 the fact that Judea's fall occurred on the first 
day of the Feast of the Passover (April 15) A. D. 73, which 
was exactly forty years after Pentecost, the beginning of the 
Jewish harvest, therefore marking the close of the Jewish 
harvest in A. D. 73. 

GOSPEL AGE HAEVEST 

The proof heretofore published in Studies in the Scriptures
 definitely establishes the second presence of our Lord 
since 1874. Correspondingly, the three and a half years 
following would be a period of preparation for the harvest 
of the Gospel age, exactly as such preparation was made for 
the harvest of the Jewish age, and would consequently mark 
the beginning of the harvest of the Gospel age in 1878. 

Likewise, the proof heretofore published definitely establishes
 the resurrection of the sleeping saints in A, D. 1878. 
(See Rev. 14:13 comments in Vol, 7) St. Paul clearly establishes
 the fact that none could be gathered into the 
heavenly garner of the Lord in the harvest of the Gospel age 
until after the awakening of the saints, saying, "For this we 
say unto you by the Word of the Lord, that we which are 
alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not precede
 them which are asleep ; for the Lord himself shall descend 
from heaven with a shout and with the voice of the archangel 
and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise 
first."—l Thessalonians 4:16, 16. 

Immediately following the announcement in Rev. 14:13, 
''Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth," 
we read (Verse 14) "and behold a white cloud, and upon 
the cloud I saw one sitting like unto the Son of Man, having 
on his head a golden crown and in his hand a sharp sickle." 
Thus is described the second presence of our Lord as the 
great Chief Reaper, at the beginning of the harvest in 1878. 
The 15th verse of that same chapter refers to the Great Pyramid
, the measurements of which confirm the Bible teaching 
that 1878 marked the beginning of the harvest of the Gospel 
age. The parallel, therefore, would establish definitely that 
the harvest would close forty years thereafter; to wit, in the 
spring of A. D. 1918. If this be true, and the evidence is 
very conclusive that it is true, then we have only a few months 
in which to labor before the great night settles down when no 
man can work. 


Now we have come to another step in* the pathway of 
present truth j and the question that confronts the people 
of God is, Are we ready for it? In 1875, when Brother Russell 
learned of the presence of our Lord, he immediately saw from 
Revelation 14:14, 16 that the work which the Lord would have 
his people to do is to reap the harvest of ripened wheat. 
(Matt. 13:39) The Lord has been pleased to remove Brother 
Russell from the earthly stage of action; and now the great 
Shepherd of the sheep" has called our attention in unmistakable
 terms to the fact that he has a work for the church 
yet in the flesh, following the harvesting of the wheat, a work 
which is described in detail in Rev. 14:17, 19, as the harvesting
 of the vine of the earth. This work is doubtless the same 
as that described in Matt. 13:40, 43. It is a work of exposing 
to all the world the unrighteousness of the ecclesiastical systems
, their acts and their unholy alliances with the beastly 
governments of the present evil order of things. It also seems 
to relate to the gathering out from amongst God's professed 
consecrated people of all offending ones. — Matthew 13:41. 

THE LAST WOBK OF THE CHTJBOH 

If any of us have come to this hour expecting that the 
last work of the church in the flesh would be one of quiet, 
pleasing, easy triumph, void of severe and fiery trials, then 
surely we have misread our Bibles and Studies in the Scriptures
 and the pages of history. Never before were there so 
many indications as now that the church is in the great 
enemy's territory undergoing final and crucial testing, with 
still more in front of her. She must continue her fight to 
the end, amidst graver perils than any she has encountered 
for a long time. 

To accomplish the work now at hand the Lord will use such 
instruments as he has provided. He has placed an instrument 
within the reach of every one of the Elijah class who desires 
to have a part in setting the nominal heavens on fire. The 
instrument is the Seventh Volume of Scripture Studies, and 
other kindred truths which the Lord has been providing for 
the church. In Revelation 22:10 he tells us, "Make no secret 
of the predictions contained in this book; for the time for their 
fulfilment is now close at hand." 

The church is now in a time of severe trial and testing. 
Many things are arising that have a tendency to cause doubt. 
The church needs comfort and encouragement. There is 
nothing that will give her so much encouragement and comfort 
as to engage intelligently and enthusiastically in the harvest 
work, with the instruments which the Lord has provided for 
that work at .this time. Concerning the Seventh Volume, 
Brother Russell said: "It will probably be given to the church 
in a time of direst need, for her comfort and encouragement," 
Again he said, "It will be for the purpose of enabling the 
church to stand after first having been developed." He 
pointed out that the book would be an explanation of Revelation
 and Ezekiel. Can we ever look for another explanation 
of Revelation such as we now possess, with 743 extracts from 
Brother Russell's pen and thousands of Scripture references 
confirming the same? Brother Russell replied to a question 
concerning the Seventh Volume, "If the Lord shows me the 
key, I will Write the Seventh Volume; if he shows the key 
to someone else, he can write it." Brother Russell himself is 
the key, and his modesty and humility prevented him from 
seeing it. He is the prominent figure foreshadowed both in 
Revelation and Ezekiel. 

THE PEHHT 

Explaining the parable of the Penny (Matthew 20:1-16), 
Brother Russell set forth in Scbiptube Studies, Vol. Ill, page 
223, that the penny is "Kingdom honors." In Psalm 149:5-9 
we read, "Let the saints be joyful in glory; let them sing 
aloud upon their beds; let the high praises of God be in their 
mouths and a two-edged sword in their hand; to execute 
vengeance upon the heathen and punishment upon the people; 
to bind their kings with chains and their nobles with fetters 
of iron; to execute upon them the judgment written; this 
honor have all the saints." Commenting upon this Psalm, 
Brother Russell stated that the "honor" here referred to would 
be conferred upon the saints on this side of the veil; that the 
sword, likewise, would be used by the saints on this side the 
veil. It is a great and wonderful honor to have part in wielding
 the sword now (the message of truth) that is binding 
the kings, rulers, nobles and systems of this world. Everyone 
who joyfully receives and uses the "point" of the sword, to 
wit, the Seventh Volume (Ezek. 21:14, 15), thus receives 
"Kingdom Honors" — The Penny. 

For many years we have been promised the Seventh Volume. 
All have looked for it, expecting the last coming into the 
truth would be classed equally with the first in receiving it. 


[6149] 


(294-295) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooki,yw» N. Y. 


The parable shows that some would murmur and complain. 
In harmony with this parable we see some murmuring and rejecting
 Volume Seven. Hence they are not satisfied with the 
penny — the honor that the Lord has offered them of having 
part in this wonderful closing work of the harvest. Such are 
not engaged now in the harvest, but are more particularly 
engaged in murmuring, in finding fault and in trying to hinder 
the work. 

THE ANGEL WITH THE SICKLE 

"And another angel came out from the altar, which had 
power over fire, and cried with a loud voice to him that had 
the sharp sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sickle and gather the 
cluster of the vine of the earth, for her grapes are fully rrpe." 
(Rev. 14:17, 18) Clearly, the angel here mentioned is the 
Watch Tower Biblb: a^d Tract Society, The altar represents
 the place of sacrifice, and the Society is maintained by 
the sacrifices of saints. The Lord has used the Society since 
its organization, and is still using it. There would be no 
reason why he would change his channel, or chariot, or method 
of hearing the message to his people until the work is finished. 

The sacrifice of the saints has wonderfully increased the 
work during the present year. The contributions for the year 
1917 are already far in excess of the entire year 1916, and 
there are yet two months more of this year. The volunteer 
work for this year is much greater than in 1916. There has 
been a great increase in the pastoral work. It has been frequently
 remarked at the conventions J,his year that never has 
there been such a spirit of loving devotion to the Lord and 
his cause and to each other as is shown by the friends in 
general, with the firm determination to finish their course 
with joy by now grasping the sword and using the "point" 
of it--the Seventh Volume — to the glory and praise of the 
Master. Interest at public meetings is also wonderfully increasing
. 

"Which had power over fire," means the authority to publish
 and send out an explanation of the prophecies of Ezekiel 
and Revelation, which are destructive to the present erroneous 
systems by turning the flood of light upon them. This is 
exactly the work now being done by the Society. "And the 
angel [Society] thrust in his sickle [message of truth] into 
the earth, and gathered the vine of the earth and cast it into 
the great winepress of the wrath of God" — by distributing 
far and wide amongst order-loving people the good news that 
the Babylonish systems of error are doomed, and a better 
time is near at hand. Will you have a part in this good 
work? Are you doing your part, and receiving the blessing? 

THE GREAT DEIVE BEGINWIKG 
Many are signifying their keen interest in this work by 
entering the colporteur service. The demand for colporteurterritory
 is every day increasing. Several new pilgrims are 
entering the service. The extension work is reviving; the 
pastoral work is increasing; volunteers are doing much more 
than heretofore; others are doing sharp-shooting; while still 
others are giving chart talks, and thus the army of the Lord, 
the little band of Gideon throughout the world, is now holding 
forth the light, proclaiming the message that the work may be 
finished in the Lord's appointed time, Babylon put to complete 
rout, and the Lord's little ones gathered home. 

Many classes are adopting the following method for a 
quick accomplishment of colporteuring of their respective districts
, namely : the territory of a city or a county is assigned 
by the Society upon request, to a district committee, consisting 
of two or three energetic members ( who may be regular colporteurs
 or otherwise) appointed by the class. This district 
committee deals exclusively with the home office in the way of 
ordering books, making reports, etc. This committee, whose 
assignment supercedes all others, will co-operate with any 
regular colporteurs who may be in the county, but the understanding
 being that the territory will be divided by the committee
 into small districts, and that every member in the local 
class who has the desire, time and ability will participate 
in the rapid colporteuring of that territory, by taking a small 
district and working it quickly. Many of the classes are ordering
 books in large quantities for this work, the Society granting
 them special colporteur rates. Our thought is that the 
canvassing of the colporteurs should be done for the entire 
seven volumes, but the colporteur should specialize on the 
Seventh Volume, To this end we suggest the following as 
a method, or canvass: 

"Good morning! I have here something that you will want, 
and I will take only a moment to call it to your attention. 
As we know, for more than three years the world has been 
involved in the greatest war of all times. The people everywhere
 are asking 'Why should We have such a war? What 


win be the result?' Those who read the Bible have wondered 
if this is the great war therein foretold. For a long time 
order-loving people, Bible readers and Christians have desired 
to understand the prophecies of Revelation and Ezekiel. 

"I have here a work recently published by the Bible Society
 of Brooklyn, New York, which is the first and only 
book that makes clear every part of Revelation and Ezekiel. 
It takes up these prophecies verse by verse, and explains them. 
It throws more light on the present war, the real causes, and 
what will be the result, than does anything yet written. It 
shows what part the Catholics, Methodists, Baptists, Presbyterians
 and other church denominations have played in the 
world's history, and what part they are yet to perform. It 
treats the subject from the political, scientific, historical and 
prophetic viewpoints. Of course you will want it. You can't 
afford to be without it. The publishers have placed it at such 
a low figure that it is now within the reach of every one. 

[Pause a moment for them to ask price of book.] 

"The price is only 60 cents, less than half the usual price 
of a hook that size. While this book is complete within itself, 
yet r it is the last in a series of seven volumes. When you have 
these volumes you have a complete library, making clear every 
difficult Bible and prophetic question which you have heretofore
 been unable to understand. The house also publishes twice 
each month a journal which keeps abreast with current events 
in the light of the Scriptures. No matter what church you 
belong to, you need these books, and particularly the Seventh 
Volume. The entire set together with the journal is only 
$4.50. Shall I bring them to you?" 

Do the colporteur work first, then let pastoral workers 
follow, loaning books to those who do not purchase. 

The Society has been compelled to order another large 
edition of the Seventh Volume, that the demand may be supplied
. The friends are greatly encouraged at the outlook; 
and those who love the Lord' supremely are forgetting all 
differences and have in mind but one thought, as did St. 
Paul: "This one thing I do" — T am determined to win the 
prize. 

NEW VOLUNTEER MATTEB 

The Society is preparing and will shortly issue another 
number of volunteer matter for this year. In 1916 we had 
only one main issue. This year we have already published 
two, and the distribution has far exceeded that of 1916. The 
third number is now being prepared and will contain strong, 
pointed, compact truths in line with the message set forth 
in the Seventh Volume, the leading article being entitled The 
Fall of Babylon. We suggest that the friends order immediately
 the quantity they will be able to use. Specify B. 
S. M. No. 99. 

"And I saw an angel standing in the sun, and he cried with 
a loud voice* saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of 
heaven, Come, gather yourselves together unto the supper of 
the great God." (Revelation 19:17) The angel standing in 
the sun clearly represents the the Elijah class yet on earth 
— those, we believe, who have joyfully accepted the Seventh 
Volume of Scripture Studies. Greater light has come to 
such and they are serene and happy in divine favor. Resplendent
 in the light that they have received in the closing 
hours of the age, these are eagerly spreading far and near 
to order-loving people the enlightening prophecies of Revelation
 and Ezekiel, They are not fearful; they are not complainers
; they are not shrinking from duty, hut are fearlessly 
and plainly declaring the message of truth, calling to the 
eagles (God's consecrated people) to <?ome and join in the 
feast of the Lord. This might suggest that those who reject 
the Seventh Volume would not be of the Elijah class, but would 
be separated from the Elijah class by the fiery chariot. 

Truly, we are living in a fearful and wonderful time, a 
time fraught with great danger, great responsibility and 
marvelous opportunities. Let each one who loves the Lord 
and his cause joyfully participate in using the instrument that 
shall reap "the vine of the earth.'* Seeing these thingB, let 
us look up and lift up our heads, for our deliverance draweth 
nigh. Your time, your love, your energy and strength, your 
means and your influence — your all — may now be used to the 
glory of the Lord and to your everlasting Denefit and happiness. 
Will you thus employ your talents? Soon our journey will 
be ended, and we shall be gathered to our glory home. Let 
us be faithful! 

"Come, all ye saints, to Pisgah'a mountain. 

Come view our home beyond the tide; 
Millennial Canaan is before us; 
Soon we'll sing on the other side." 


[6150] 


THE TEMPLE REBUILT AND DEDICATED 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "Rebuilding the Temple/' published in issue of October 15, 1903, which please see.] 


EZRA'S RETURN FROM BABYLON 


[This article, with the exception of the first paragraph (printed below) was reprinted from article entitled «' Gathering and Winnowing
," published in issue of November 1, 1905, which please see. I 


The prophecies of Haggai were delivered to Israel about 
the time of their return from the Babylonian captivity, and 
therefore at the time of the founding of the Temple, the 
Prophet being advanced in years. Then the Prophet Zechariah, 
a younger man, was raised up by the Lord; and other messages 
were sent to the discouraged Israelites to show them that 
they must not expect great national prosperity at that time, 
but that nevertheless the Lord was with them, and that by 


faithfully continuing in an apparently small, insignificant 
matter they would be accomplishing his purposes. In some 
degree this corresponds with the messages which have come 
to the Lord's people since the time of WycIifTe, and which have 
led to the Reformation movement in its various aspects, and 
incidentally to the preparation of the "living stones" of the 
glorious antitypical Temple. 


SEVENTH VOLUME TRULY APPRECIATED 


It would be impossible for us to print the thousands of 
letters being received expressive of the joy and assistance received
 through careful and prayerful reading of the Seventh 
Volume, The Finished Mystery. 

Surely the blessing of the Lord has rested upon this volume 
in no measured terms! Hundreds have stated that they have 
renewed their consecration to the Lord, and have appreciated 
his protecting care from the evil spirits more and more as 
they see more clearly how these evil ones are operating. 
However, we are glad to make a few quotations from some of 
the letters, all of which we are sure w r ill be read with interest: 

"We desire to tell you of the joy and comfort Volume Seven 
has brought to us. We appreciate it as the gift of the Lord 
and consider it invaluable. Bringing to us the Sinaitic version 
of Revelation alone would be worth the money, to say nothing 
of the labor of love in bringing together our Pastor's comments 
and the harmonizing of the other portions. I also deeply 
appreciate the comments on the book of Ezekiel. I consider 
that the whole book is w T onderful. As I think over our Pastor
's words that Volume Seven would be given to the church in 
her hour of direst need, my heart is comforted as respects the 
members of the little flock this side the veil, and I am amazed 
at the gracious provision of our heavenly Father on behalf 
of the great company class, to be reached through the same 
volume. What a glorious assistance it will be in helping them 
to come quickly to a knowledge of the truth, present truth!" 
— C. H. S-, Pa. 

"The more I study, looking up references to Scripture 
Studies, Towers and Scriptures, the more fully I am convinced
 that it is indeed the promised Seventh Volume or 
'penny' — THE message now DUE. Words fail ,me to express 
the JOY and strength that fills my sou). The words of our 
Pastor have been culled from his writings of forty years, and 
brought together in one compact form, and supplemented by 
certain facts that he himself could not so well state as another
. Surely it will be a POWER to accomplish the Lord's 
purpose at this momentous time! I pray that I may use this 
chariot to mount to the skies."— E. M., Mass. 

"The most of us are rejoicing in the Seventh Volume. To 
my mind the volume came at the appointed time. I myself 
have been greatly oppressed of late with mental suggestions 
of a more or less lewd nature, and in talking to several of the 
friends I find this is true of both male and female. *Know ye 
not that we shall judge angels?' No doubt, the TEST IS 
NOW ON; and our dear Lord has provided us, through that 
wise servant, the vow, for our help and protection at this 
time. It seems to me very plain how those fallen ones are 
being judged, and at the same time we as well. Let ma REMEMBER
 THE VOW/'— G. M, K., Va. 

"I feel as though the 'penny* is hundreds, yea, more than 
hundreds, of times beyond what I deserve. It has given me so 
much encouragement and so much" blessing. 1 am only fourteen
 years old, so that I do not mingle with trre world at all, 
and my only friends are the dear truth people; and this 
makes me shy in giving tracts to strangers, but I am trying 
to overcome and hope to be counted worthy of being of the 
Elijah class in this momentous hour." — 0. F. D., N. Y. 

"Our hearts are overflowing with love and gratitude to our 
loving Heavenly Father and our present Bridegroom and 
Chief Reaper for the wonderful message received through 
Volume Seven. We are overwhelmed at the goodness of our 
God. Surely we are not worthy of his wonderful favors, to 
be among those who have hearing ears and seeing eyes!" — 
A Brother and Sister (the two oldest successful colporteurs 
in the field.) 

"All of the class are interested in the Father's plan as it 
is now being revealed in this last hour, and they have read 
and are studying the Seventh Volume as having been sent 


at just the time Pastor Russell said it would come — in a time 
of great distress prevailing in the church. All rejoice at the 
marked indications of the fulfilment of what we are to expect
 in the perilous times which the church must see before 
the glorification comes/'- — C. B., 111. 

"I can never tell you what joy was mine when the longIooked
-for Seventh Volume was handed to me. It certainly 
has been my Gethsemane comforter, renewing my zeal and 
courage with the reading of each page. How I long to be 
one of the three hundred (class) of the antitypical Gideon's 
band! and I am determined TO BE, by the Lords help. Each 
day since receiving the volume I have thanked my dear heavenly
 Father for so great a favor." — B. T. M., Minn. 

"I am rejoicing in the Seventh Volume. It is a call to look 
to our armor, fasten it carefully, to sharpen (our knowledge
 of) the Sword of the Spirit, and to lose no time in preparing
 to meet the foe. Before I had opened the parcel I 
felt it was the last message from our Head before we started 
for home. It is also a message for the false church, but how 
few will heed it till we are gone!" — Mary T. F. H., Ohio. 

"The enlightenment which I have received from Volume 
Seven, especially Rev. 7:1-3, has been a great help to me; for 
I have had corroborative experiences along this very line. It 
comes to me now as re- enforcement in the time of need, giving
 me new strength for battle against the unseen forces and 
a deeper love and sympathy for others. Praise the Lord*" — 
H. C. H„ Conn. 

"How great and rich a blessing has come to me through 
the Seventh Volume words cannot tell, but daily from its 
pages flows deeply and richly the Spirit of the Lord. How 
evident it is that God's hand is guiding and helping Brother 
Rutherford! How evidently the Lord guided in regard to 
Volume Seven!" — J. A. M., Pilgrim. 

"Am much pleased with the Seventh Volume and deeply 
impressed with the many facts pointing to the Passover of 
1918. My continued prayer is that we all may be found faithful
 to our covenant of sacrifice and found possessed of the 
Spirit of the Master, as illustrated in the first martyr, Stephen 
— 'Lord, lay not this sin to their charge/ " — G. F. E., Conn. 

"I cannot tell you how much I am enjoying the Seventh 
Volume. Am in the 14th chapter of Revelation, and it is getting
 more intensely interesting every minute. I am so anxious 
to get through with it to find out what the Lord's will has in 
store for us on this side of the veil, both of sorrows and 
joys."— R. B. J., Mich. 

"The wonderful Seventh Volume! We could hardly believe
 it was at last published. We are feasting on it, and are 
thankful we are accounted worthy to read it and understand 
it. We have been greatly encouraged by reading it and want 
to be of those who will use it to mount to the skies." — H. N., 
Ohio. 

"Oh, what a blessing the Seventh Volume has been to the 
church! Such encouragement we find while reading it! It 
causes us to be more diligent, and not let an opportunity slip 
that would help some poor struggling soul. I cannot find 
words to near tell my sentiments of this precious book." — 
E. T„ Mont. 

"We are rejoicing m the Seventh Volume; and we accept 
it as from the blessed Lord in this hour of temptation, and 
how thankful we are that we have lived to receive the penny. 
What a wonderful time we are living in, and what a Savior!" 
—0. R., Okla. 

"How rich we all are with the wealth of his truth, and 
now additionally with his latest gift,- 'the penny!* My heart 
is full of gratitude to him, and I praise him for hia keeping 
power and the deep peace which passeth understanding." — 
J. G. H., N. Y. 


[6151] 


(298-303) 


(303-307) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


"I am proceeding to put in shape my affairs in order to en 

?age in this latest Lord's work as the way may open to me. <oy<> oevenin voiume testimony, n any one present tlien 

shall truly be very sorry and ashamed if" I miss the chariot could not see it is the Seventh Volume, he was dumb as well 

when it ascends."— Sr. S., N. J. as blind."— E. H. T., D. C , 


"The testimony meeting last Sunday afternoon was about 
75% Seventh Volume testimony. If any one present then 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


CONVINCED THE LOEB MADE NO MISTAKE 

Sept. 9th, 1917. 
Deab Brethben: — 

Greetings in our dear Lord! Just a few lines to tell you 
of my full heart sympathy and loyal support in these times 
of stress upon the church in general, and particularly upon 
our dear President, who is so nobly and faithfully standing 
for truth and right. The kindly way in which he has spoken 
of the opposing brethren during each and all of the series of 
conventions this year has been a grand inspiration to me and 
a wonderful lesson in brotherly love. Of him I can now truthfully
 say in the words of St. Paul to the Philippian church, 
"I thank my God upon every remembrance of you." 

I was so glad to receive Harvest Siftings and to know 
exactly how conditions are. One little thing was cleared up 
which has been rather a mystery to me for over a year. T 
wondered why, when one of the now opposing brethren was in 
Vancouver on a pilgrim visit in 1916, he should have spoken 
so strangely about Brother Rutherford and Brother Van Amburgh
. He stated at my table that whenever Brother Russell 
was away for any length of time, he invariably, upon his return
, would be called upon to straighten out tangles at Bethel, 
doctrinally or otherwise, caused by Brothers Rutherford and 
Van Amburgh. I believed it then, coming as it did from one 
of the Society's officers. How could I reasonably doubt it? 
But now, with Harvest Sittings in my hand, I see plainly the 
motive behind these remarks. It appears the brother was 
here doing what he had been engaged in doing all through 
Canada — commonly known by the world as "knocking." Of 
course when the election took place last January I was greatly 
surprised that without any effort on Brother Rutherford's 


part he was placed in the position of honor and trust which 
he now holds under the Lord — that of President of the Watch 
Towkb Bible and Tract Society, which the Lord loves as 
the apple of his eye, I now see the wisdom of the Lord in 
the whole matter, and am convinced that He made no mistake. 

I notice in the new pamphlet gotten out by the opposition 
they charge that the Bethel Family and Pilgrims are staying 
by our President because they have been bribed. What an 
insult to the dear faithful friends at Bethel whom these 
brethren pretended to love! As one of the traveling brethren 
I positively deny being bought or bribed. I should think it a 
very dangerous position to take — to freely charge any of God's 
elect with such a crime: 

Dear Brother Rutherford is personally the target for 
Satan's darts at this time, but he has the prayers of all true 
saints that he may "be strong and very courageous." By 
divine favor, I am, 

Your brother in the truth, C. E. Heard, Pilgrim. 

SOME WORDS OF ENCOURAGEMENT 
Deab Brethren in Christ: — 

The Towers continue to be beautiful and inspiring; they 
seem just as stimulating and helpful as when our beloved 
Brother Russell was with us. There is one thing which has 
impressed me, one thing which marks this periodical as being 
of the Lord, namely, the absence of the ego, that personal 
element which is likely to engender sectarianism and pride. 

The dear Lord will surely continue this "meat in due season
" till the spiritual Israel are sealed and made meet for the 
glorious inheritance. Much love and best wishes. 

Yours in our dear Redeemer's name, 

Frederick Lardent. — England. 

