Announcements
LOVING IN DEED AND IN TRUTH
When the inspired apostle tells us, at 1 John 3:18 (NW), to love “neither in word nor with the tongue” he does not mean that no verbal expression is ever to be made of love. The tongue should certainly be used to express interest in others, showing them that we care for them. But to limit expressions of love to words only is to come short of the Scriptural requirement. To show our sincere love for others calls for more than just words. For ministers it means to leave the comfort of one’s home to take to others good spiritual food that will strengthen them to endure present-day stresses and trials. During May Jehovah’s witnesses, complying with the commandment to show love for others, will call on people at their doors with good news about God’s kingdom and leave with interested persons a Bible study aid book and a booklet for only a 50c contribution. You may share in this work by contacting the nearest Kingdom Hall or by writing to this Society.
AN INTERNATIONAL UNIFYING AGENT
Have you enjoyed this magazine that is in your hand? Ask yourself, Have you not learned at least one important fact about the Most High God or his Word, the Holy Bible? Is that not worthwhile gain? Another thing. Turn to the inside front cover. Note the forty-two languages into which this information is being translated. Note the astounding circulation of this same information. What does this indicate? It means that people all over the world are interested in the announcement of Jehovah’s kingdom that is featured in The Watchtower. It proves that there is a spirit among people of all nations that can unite them. It shows further that their hope is centered in the provisions of Jehovah God rather than the continually failing schemes of men. You can join regularly with these hundreds of thousands in the most profitable study that is now available to persons of good will toward God and their fellow man. Send only one dollar today and receive The Watchtower through the mail twice a month for one year. You will also be sent three printed Bible talks.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
May 27: Activity and Life versus Inactivity and Death, ¶1-24. Page 241.
June 3: Activity and Life versus Inactivity and Death, ¶25-27, and Gaining the Prize of Life by Active Training Now. Page 247.

