Announcements
◆ Literature offer for February through April will be a year’s subscription for The Watchtower, with three booklets or one of the 50c bound books copyrighted in 1961 or earlier, for $1.50. Subscriptions for both The Watchtower and Awake! may be offered with two of the older bound books for $3.00. As of September 1, 1973, congregation inventories showed over 198,000 bound books copyrighted in 1961 or earlier among congregations. If your congregation has more older books than publishers can use, please contact nearby congregations to see if they can help, to move your supply of older bound books. Reimbursement of individual publishers and of congregations for such books given free with new subscriptions will be handled in the same manner as outlined in the October 1972 Kingdom Ministry. None of the old books are stocked by the Society.
◆ In correspondence to the Society, when submitted by the presiding overseer, please be certain that the name of the city and the congregation are given in the return address. When anyone else writes to the Society, it would be appreciated if the name of the city and the congregation with which that one is associated would be stated in the body of the letter.
◆ It would be good for book study conductors to cover about 8 or 9 pages each week at the book study. Doing so will enable you to cover the book God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached in about a year.
◆ If you have not already done so, now is the time to order handbills for the special public talk on March 31; also Memorial invitations. The special April 15 Watchtower will feature the subject “Surviving on the Victorious Side at Har–Magedon.” The April 8 and April 22 issues of Awake! will also be special ones. Have you ordered sufficient? If not, please do so now.
◆ Temporary pioneering in April: it may be desirable for the presiding overseer to arrange a meeting soon at a time convenient for those interested in temporary pioneering in April. Many arrangements can be worked out for group witnessing, etc.
◆ New Publications Available:
Listening to the Great Teacher​—Laotian, Melanesian-Pidgin, Motu, Papiamento
“This Good News of the Kingdom”​—Hungarian, Kwale
Sermon Outlines​—Hungarian
“The Nations Shall Know that I Am Jehovah”​—How?​—Italian, Portuguese
Organization for Kingdom-preaching and Disciple-making​—Greek, Tagalog
Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook​—Afrikaans, Chishona, Greek, Ibo, Xhosa, Zulu
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Laotian, Tshiluba
“Singing and Accompanying Yourselves with Music in Your Hearts”​—Yoruba
◆ Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Divine Purpose​—Spanish
From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained​—Dutch, German
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Efik, Lingala, Samoan, Vietnamese
God’s Kingdom Rules​—Is the World’s End Near?​—Albanian
◆ The following forms and tracts are no longer being printed by the Society:
Study Record (File copy) (Former S-2)
Subscription Record Sheet (Former S-10)
Change of Address (S-49)
Regular Pioneer Information Letter (S-203)
Vacation Pioneer Information Letter (S-204)
Weekly Record Sheet (S-22)
Vacation Pioneer Report Card (S-201)
Congregation Chart
Would You Like to Understand the Bible? (Bible Study Folder)
What Do You Really Know About God? (Bible Study Folder)
Tracts 1 through 12 (English and Spanish)

