Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
All of us have reason to be overjoyed about what is taking place in the ranks of Jehovah’s people world wide.
Weren’t you thrilled to learn that 193,990 had symbolized their dedication by water immersion during the 1973 service year? That was the highest number in the history of Jehovah’s servants! And the increase has not slowed down. Already, during the first three months of this service year, Canada, Austria, Brazil, the Philippines and the United States have reported tremendous increases in the number baptized, increases exceeding by over 50 percent the outstanding number immersed during the same period last year.
Here in the United States we also had another fine month in the field during November. The largest number to date​—18,687—​shared in the regular pioneer work. All together, 478,795 reported field activity​—54,453 more than last November. We were featuring the book God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached, and nearly a million books were placed​—986,399 to be exact. A grand witness was given.
A few early reports have come in about distribution of Kingdom News No. 17. We heard about a priest who held up a copy in church warning his congregation not to accept it. The result? At least one man eagerly asked a Witness for a copy. In another place, a man who read it called a local Witness promptly and told him that for years as a church member he had been trying to understand the Bible but that now he knew why he was having difficulty; he wanted a home Bible study. What a privilege to have a part in finding and helping such people!
These are thrilling times in which to be alive. It is true, there are mounting problems for everyone as the old order deteriorates. But by our keeping in mind what it all means​—that the incoming of God’s new order is at hand—​we will be helped to keep first the interests of the Kingdom, and we will encourage one another to successful endurance.
Be assured of our warm love and heartfelt prayers on your behalf.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

