If Your Address Changes
Among the millions of persons who move each year are some of our brothers and interested persons. When there is an address change, what can be done to assist with the delivery of personal subscriptions and of literature supplies sent to the congregations? The following is provided for your reference:
Personal Subscriptions: A new Subscription Change of Address form (M-205) has been sent to congregations. It should be used to advise the Society of an address change only for personal subscriptions. The slip can be obtained from the one looking after the accounts records. When additional supplies of the M-205 form are needed, they can be ordered on the Literature Order Blank. If the M-205 is not available, write the Society a letter, giving the new address and the former one. If possible, send the address change four to six weeks before making a move. Doing so will help to ensure regular delivery of magazines and will assist toward saving the Society postage costs for the return of undeliverable magazines. (The Change of Address form, S-49, has been discontinued.)
Distributors’ Orders for Magazines: Congregations will continue to use the Distributors’ Order form (M-202) for address changes as well as for adjustments in the number of magazines desired. Allow at least one month for changes to become effective.
Handbill Orders: Unless you specifically request otherwise on the Handbill Order, your handbill orders will be sent to the Distributors’ Order mailing address.
Permanent Address for Literature Orders: Notify the Society whenever the permanent address for literature orders should be changed. Please do this in a letter accompanying your Literature Order Blank.
Permanent Mailing Address for Congregation Correspondence: If it becomes necessary to make a change in the permanent address for mailing correspondence, the body of elders can select a dependable person who plans to continue living where he now is, one who will see that the congregation’s mail is immediately given to the presiding overseer. This address need not be changed when a new presiding overseer begins to serve.
Some congregations have used one address for all mail and literature supplies from the Society. If this is the case with your congregation, it should be mentioned when notifying us of any change so that all of our address files will be properly adjusted.

