Presenting the Good News​—Using the Bible
1 God’s Word exerts tremendous power upon its hearers. Look what it has done for us. What it says is more powerful than anything that men can devise or speak. Using the Bible in our field ministry will work wonderfully to draw right-hearted ones to God, resulting in salvation to those disposed to obey Jehovah’s voice. (2 Tim. 3:16, 17) Are we using the Bible in our witness work as we go from house to house with the monthly offer and when we make return visits? Why the question? Reports from many parts of the country indicate that some publishers are not using the Bible as much as they were in the past.
2 To use the Bible in giving a presentation does require preparation on our part. Are we taking time to prepare our presentation so we can effectively use the Word of God in the field ministry?
3 When we call, how do householders view us? During the course of a day, through the news media and personal contacts, they hear expressions of the viewpoints, opinions and attitudes of other persons. On what authority do these expressions rest? If we are using the Bible, reading directly from it whenever possible, the householder can readily appreciate that our expressions have as their basis the supreme source of authority, Jehovah God himself. (John 17:3) Because of our dependence upon the Word of God, many of those we call upon will come to appreciate that we are ministers of God.
4 Have not many of us, when witnessing to friends, relatives, neighbors and others, heard expressions regarding our use of the Bible, such as: ‘You people really know your Bible’; ‘I wish I could make use of the Bible as you do,’ etc.? We are pleased to hear such comments.
5 The response of householders varies. If it becomes apparent that the householder will not give attention to our full Scriptural presentation, try to direct his attention to a single scripture. One could say: ‘I would very much appreciate hearing your thoughts on this one scripture.’
6 Not knowing when we may find a person genuinely longing to hear God’s Word, let’s be prepared to use the Bible, endeavoring to give the full Scriptural presentation at every opportunity, and, when that it not possible, presenting a single scripture.​—Ps. 119:162; Luke 11:28.

