Serving with a Spirit of Willingness
1 Jehovah’s servants in this time of the end are prophetically described as demonstrating a spirit of willingness. (Ps. 110:3) We know that Jehovah has always been pleased with willing, whole-souled service.​—2 Cor. 9:7.
2 But it can be asked: “How could Paul say, ‘Woe is me if I did not declare the good news,’ and at the same time perform his service willingly?” (1 Cor. 9:16) Paul knew what is stated at Ezekiel 3:18 about the serious responsibility to give warning to the wicked. He knew that Jehovah, out of his love for people, wanted them to be warned. Paul certainly had a love for people, too, did he not? And he willingly accepted Jehovah’s viewpoint with regard to preaching the good news to the world of sinful mankind. Furthermore, as shown at 1 Corinthians 9:17, he “willingly” carried out this ministry at his own expense.
3 It is encouraging to know that so many of our brothers have willingly arranged their affairs to serve as temporary and regular pioneers. For the first month of the service year, 17,010 were able to serve as regular pioneers; for October, 17,824; and for November, 18,687. Commendably over 30,000 served as temporary pioneers in September. Are these figures mentioned to make you feel under “compulsion” in some way to serve as a pioneer even if your circumstances do not permit you to do so? No, but, rather, as an encouragement, to show what others have been able to do to enlarge their contribution in the work of Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making. It is appreciated that many have a family and other responsibilities that must be cared for and that may for the present prevent them from serving as temporary or regular pioneers. (Gal. 6:4; 1 Tim. 5:8) Isn’t it encouraging, though, to know that so many of our brothers have been able to enlarge their privileges of service? Can you?
4 Our being motivated by the same “word of God” causes us to think of ways that we can enlarge our field service privileges. (Heb. 4:12) Younger ones may be able to serve as temporary pioneers during vacation periods from school. Family heads may be able to get time off from work or use evenings and weekends to serve as temporary pioneers. Such would require adjustments in their normal schedule, as can be appreciated. In some families it may be possible to help other family members to serve as temporary pioneers during the month of April. When elders and ministerial servants are able to take the lead in temporary or regular pioneer service, the entire congregation is benefited.
5 Some have been able to use temporary pioneer service as a stepping-stone to regular pioneer service. If you will be serving as a temporary pioneer for consecutive months, endeavor to put in 100 hours each month. (Organization book, p. 141) This will be helpful in determining if you are able to reach the hour requirement set for regular pioneers.
6 During April many who are studying will have progressed to the point that they can be invited to share in the field ministry for the first time. Possibly you will be asked by the elders lovingly to assist such new ones. Where it will be advantageous, the elders can arrange for meetings for field service throughout each week in April to help all in the congregation to have a full share in the field ministry. Arrangements can also be made for experienced publishers to work along with others to give encouragement, having in mind the principle set out at Ecclesiastes 4:9, 10.
7 As we continue ‘receiving’ in such a large way from the abundance of spiritual food provided through Jehovah’s organization, we feel moved to share such good things with others, don’t we? (2 Pet. 1:8) From our own personal experience we have found that giving willingly brings us great joy, just as Jesus said would be the case.​—Acts 20:35.
[Blurb on page 8]
Be a Temporary Pioneer in April.

