Appreciating the Gift of Kingdom Work
1 Work is indeed a gift. Not one of questionable value but one that has been proved to be of value. It is well known that a reasonable amount of physical labor brings a wide variety of benefits to both mind and body. This being true of ordinary work, how much truer of Kingdom work, which produces results that can last forever. Here is a gift of surpassing excellence.
2 Yes, what a privilege to be dedicated to the Sovereign of the universe and assigned a share in the final work of preaching the good news and making disciples. (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) This work deserves our whole-souled participation. (Col. 3:23) By such work we lay up treasures in heaven for ourselves, and what work could result in greater good for others?
3 During the month of October we will work at presenting the subscription offer for Awake! It should be our desire to aid as many people as possible to have the opportunity to become acquainted with the value of Awake! Having the special issues to work with during October will be particularly valuable in developing interest.
4 When you place a subscription or even one magazine, what might it accomplish? A missionary sister in Sierra Leone, West Africa, writes: “One Saturday while engaging in the magazine work I met a retired gentleman who readily accepted the magazines I offered him.” The concluding paragraph of her letter says: “He has progressed to the point where he now attends all the meetings. His next step, the field ministry, as he recently expressed his desire to be baptized at the district assembly in December.” Getting the magazines into as many homes as possible is a worthy goal.
5 Do you share in the street magazine work? A pioneer from the Netherlands says: “When standing with the magazines by the station regularly we see the same people commuting to their place of work. It’s not uncommon to meet some of these persons in the door-to-door work. One lady told me she recognized me from standing by the station. She was very friendly and took two magazines. The following Monday while I was standing with the magazines she approached me, asking me to call back on a Sunday morning, because her daughter would like to know more about the Bible . . . The daughter is making good progress.”
6 Do you enjoy making others happy? Then think of the joy that a single copy of Awake! brought to one downhearted person. She writes from Jamaica: “My search for the truth began in June 1971 when my sister died in an automobile accident. For the first time I sat down and thought deeply about life and what it all means. The funeral service gave me no answers and I grieved over my loss very much. One Saturday in June 1972 I remember walking home and as I opened the door I stepped on some paper. There was an Awake! and an invitation to the Kingdom Hall the next day. The article ‘Why Must Even Youths Die?’ made me jump for joy​—all my questions were answered! That same night I got out my clothes to attend the meeting the next day. Sunday I spent reading the Awake! and resting, and at 6 p.m. I attended my first meeting. A young sister asked if I would like to have a home Bible study, which I eagerly accepted. My friends opposed, but I paid them no mind, as I knew I had found the truth. Soon after we completed the Truth book, I was baptized, April 7, 1973. Now life has real meaning and purpose for me. I hope to see my sister again in the resurrection.” Could it be that some of the magazine and subscription work you do in October will turn out this way?
[Blurb on page 1]
Appreciating the Gift of Kingdom Work.
[Blurb on page 8]
Make Awake! Available to All.

