Presenting the Good News​—With the Book God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached
1 In November we will have the opportunity for the first time to present, in the regular house-to-house work, the new book God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached. Here is something entirely new to offer in the territory. In presenting the book each publisher should feel free to do so in the manner that he believes he can handle best and that he feels is best in his territory. Some will want to begin with a Scriptural discussion, while others might prefer to offer the book directly. The following suggestions can be used or they can be adjusted to what you personally prefer:
2 One might say: “There are many honest-hearted people who would like to see the establishment of a government that is truly dedicated to righteousness, and which will last. Our brief call is to encourage people to listen to what God himself has to say about the establishing of such government. Speaking of the thousand-year reign of Christ and those who would rule with him, Revelation 20:6 says, [read]. With such individuals ruling, we can be sure the government will be of the best kind. This book, God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached, will show why it is a certainty and the evidence that it is near.”
3 Or, one might ask: “Do you think it is possible to establish a completely righteous government that will last for a thousand years?” (Pause for reply.) This publication, God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached, shows clearly that God has just such a government in mind for this earth. We place the book on a contribution of just fifty cents.”
4 After a brief introduction regarding your call, you might show the book, read the title, then say: “Here on page 18, after quoting Revelation 19:11 through 20:10, where God’s thousand-year rule is discussed, it points out . . .” Then read paragraph 28 or as much of it as you think appropriate, or, read paragraph 30. Then make the presentation.
5 Would you enjoy covering your territory with a Kingdom sermon again? Then you might prepare something using Matthew 6:9, 10, showing that the main purpose of the Kingdom is to accomplish God’s will, and Revelation 21:3, 4, showing that the Kingdom will restore health and life to mankind in a paradise earth.
6 It will certainly be a pleasure to present this new publication in our territory. Surely Jehovah’s blessing will be with us.

