Service Meetings to Fit Your Congregation
1 “And all your sons will be persons taught by Jehovah, and the peace of your sons will be abundant,” promises Isaiah 54:13. The service meeting is one of the arrangements through which such teaching comes. Everyone in the congregation can contribute to making it an enjoyable and beneficial meeting.
2 Almost all service meetings follow the time schedule and material outlined in Kingdom Ministry. However, occasionally that information might apply differently in various congregations and so the elders and ministerial servants who present the information should do so with flexibility. For example, the article “Challenging, Yet Rewarding, Territory” in the June 1973 Kingdom Ministry applied primarily to larger cities. Thus the brothers in small towns and rural areas, while applying these suggestions to their local areas, did not need to spend as much time covering the material.
3 When information in a Kingdom Ministry article does apply directly to the congregation, then the one responsible for the presentation should prepare that material thoroughly so the audience fully understands and appreciates how it applies locally. Apparently in some instances the one assigned concludes that all in the congregation have read the information and are fully acquainted with it and so he does additional research so as to present his own “fresh” material and not “rehash” what is in the Kingdom Ministry. At times this is done in the form of a long, drawn-out introduction. But it would be more profitable if he used that time to consider the assigned article itself and to aid the congregation to see how to apply it.
4 Some have asked questions regarding how best to conduct the discussions of the Scriptural subjects occasionally outlined under “Your Service Meetings.” They have felt that there is too much material and in some instances have gotten only halfway through. For example, in the outline “How Well Do You Know the Organization?” in the September Kingdom Ministry there are about fifteen Scripture references in addition to publication references. The chairman really should arrange for a rounded-out discussion of the entire subject. It is not intended that all scriptures should be looked up and read during the discussion. The same is true of references to publications. These are included so that publishers can look them up at home as they prepare and then bring these thoughts into the discussion, possibly only briefly. Thus some time can usually be given to each question, key texts chosen in advance can be read, the discussion will move along briskly and the congregation will benefit because all points are covered in a balanced consideration.
5 The question has been raised as to how the brother assigned can adequately conclude the service meeting when only ten minutes are set aside for both “Concluding Comments” and “Branch Letter” as in the September 16 service meeting. He will have to decide how the time will be distributed, but in this instance likely only a very few, choice, brief statements would be made on the “Branch Letter.” He is responsible to see that the service meeting ends on time.
6 Who should be selected to demonstrate the various Scriptural presentations and literature offers or otherwise show how the good news might be delivered? It should usually be the more capable and experienced publishers who are asked to do this. Additionally, they should have been instructed and rehearsed by the chairman of that assignment. It is generally not best for new and inexperienced publishers to demonstrate how the work is to be done simply because we want them to have the opportunity to be on the platform, although some can be used as householders. They will have many opportunities to get experience through commenting at the meetings, giving student talks in the ministry school and participating in the field service.
7 If the service meetings at times seem not to be as interesting and instructive as they might be, it would be good for the presiding overseer and, in fact, the body of elders, to consider the matter to see if application of some of the above thoughts might help. Both those in the audience and those on the platform, with forethought and preparation, can contribute toward making the service meetings upbuilding and joyful occasions.

