Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 14
10 min: Song 75. Introduction, text and comments.
20 min: “Appreciating the Gift of Kingdom Work.” Questions and answers. Could have some of the experiences read and then have the audience tell what they especially appreciated or learned. Also, in connection with paragraph 3 or near end of discussion might have well-rehearsed demonstration of “Awake!” subscription presentation, or double subscription offer, that has proved effective in home territory.
10 min: Our Accomplishments and Prospects. Review some of the good things the congregation has accomplished during the 1973 service year. Can also discuss some of the things it hopes to accomplish during the 1974 service year.
10 min: Our Tract Distribution Campaign. Report on how congregation did in distribution of tracts. How many territories were worked? Were all the tracts distributed? Discuss article “Have You Followed Through?” Might include some favorable experiences regarding people’s response during distribution and also now in the follow-up work.
10 min: Concluding comments. Include accounts report. Song 81.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 21
10 min: Song 84. Introduction, text and comments.
10 min: “Are You a Subscriber?” Questions and answers.
10 min: October’s special magazines. Report on distribution of October 8, 15 and 22 issues. Some presentations that have proved successful can be discussed so that others can use these ideas in placing any remaining copies.
15 min: “Can You Wait upon Jehovah?” From August 1, 1973, “Watchtower.” Can be handled primarily as a talk but also can bring audience into discussion.
15 min: Concluding comments: How is “Awake!” subscription campaign going? Which presentations are proving most successful? Let publishers offer helpful comments but might have some prepared beforehand with beneficial ideas. Comment on Branch Letter. Song 86.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 28
12 min: Song 92. Introduction, text and comments. “Question Box.”
18 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With the Book ‘God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached.’” Chairman can offer some introductory comments regarding privilege of covering territory with the new book and need to have share. Then can discuss with audience some of the presentations suggested. Would be good to have one or two well-rehearsed demonstrations and then some closing comments by chairman.
15 min: Our Special Public Meetings. Let congregation know about the arrangements that have been made for series of talks in new book “God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached.” Remind brothers of how they can have full share in this special arrangement by reading as much of material as possible beforehand, by attending and by helping others to attend. Use introductory material in September “Kingdom Ministry” insert as basis for discussion. Point out that some will be able to read beforehand the chapters to be covered in coming public meetings, but others might be able to read only scriptures recommended for reading in advance. Be sure to emphasize how the brothers will benefit by advance preparation and attendance, and the need for all to be there. Might also make some general comments on congregation’s public meeting program and seek to build appreciation for arrangement as a whole.
15 min: Concluding comments. Comment on some of the Theocratic News items. Song 93.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 4
15 min: Song 96. Introduction, text and comments. Discuss November theme, “Prove Our Faith by Firmness in Our Integrity,” by covering choice thoughts from March 1, 1972, “Watchtower,” in pars. 1-6, beginning on page 133; par. 19, page 138; and pars. 21, 22 on page 139.
15 min: “Theocratic Educational Opportunities.” Possibly ministry school overseer could handle this. Some of the material could be given in form of a talk but can draw audience into discussion freely. Can also mention some good things that have taken place in local congregation’s ministry school recently, such as new students enrolled, improved talks being given by students, increased appreciation in evidence on part of brothers in general. Possibly there are some suggestions that can be given for improvement that school overseer could helpfully mention.
15 min: “Service Meetings to Fit Your Congregation.” The presiding overseer might want to handle this. He could offer some introductory remarks for about two minutes and then call two or three responsible brothers to platform to discuss major points in article. Be sure to make local application where possible. In conclusion, audience could be given opportunity to make expression of what it is that they especially appreciate about the service meetings.
15 min: Concluding comments. Comment on any applicable Announcements. Draw from audience comments regarding placing the new book “God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached.” Ask what publishers have found works best in presenting the offer in local territory. Song 97.

