Buy Out the Time During Wicked Days
Why should Christians value time highly?
Time is considered so valuable that some say “time is money.” It is precious, valuable. a prized commodity. Without time nothing can be enjoyed, nothing can be accomplished. Time is also valuable because, under present conditions, man’s life-span is limited to seventy or eighty years. That is why youths are counseled to remember their Creator. (Eccl. 12:1) Especially is the time of this generation, in which the good news of God’s kingdom has to be preached first, limited. As the apostle Paul expressed it: “Brothers, the time left is reduced.” Today it is even more reduced. Satan the Devil knows that his time is reduced. That is why he is so furiously active.—1 Cor. 7:29; Rev. 12:12.
What counsel do we therefore do well to heed?
“Keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise but as wise persons, buying out the opportune time for yourselves, because the days are wicked.” If this was true of Paul’s day, how much more is it true of these critical “last days” when wicked men and impostors advance from bad to worse!—Eph. 5:15, 16; 2 Tim. 3:1, 13.a
In what ways can Jehovah’s witnesses use their time wisely?
By avoiding unprofitable pursuits. They can use their time wisely by performing all their necessary activities, such as providing the necessities of life, in a way that will please Jehovah. In particular can they use their time wisely by preparing for and attending the meetings of their Christian congregation and by sharing in the various features of the field ministry. In this regard a schedule of Christian activity is most useful and will serve as a protection. A very busy schedule will keep them occupied in the work of the Lord and thus protect them against getting into trouble.—1 Cor. 15:58.
Does the proper use of time allow for rest and recreation?
Yes, rest and recreation are necessary for keeping balanced and healthy. But the kind of recreation we choose and the time we devote to it should be balanced with our Christian obligations. While we would like to spend much time enjoying the beauties of God’s creation and other forms of recreation, in view of the urgency of our times these should be balanced with our worship. When a ship is sinking, one’s thoughts are not on recreation but on survival. So today, for Christians time for recreation must be limited in the interest of helping people flee to safety.
How can use our time even more wisely?
Those who are Christian ministers can use their time even more wisely by improving their effectiveness in the ministry. They should not be ‘beating the air.’ (1 Cor. 9:26) As they become more acquainted with the Scriptures and more skilled in presenting the truth to others they will become more fruitful and so make better use of their time. After all, they do not engage in the field ministry just to report hours, but to do good, to help people see God’s truth and thereby get on the road that leads to eternal life.
What if you have failed to use your time wisely in the past?
First of all, do not waste still more time by brooding on past mistakes. Why let such worries rob you of peace of mind and contentment? Rather, call to mind that Jehovah is truly a merciful and loving God and that he will freely forgive you if you sincerely repent, even as he shows at Isaiah 1:18, 19. So from now on turn over a new leaf and make good use of your time. As we read at Proverbs 28:13: “He that is covering over his transgressions will not succeed, but he that is confessing and leaving them will be shown mercy.” We cannot change the past, but we can do something about the present and the future with Jehovah’s help. We can heed the apostolic advice to buy out the time during wicked days.
What should be the outlook of dedicated Christian ministers?
They should always look forward to improving their worship, their Christian ministry; if not by devoting more time to it, at least by improving the quality of it. Each one of us should want to forget the bad things that are behind and pursue the goal of everlasting life in Jehovah’s new system of things, when we shall have endless life to serve Jehovah and to enjoy what he will then provide for all obedient mankind. (Ps. 37:34) Making wise use of the present time, we will be among those saying: “We ourselves will bless [Jehovah] from now on and to time indefinite.” With time running out, it is truly the time for us to be molded by God’s truth so that we will bless him daily.—Ps. 115:18.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, May 1, 1968.

