Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should recognize these important points.
● How was the existence of Pontius Pilate confirmed by archaeology?
An inscription was discovered that contained his name and that of Tiberius.—P. 564.a
● How did the faithfulness of the prophet Daniel’s three companions in regard to the matter of refusing to eat certain foods forbidden by God’s law prove beneficial?
It strengthened them to face the greater test that came up when they were commanded to bow before the image on the plain of Dura.—Pp. 571, 572.
● What good habits will help a Christian to prevent fear from unbalancing him?
Regular study of God’s Word, privately and with fellow Christians, and constant prayer to Jehovah.—Pp. 590, 591.
● How did Jesus teach his disciples humility?
By his own example of humility, washing their feet.—P. 595.
● To whom did God give the sabbath law?
To the nation of Israel.—P. 603.
● If Christians are not under the sabbath law, then why did Jesus observe the sabbath?
He was born into the nation to whom the sabbath law was given and was therefore required to keep it, as were all other Jews.—P. 604.
● What did the reign of King Solomon with its peace and plenty foreshadow?
The rule of all mankind under God’s kingdom by Jesus Christ.—P. 625.
● For what two reasons did Jehovah decree the extermination of the Canaanites?
Because of their extreme wickedness, and because God had promised the land to the descendants of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.—P. 635.
● What will help one to overcome the tendency to be quick to anger?
Considering and following the example set by Jehovah God himself; also applying the direct counsel given in God’s Word on the subject.—P. 644.
● Why did the early Christians attack false religion?
To turn people from darkness to light and from the authority of Satan to God.—Pp. 652, 653.
● What weapon is used by true Christians against false religion?
God’s Word of truth, the Holy Bible.—P. 654.
● Why should Christians seek to improve their vocabulary?
Because it will add life and color and great satisfaction to their work of gently teaching others.—P. 717.
● Is it the responsibility of just the congregation servant to counsel others to avoid their getting into difficulties?
No. Galatians 6:1 indicates that those having spiritual qualifications should do so, and this includes more than the congregation servant.—P. 719.
● When Jesus said that one cannot enter the Kingdom unless he is “born from water and spirit,” what did he mean by the “water”?
The water is literal just as is the holy spirit, and so refers to water baptism.—P. 734.
● What is evidently indicated by the “signs in sun and moon and stars” mentioned at Luke 21:25?
Heavenly phenomena, such as sunspots, which disrupt shortwave radio broadcasting and magnetic areas and which also affect people to an abnormal extent. Cosmic rays bombard the earth, great quasars are being discovered and radio signals are being picked up from heavenly bodies. There is also fear that man will use the moon as a military base to control the earth.—Pp. 751, 752.
● How is Jesus’ prophecy about “the roaring of the sea and its agitation, while men become faint out of fear,” being fulfilled in our day (Luke 21:25, 26)?
Man’s use of the sea for warfare is causing fear. The building of nuclear submarines armed with missile-shooting equipment capable of firing from underwater long-range missiles carrying atomic warheads strikes fear into the nations. Even surface ships are being so armed.—P. 752.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower of 1968.

