How The Watchtower Influences Lives
THE WATCHTOWER began to be published in July 1879 as a religious monthly. Its first edition consisted of 6,000 copies, most of which were sent to people who were not subscribers but were thought to be interested in Bible truth. In 1892 it began to be issued twice a month on a contribution of one dollar, which subscription rate has remained unchanged these seventy-seven years. In the eighty-nine and a half years since it was first published The Watchtower’s circulation has increased to nine hundred and twenty-five times its original circulation, so that today more than 5,550,000 copies of each issue are printed in 72 languages.
Why is The Watchtower published? To influence the lives of its readers for good by shedding light on what the Bible has to say about the Creator’s name, purposes and will for his creatures upon earth. It has truly served as a beacon light, a watchtower. (Isa. 21:8) As the official journal of Jehovah’s witnesses it has contributed greatly to these Christians’ being described as “people of conscience, of integrity, of will power—people whose lives reflect what they believe to an unusually large degree.”—Albuquerque, New Mexico, Tribune, July 25, 1968.
Time and again The Watchtower gives counsel from the Bible regarding family life, including counsel for youths. How even youths benefit from this can be seen from a letter received from one of them:
“I was required to write some papers on the subject of my choice in my English class. I used the opportunity to write about family unity. I brought out what I had previously read in The Watchtower and showed how each family member could go to God’s Word and receive instruction on right conduct. . . . When the teacher read the report, she told the whole class that I had written something different . . . She said it was unusual for me to know about family matters and that she was going to make a copy of it to put in the church bulletin.” Unusual for a youth to know about family unity? Not if he reads The Watchtower, which points to what the Bible has to say on the subject.—Col. 3:18-21.
And no matter how old a person might be, he can be influenced for good by what he reads in The Watchtower. Thus a few years ago on an island in the Bahamas a seventy-three-year-old man, though having lived with a woman without benefit of legal marriage for thirty years, determined to get married because of what he learned from the Watchtower articles on marriage. Many tried to discourage him, and his bride was hesitant because of fear of ridicule. But in a few months the two were married in the midst of astonished onlookers who had come for the wedding and the marriage talk. Yes, The Watchtower influenced this man, though seventy-three years old, to bring his life in line with such Bible principles as those stated at Hebrews 13:4.
The spiritual food in The Watchtower has enabled thousands upon thousands of the Christian witnesses of Jehovah to withstand the bitter persecution of the Nazis during Hitler’s time and to endure the harassment of the Communists. It has enabled them to stand firm despite the strong opposition of religious dictators. And it has served to give people of all kinds hope, although they may be living in the most depressing circumstances. Thus some years after World War II the Watch Tower Society received a letter from a field representative of American Friends of Russian Freedom:
“I had the pleasure of meeting Mrs. K———. She lives in one of the hundreds of refugee camps which are still to be found throughout Germany. The surroundings in these camps are dreary enough to daunt even the most redoubtable soul, especially after years of substandard food, clothing and housing, and years of vain hope for a better life through emigration or employment. . . . But as soon as I entered her tiny room I saw how this woman differed from most of the people I had met. The room was tidy, and she was clean and neat, and good humored and hospitable. When I remarked on seeing a copy of the Russian edition of The Watchtower on her table, she replied that it had been her strongest support in recent months, and that through it she has been able to find new joy in life, and new hope. She also seeks to interest others in the camp in its message.” Yes, she had something that influenced her to have joy and hope in spite of dreary circumstances that caused others to lose hope and to sink into despondency.
The Watchtower also helps people to understand and embrace the basic doctrines of the Bible. Thus a woman in Mexico who had subscribed for it but did not appreciate its contents gave her copies to her neighbor lady. When the Witness who had obtained the subscription learned about this, he called on that neighbor lady who, by now, had obtained eight copies. He reported:
“The magazines had done a good job. From only eight issues the family learned the basic truths of God’s Word and had become free from lies, idols and certain superstitions. The final result is that two of these persons are now baptized and two more have begun to share the good news of God’s kingdom with others.” Nor is that all. The family that appreciated The Watchtower told the woman from whom they got their copies in the first place: “You gave us the truth, and we want to give it to you.” They were able to start a regular Bible study with her, and now she is coming to the meetings where The Watchtower is studied.
Yes, that is exactly what The Watchtower does, it influences for good the lives of people who read it; it strengthens their faith in the Bible as the Word of God; it discusses Bible prophecies and their fulfillment; it gives counsel on Christian conduct; it offers exposition on Christian doctrine and it admonishes all Christian ministers of Jehovah as to their commission to preach first this good news of God’s kingdom. We trust that it will also influence your life for good!

