Announcements
● New Publications Available:
Choosing the Best Way of Life—Dutch, Norwegian, Swedish
Good News—to Make You Happy—Arabic, Cibemba, Tswana, Twi
Happiness—How to Find It—German
Holy Spirit—The Force Behind the Coming New Order!—Czech
True Peace and Security—From What Source?—Bulgarian, Samoan, Turkish
Your Youth—Getting the Best out of It—Croatian
A Secure Future—How You Can Find It—Chinese
Is There a God who Cares?—Chinese
Study Questions for the Book Is This Life All There Is?—Dutch
There Is Much More to Life!—Chinese
● When ordering the 1981 Yearbook, publishers and pioneers are requested to do so through the congregation. Orders for the Yearbook in the following languages may be placed after the dates here listed: November 15, 1980 English; December 15, 1980 French, Greek, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish; February 1, 1981 Dutch, German, Japanese, Korean. PAYMENT SHOULD NOT ACCOMPANY ORDERS. Congregation accounts will be charged at the rate of $1.00 each for publishers. Regular and special pioneers on the list before July 1, 1980, may receive a free copy for which the congregation may request credit. Pioneers may obtain additional copies at 25 cents each.
● The August issue of Our Kingdom Service on page 4 outlined that during the circuit overseer’s visit there would be an adjustment in the Theocratic School and service meeting. This adjustment remains in effect except that Assignment No. 1 will be 15 minutes in length, rather than 20 as formerly, and the highlights from the Bible reading for the week will be 8 minutes in length, rather than 6, as formerly. There will be no student talks that week. Thus with the circuit overseer’s one-half hour talk and the regular service meeting conducted for 45 minutes, the whole program, including songs and prayers, should not exceed about one hour and 55 minutes, beginning January 1, 1981.
● Literature offer for November: My Book of Bible Stories for $2.50. December: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and the book Happiness—How to Find It for $3.10. January: Watchtower subscription for $2.50. February: One of the 192-page books you have in stock locally. Use any except Happiness or Truth books.
● Congregation secretary should send the Pioneer Information Report form (S-207) to the Society immediately if he has not already done so. This must be sent in even if there are no pioneers in the congregation.

