Dependability—A Mark of Faithfulness!
1 We all depend on many things in life. We need food and water, and air to breathe. We are thankful for friends or family we can depend on.
2 But most of all we are dependent on Jehovah, as He is the Life-Giver. We have come to appreciate also that it is through the “faithful and discreet slave” class that Jehovah provides us with spiritual food “at the proper time.” (Matt. 24:45-47) We are glad Jehovah has built up an organization of faithful servants throughout the earth who are willing to shoulder the load of directing the Kingdom interests in 97 branch offices and who work hard to print and distribute the spiritual food through this organization.
FAITHFUL EXAMPLES
3 As we examine the Bible record we find examples of many men and women who were dependable and showed their faithfulness to Jehovah. Think of Moses. Remember the many ways he showed both his faith and dependability in Jehovah’s service. (Heb. 11:27-29) Did not he and his brother Aaron return to Pharaoh time after time with the message that Jehovah commanded until they finally were told to appear no more on pain of death? (Ex. 10:11, 28) Was he not faithful in overseeing the building of the tabernacle just as Jehovah directed? And did not Moses faithfully stand before the people to judge them until Jehovah showed the way to give him assistance?—Ex. 18:13, 25, 26.
4 Others we could point to as examples of dependability are Mark and Timothy. Although John Mark at one time turned back from accompanying his brothers on an evangelizing trip, thus raising questions about his dependability, he later showed himself to be both useful and dependable, even being privileged later to write one of the Gospels.—Acts 13:13; 2 Tim. 4:11.
5 Timothy also, though a young man, zealously followed the directions given him by his older brother Paul in carrying on the preaching work.—2 Cor. 1:18-20.
SHOWING OUR DEPENDABILITY
6 In line with our dedication, are we dependable in our field activity? If we are elders and ministerial servants and are privileged to give instruction to the congregation through a part on the meeting or to take the lead in the field service, do we show ourselves dependable? It is important that we do so as Luke 16:10 shows.
7 When we enroll in the Theocratic School, can we be depended on to take the talks assigned to us? And when we speak about the truth is it according to accurate knowledge and the fine instruction we have received through Jehovah’s loyal organization?—2 Tim. 1:13.
8 When it comes to cleaning the Kingdom Hall, can we be depended on? Do we uphold the decisions of the elders, appreciating that their appointment is in harmony with the direction given in God’s Word through holy spirit? Are we on time for theocratic appointments? Do we turn in our field service and Bible study reports promptly? Do we support the Kingdom Hall as the center of true worship in our area, contributing to keep it in good condition?
9 Surely we all want to be found dependable both by Jehovah and by our brothers. Just as we depend on Jehovah to supply our daily needs, along with spiritual food and guidance, we want to be used by Him in a way so that others can depend on us in time of need.—1 Pet. 4:10, 11.

