Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 2
12 min: Song 99. Appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Service and local announcements. Discuss Psalm 22:22 in introducing part on program.
25 min: “Congregation Meetings—Part I.” Question-and-answer discussion. Have qualified reader on platform sum up each paragraph. Elder handling part should get figures on meeting attendance from congregation records and analyze with audience when discussing paragraphs 5-9. Friends should be commended. Is there an area where improvement is needed? If so, what are some problems hindering some from attending? When considering paragraph 4, let some tell how and when they prepare for Theocratic School and service meeting. Emphasize that only a few minutes may be needed for this each week in addition to the Bible reading assignment.
18 min: “Presenting the Good News—With My Book of Bible Stories.” Talk and discussion with audience. Let some in audience explain how they plan to present the book and what they will feature. If some have had an interesting experience when placing the Bible Stories book in the past, you may entertain one or two. Have pioneer or other qualified publisher demonstrate new Topic for Conversation.
 5 min: Song 81 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 9
 5 min: Song 75 and local announcements.
12 min: Consider Stories 55 and 110 from the Bible Stories book with a group of children. Highlight the privilege young Samuel had of being a spokesman for God. Also, emphasize wonderful work that Timothy shared in by giving of himself and traveling with the apostle Paul.
20 min: “How Do You View Your Parents?” The following material is based on chapter 10 of the Youth book. Certain paragraphs from that chapter are cited after the questions below, which should assist brothers in preparing comments. Elder with this part may assign youths beforehand scriptures to be read. Encourage youths to participate in discussion. Please pose the following questions, have texts read and discussed. Who has the responsibility of teaching and training children, and according to whose rules? (Eph. 6:4) If the parents of a young person are not serving Jehovah, must they still be respected and obeyed? Why? (par. 4) What are some of the things your parents have done for you from the time you were a baby until now? (pars. 5, 6) How can you show that you appreciate what they do? (Eph. 6:1, 2) Do parents ever make mistakes? (Rom. 5:12) How should you view mistakes made by your parents? (Matt. 6:14, 15) According to God, who has the final decision in matters pertaining to the family? (Col. 3:20) Why is this so important? (par. 10) Since God has given parents the responsibility of training their children, what do parents have the right to impose on their children concerning dress, associations, and so forth? (Prov. 6:20) How did Jesus show respect for this God-given arrangement? (Gal. 4:1, 2) How does Jehovah view the matter of disobedience to parents? (Prov. 30:17; par. 11) What are some of the rewards for obedience now and in the future? (Gal. 6:7; pars. 13, 14; Prov. 3:1, 2)
18 min: This part may be arranged locally according to needs, or talk may be given on article “Why ‘Be in Subjection’?” from Watchtower of May 15, 1980.
 5 min: Ask all to bring book Our Incoming World Government—God’s Kingdom to meeting next week. Prepare from page 162, paragraph 6, through page 166, paragraph 16. Song 94 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 16
 8 min: Song 118, local announcements and accounts report.
18 min: Our Position in the Dividing of Kingdom Supporters from Non-supporters. Discussion by qualified teacher with congregation of highlights of material in Our Incoming World Government—God’s Kingdom, page 162, paragraph 6, through page 166, paragraph 16. Highlight difference in position, but unity of work done by King’s “brothers” and “sheep” class. Paragraph 6: How and by whom are the nations being put on notice? How do scriptures indicate this?—2 Cor. 5:20; Isa. 43:9.
Paragraphs 7, 8: Read and discuss Matthew 25:31-33. When and on what basis does this separating work take place?
Paragraphs 9, 10: Read and discuss Matthew 25:34, 35. Whom do the sheeplike ones who are separated to the King’s right hand picture? What did Jesus show them as doing?
Paragraphs 11-13: Read Matthew 25:37-40. Whom did Jesus refer to as “my brothers”? How do “sheep” show their support of the King’s “brothers”? What circumstances have the King’s “brothers” had to endure?
Paragraphs 14, 15: How are the sheeplike Kingdom supporters rewarded? What must each one do to show he is a Kingdom supporter? See also page 173, paragraph 31.
Paragraph 16: How do “sheep” “inherit the Kingdom”? How is hope of the King’s “brothers” different? How can our congregation show we are Kingdom supporters?
10 min: Service overseer conducts discussion on how to follow up placements of My Book of Bible Stories with group of brothers and sisters who are active and effective in return visit work. We can offer to demonstrate the use of this publication in studying with children in the family, preferably while father or mother attends, so they will see how to teach their own children. Some are using book for studies with adults, using as basis for discussion the scriptures at the end of the story. Show how this can be done. If householder prefers something else, offer to study from a book or booklet of your choice, such as “This Good News of the Kingdom.” With the many placements of My Book of Bible Stories, a practical and realistic follow-up by congregation should be planned.
17 min: Audience discussion of “Dependability—A Mark of Faithfulness!” Some can be assigned to read or comment briefly on scriptures shown. Be sure to read paragraphs six and seven.
 7 min: Encourage congregation to show themselves ‘supporters of the Kingdom’ by sharing in field service on weekend. Song 54 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 23
 5 min: Song 114 and local announcements.
25 min: “Shake the Dust off Your Feet.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Look up all cited scriptures as time allows and discuss.
15 min: Experiences. “How I Got the Truth.” Elder interviews two or three individuals or families. Especially give consideration to favorable impression made by Witness who called on them because of mild and pleasant manner in dealing with them. Tie in impression made with information presented in previous part. It is preferred that those interviewed do not read or memorize what they are going to say. Elder can skillfully ask questions and draw out information.
15 min: Talk on article “Special Series of ‘Happiness’ Talks.” Song 14 and prayer.

