Presenting the Good News—With My Book of Bible Stories
1 “Only watch out for yourself . . . that you may not forget the things that your eyes have seen and that they may not depart from your heart all the days of your life; and you must make them known to your sons and to your grandsons.” (Deut. 4:9) With those words, Jehovah was preparing his people to enter into the Promised Land. Yes, it was not only important for the adults ‘not to forget the things’ Jehovah had done, but also important that the sons and grandsons be taught. Is it any different today as we stand at the threshold of a far grander Promised Land, God’s new order?
2 What a marvelous instrument Jehovah has provided to help us ‘watch out for ourselves’ and also to use in teaching our ‘sons and grandsons.’ We speak of My Book of Bible Stories, now printed in 35 languages. The stories of what Jehovah has done in the past must not depart from the hearts of our children all the days of their lives.
3 Many have said that this book is the easiest one to offer of any we have ever had. Perhaps that is why it has reached the remarkable circulation figure of over 13 million copies in just two years. Obviously many who are not Jehovah’s Witnesses are interested in giving spiritual help to their sons and grandsons.
4 We can assist them by presenting My Book of Bible Stories in field service during November. What have you found to be the best way to present it? While it is true that we are placing an attractive book on a remarkably low contribution, we do not want that to be the chief aspect of our presentation, do we? We want to highlight the spiritual benefits of the offer. How can we accomplish this?
5 Our Topic for Conversation shows two basic reasons why the Bible was written, namely (1) to sound a warning and (2) to make you wise for salvation. You might say: “Hello, we are calling today to help people understand why the Bible was written. Have you ever wondered about that? [Allow response.] One reason that some are not aware of is to sound a warning. That is the thought expressed here at 1 Corinthians 10:11. [Read.] God’s warnings are not to frighten but to move people to seek salvation, a second reason why the Bible was written. Second Timothy 3:15 helps us to appreciate that young and old alike need the Holy Writings for salvation. [Read.] Let me show you an example of the happy salvation foretold by one Bible writer, Isaiah, here in one of the stories in this book, My Book of Bible Stories.” Turn to Story 71 and read first and last paragraphs. Offer the book.
6 You may encounter some who already have the Bible Stories book. What then? Why not offer to study it with them and the family? There is also the possibility of placing some other appropriate Bible study aid.
7 Have you thought of offering the Bible Stories book to people on the street? Many have and some have had fine results.
8 Let all of us assist others during November to know why the Bible was written by offering My Book of Bible Stories on a contribution of $2.50.

