The Search for Happiness
A FEW years ago, people in France, Germany, Great Britain, and the United States were asked, “What does it take to be happy?” Of those interviewed, 89 percent said that it takes good health; 79 percent mentioned a satisfying marriage or partnership; 62 percent pointed to the rewards of parenthood; and 51 percent thought a successful career was needed for happiness. And even though conventional wisdom cautions that money does not ensure happiness, 47 percent of those questioned were convinced that it does. What do the facts show?
First, look at the supposed link between money and happiness. A survey of the one hundred richest people in the United States showed that they were no happier than people in general. Furthermore, while many in the United States have almost doubled their material possessions in the past three decades, they are not any happier than they used to be, according to mental-health experts. In fact, one report comments: “Over the same period, depression rates have soared. Teen suicide has tripled. Divorce rates have doubled.” In some 50 different countries, researchers who studied the link between money and happiness reached the conclusion that money cannot buy happiness.
Next, how important for happiness are such factors as good health, a satisfying marriage, and a successful career? Well, if these factors were absolutely needed to be happy, what about the millions of people who do not enjoy good health and all those who do not have a satisfying marriage? What about married couples without children and all the men and women without a successful career? Are all such individuals doomed to a life of unhappiness? And would the assumed happiness of those who presently enjoy good health and a satisfying marriage vanish if their situation changed?
Are We Searching in the Right Places?
Everyone wants to be happy. This is not surprising because man’s Creator is described as “the happy God,” and man was made in God’s image. (1 Timothy 1:11; Genesis 1:26, 27) Hence, it is only natural for humans to search for happiness. However, many find that holding on to happiness is like holding on to grains of sand—both slip away easily.
Could it be, though, that some are trying too hard to find happiness? Social philosopher Eric Hoffer thought so. He observed: “The search for happiness is one of the chief sources of unhappiness.” That is certainly true if we seek happiness in the wrong places. In that case, we are sure to meet with disappointment and frustration. Trying to become rich; striving for fame or recognition; pursuing political, social, or economic goals; or simply living for self and instant gratification all fail to deliver happiness. No wonder some have adopted the ironic view expressed by one author who noted: “If only we’d stop trying to be happy we could have a pretty good time”!
Significantly, the poll mentioned at the outset of this article also showed that 4 out of 10 people felt that happiness results from doing good and helping others. And 1 out of every 4 stressed that faith and religious conviction play a major role in being happy. Clearly, we need to take a closer look at what it takes to be truly happy. The following article will help us do so.
[Pictures on page 3]
Many think that money, a satisfying family life, or a successful career is the key to happiness. Do you agree?

