




“Your eyes even saw me as an embryo.”​—PSALM 139:16




Does God Understand You?



WHAT CREATION TEACHES US

Reflect on one of the closest relationships humans can have​—that of identical twins. They share an especially intimate bond. Some twins even “know what it’s like to say something to someone who understands exactly what they mean without explanation,” says Nancy Segal, director of the Twin Studies Center and a twin herself. One woman described the relationship between her and her identical twin this way: “We just know everything about each other.”
What accounts for this unique understanding? Studies suggest that while environment and parenting are factors, the especially similar genetic makeup of identical twins seems to play a critical role.
CONSIDER: The Creator of all this awesome genetic material surely has a unique understanding of the makeup of every one of us. Indeed, the psalmist David declared: “You kept me screened off in my mother’s womb. My bones were not hidden from you when I was made in secret. . . . Your eyes even saw me as an embryo; all its parts were written in your book.” (Psalm 139:13, 15, 16) God alone knows and can fully understand not only our genetic makeup but also all the events in our life that have shaped us. God’s unique knowledge of us and our genetic makeup assures us that he does indeed understand us in every detail.



WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES US ABOUT GOD’S INSIGHT

David prayed: “O Jehovah, you have searched through me, and you know me. You know when I sit down and when I rise up. You discern my thoughts from afar. There is not a word on my tongue, but look! O Jehovah, you already know it well.” (Psalm 139:1, 2, 4) In addition, Jehovah is aware of our innermost feelings and even “discerns every inclination of the thoughts.” (1 Chronicles 28:9; 1 Samuel 16:6, 7) What do these verses reveal about God?
Even though we may not vocalize all our prayerful thoughts and feelings, our Creator not only observes what we do but also understands why we do it. Moreover, he understands the good we would like to do, even if our limitations prevent us from carrying out our heartfelt desire. Surely, because God put love in our hearts in the first place, he is willing​—even eager—​to observe and understand our loving thoughts and motives.​—1 John 4:7-10.
Absolutely nothing escapes God’s notice. He is even aware of our sufferings when others may not be aware of them or fully understand them

The Scriptures assure us
  “The eyes of Jehovah are on the righteous, and his ears listen to their supplication.”​—1 PETER 3:12.

  God promises: “I will give you insight and instruct you in the way you should go. I will give you advice with my eye upon you.”​—PSALM 32:8.





GOD IS VERY COMPASSIONATE

Can knowing that God understands our situation and feelings help us deal with adversity? Consider what happened to Anna, from Nigeria. “I questioned whether life was worth living because of my desperate circumstances,” she explains. “I was a widow caring for my daughter, who was in the hospital with hydrocephalus (excessive fluid in the brain), when I was diagnosed with breast cancer and had to have surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy. It was extremely difficult for me to handle being in the hospital at the same time that my ailing daughter was.”
What helped Anna to cope? “I pondered over scriptures such as Philippians 4:6, 7, which says that ‘the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers.’ Each time this scripture came to mind, I felt a close personal bond with Jehovah, knowing that he understands me better than I understand myself. I also received much encouragement from my beloved spiritual brothers and sisters in the Christian congregation.
“Even though I still struggle with my health, my situation and that of my daughter have improved. Because we have Jehovah on our side, we have learned not to think negatively when we face challenges. James 5:11 assures us: ‘We consider happy those who have endured. You have heard of the endurance of Job and have seen the outcome Jehovah gave, that Jehovah is very tender in affection [or, “very compassionate,” footnote] and merciful.’” Jehovah understood Job’s situation perfectly, and we can be sure that he likewise understands any difficulties we go through.



