





God Will Soon End All Suffering




“How long, O Jehovah, must I cry for help, but you do not hear? How long must I ask for help from violence, but you do not intervene?” (Habakkuk 1:2, 3) These are the words of Habakkuk, a good man who enjoyed God’s favor. Did his plea indicate a lack of faith? By no means! God reassured Habakkuk that He had an appointed time to bring an end to suffering.​—Habakkuk 2:2, 3.
When you or someone close to you is suffering, it is easy to conclude that God is slow to act, that he should have intervened by now. Yet, the Bible assures us: “Jehovah is not slow concerning his promise, as some people consider slowness, but he is patient with you because he does not desire anyone to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.”​—2 Peter 3:9.



WHEN WILL GOD ACT?

Very soon! Jesus revealed that a particular generation would witness a unique combination of conditions that would mark the last days of a “system of things.” (Matthew 24:3-42) The fulfillment of Jesus’ prophecy in our day indicates that God’s intervention in human affairs is imminent.a
But how will God bring an end to all suffering? When Jesus was on the earth, he demonstrated God’s power to alleviate mankind’s suffering. Consider some examples of this.
Natural Disasters: While Jesus and his apostles were sailing on the Sea of Galilee, a violent windstorm threatened to sink their boat. But Jesus showed that he and his Father can control the natural elements. (Colossians 1:15, 16) Jesus simply said: “Hush! Be quiet!” The result? “The wind abated, and a great calm set in.”​—Mark 4:35-39.
Sickness: Jesus was well-known for his ability to heal the blind and the lame, as well as those suffering from epilepsy, leprosy, or any other sort of infirmity. “He cured all who were suffering.”​—Matthew 4:23, 24; 8:16; 11:2-5.
Food Shortages: Jesus used powers granted to him by his Father to multiply meager food supplies. It is recorded that twice during his ministry, he fed thousands.​—Matthew 14:14-21; 15:32-38.
Death: That Jehovah has the power to undo death is clearly shown by the three resurrections Jesus is recorded to have performed. One of those whom he brought back to life had been dead for four days.​—Mark 5:35-42; Luke 7:11-16; John 11:3-44.



For more information about the last days, see lesson 32 of the book Enjoy Life Forever! published by Jehovah’s Witnesses and available for free download at www.jw.org.

