Announcements
● Literature offer for January: Watchtower subscription for $2.50. February and March: Any 192-page book (60c) in congregation stock. April and May: Watchtower subscription for $2.50.
● Prepare for Memorial and special talk: Please order Memorial invitations and special talk handbills now so that your congregation will receive them well in advance of the Memorial celebration on Sunday, April 19, and special talk to be held on Sunday, April 5. Memorial invitations may be ordered in lots of 250, 500 and 1,000, using the special blue Memorial Invitation Order Form. The special talk handbill should be ordered on the yellow Special Talk Handbill Order. Two copies of each form are being sent to congregations with the December statement. The special talk will be on the subject: “On Whose Promises Do You Rely?” PLEASE DO NOT REMIT WITH YOUR ORDER. The invitations and handbills will be charged to your congregation’s literature account. Payment for these should be included with the amount of money remitted for literature. Please do not list payment for invitations and handbills separately on the remittance form.
● At circuit assemblies having the new program starting in February, district overseers will give the public talk “Facing the Future with Faith and Courage.” Starting in February, circuit overseers will give a public talk with the theme “Encourage One Another as the Day Draws Near.”
● New Publications Available:
Good News—to Make You Happy—Hiligaynon, Pangasinan, Romanian
Life Does Have a Purpose—Croatian
Making Your Family Life Happy—Arabic, Greek, New Guinea Pidgin, Tagalog
● A recording of the Bible book To the Romans is now available in English on a single cassette at a cost of $2.00 each. Pioneers may order the cassette at a cost of $1.75. The two recordings released at the English district conventions this past summer are also available. These include The Good News According to Mark (2 cassettes), $3.00, congregation; $2.50, pioneer. Kingdom Melodies-I, $2.00, congregation; $1.75, pioneer. Cassettes should be ordered through the congregation on the regular Literature Order Blank, using the space provided. These cassettes will also be available with Braille labels for use by the blind.
● The Society now has available in grade-two English Braille the book God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached. This nine-volume publication may be obtained on a free loan basis or purchased and kept permanently. A remittance of $9.00 should accompany orders if purchased. All orders for Braille items should be sent to the Society’s BRAILLE DESK and not included on regular congregation literature orders. Braille publications should not be stocked by the congregation.

