Circuit Assemblies—Aid in Our Fight for the Faith
1 Back in ancient Israel, the annual assemblies were times of rejoicing and of spiritual encouragement and instruction. The same is true among Jehovah’s people today. What a relief it is to leave behind secular cares and pressures for two days to assemble together with our brothers for good association and instruction! And how built up we are spiritually when the assembly seems so quickly to draw to its conclusion! It was good to see that over 931,000 attended the series of circuit assemblies from February through August 1980, a 3.6 percent increase over 1979.
2 During the past few months, most of us have had the privilege of attending a circuit assembly that had as its theme “Set Apart from the World.” Certainly the program aided us to see more clearly our position as true Christians. Yes, “the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one,” so as true servants of Jehovah, we need to fight actively against and resist the unclean conduct and contaminating spirit of Satan’s old system. (1 Pet. 4:3, 4; 1 John 5:19) Only then can we continue to have Jehovah’s spirit and blessing.
3 Keeping separate from the world requires a strong fight for the faith. So our new series of circuit assemblies, which begins in February, has the theme “Fight the Fine Fight of the Faith.” The new program will develop why a fight for the faith is so necessary at this time and what is involved in this fight. As dedicated Christians, we cannot afford to become apathetic or negative in our attitude toward the worsening moral climate in the world. We need to heed the Scriptural warning regarding this condition. At the same time, we are admonished to fight hard for the faith.—1 Tim. 1:18; 6:12.
4 As you know, the Theocratic School schedule has been revised for 1981. In view of this, a model school will be conducted at the circuit assembly. It will be good for everyone to benefit from the district overseer’s counsel following each student’s presentation.
5 The assembly program will also point out the need to distribute zealously the timely message in our magazines and why we should act now on what we have heard in order to make our advancement manifest. There will also be a straightforward part on the program showing how to go on waging our Christian warfare. These provisions will strengthen us for our Christian fight. We need to protect our spirituality as the end of this system approaches. So be sure to attend the next assembly arranged for your circuit!

