Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 4
(Starting with this meeting, the service meeting will be limited to 45 minutes, not including songs and prayer. Please observe this adjustment in all future meetings.)
Song 10
 3 min: Local announcements. Include encouragement to read chapters 4 to 6 from Happiness book to be covered in talk next Sunday.
10 min: Elders can prepare locally or give a talk using “Questions from Readers” in the September 1, 1980, issue of The Watchtower. Draw points from “Insight on the News” on page 11.
17 min: “Does Sexual Morality Make Sense?” The following material is based on chapter 18 of the Youth book, pages 133-140. Elder with this part may assign to various youths beforehand questions and scriptures to be read. Certain paragraphs from the chapter are cited after the questions below, which should assist brothers in preparing comments. Please pose the following questions, have texts read and discussed as time permits. Encourage youths to participate fully in discussion. How do many people in the world feel about premarital sex? What are some effects? What does 1 Corinthians 6:18 say about fornication? (pars. 4-7) What is a sign of moral strength? Cite some Biblical examples. (pars. 8-11) What scriptures show that Jehovah condemns fornication and loose conduct? (1 Cor. 6:9, 10; Ps. 97:10) Why is God’s law on morality so beneficial for us now? Relate some problems youths are being faced with in school concerning this matter. What thought-provoking questions should youths ask themselves if wrong conduct seems appealing to them? (pars. 16, 17) What bad aftereffects result to those who give in to sexual immorality? Why does sexual morality make sense? (pars. 18-21) What examples do we have in the Bible to aid us to make a correct decision? (2 Sam. 13:1-19; Gen. 39:7-20) What relationship with Jehovah will a wise choice mean for us? (Eph. 5:3, 4; Phil. 4:8) Our service to God is acceptable only if we present ourselves clean and undefiled. Such wholesome conduct results in a clean conscience. This approved condition enables youths to enjoy freedom of speech when sharing in the field activity.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News—Offering the Watchtower Subscription.” Question-and-answer coverage of article. Include demonstration of suggested Topic for Conversation when covering paragraphs 3 and 4. Enthusiastically encourage congregation to share in offering subscriptions this weekend in the field service.
Song 89 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 11
Song 28
 7 min: Introduction, accounts report. Suggest brothers review chapters 7 and 8 of Happiness book for Sunday’s talk.
20 min: “How the Theocratic School Is Benefiting Us.” (To be handled by school overseer) Question-and-answer discussion of material. Review each talk thoroughly so publishers will appreciate value and see need of attending school regularly. Discuss feature of oral counsel being given after talks and the benefit of such to the students. Highlight positive trends noted in local Theocratic School, such as new students being enrolled, improved talks being given by students, increased appreciation by brothers in general. Possibly some suggestions can be given for improvement that school overseer could helpfully mention as time permits. (See Study 20 in School Guidebook, beginning on p. 100, “Counsel Builds Up.”)
18 min: Review talking points in the January 15, 1981, issue of The Watchtower that can be used in the field service. Prepare in advance to have different publishers comment on points they will use from the magazine. Encourage all to read magazine and bring it to the meeting. May want to demonstrate how one or two talking points can be incorporated in a magazine presentation. Have several experiences related showing what has been accomplished in offering subscription and/or magazines.
Song 33 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 18
Song 77
 5 min: Introduction and Announcements. Suggest that brothers read chapters 9 and 10 in Happiness book to be covered in next Sunday’s public talk.
18 min: “Go Therefore and Make Disciples.” Discussion of article with appropriate questions. Include comments from one or two book study conductors on how they plan to assist publishers in the disciple-making work. Encourage publishers to seek to conduct Bible studies if they are not already doing so. Also, if some have too many return visits or studies, they should discuss this with their study conductor to see if others can assist in caring for them.
15 min: “What Gives Them Courage?” Talk on August 15, 1980, Watchtower article, along with audience participation. Highlight need for courage today as we carry on with our preaching and teaching activity. Show how we rely on Jehovah, not on our own strength, as we go from house to house and conduct Bible studies or even face persecution. If time permits, include experiences from local brothers or sisters who have overcome timidity and are now courageously preaching the good news and making return visits regularly.
 7 min: “An Encouraging Report.” Also, consider October Service Report and relate what was accomplished locally during that month, noting encouraging features.
Song 7 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 25
Song 36
 6 min: Introduction and local announcements.
12 min: “Circuit Assemblies—Aid in Our Fight for the Faith.” Discuss article with audience participation. Allow time for one or two comments on points brothers enjoyed from current circuit assembly program. Encourage all to make plans to attend next assembly when dates are announced.
12 min: Elders can prepare material needed for local consideration or cover material in September 1, 1980, Watchtower article, “Follow the Great Exemplar.”
15 min: Our Field Service in February. Briefly outline offer of any 192-page book. Mention which books are available locally. Include one or two prepared, brief comments from audience on talking points that will tie in with current Topic for Conversation; also experiences that will build appreciation for group witnessing. Encourage all to be in field service next Sunday, the first Sunday of February, if possible. Also suggest that everyone review chapters 11 to 13 of Happiness book for Sunday’s talk.
Song 48 and prayer.

