Presenting the Good News—Offering the Watchtower Subscription
1 What effect can The Watchtower have upon honest-hearted persons? (John 10:14) A college student found copies of The Watchtower in the ladies lounge of the department store where she worked. Noticing an order blank on one, she sent for a subscription. To the Witness who called on her she said: “I do love to read the Bible and since I found The Watchtower I enjoy reading it also.” While she had a strong desire to aid others, she felt that her college course really did not qualify her to do so. She now feels that she has something with which she can really help other people.
2 Because we all recognize the powerful influence for good found in the pages of The Watchtower, we look forward to offering the subscription to lovers of truth and life. By reading the magazine, thousands of honest-hearted persons have come to know and love Jehovah. It has aided them to enjoy an ever-greater depth of appreciation for him and his purpose. We should plan to use all opportunities to present the good news by offering subscriptions.
3 One of the foremost ways to acquaint others with the wonderful message of The Watchtower is by offering it from house to house. Each of us may develop our presentation in a way that is adaptable to the local people and circumstances. However, some may enjoy using the following: “Hello, my name is ․․․․․․․․. I’m calling today on people who love the Bible and believe that it has a timely message for mankind. Perhaps like many in your neighborhood you have a family Bible in your home. Have you ever wondered how the Bible can benefit you and your family today? [Let householder respond.] Notice what we are told at 1 Corinthians 10:11. [Read.] When public warning is given of an impending disaster, we do well to heed it. How much more so should we give attention to the divine warning found in the Bible, since life is involved. Don’t you agree? [Allow response.] Knowing that God may soon take action against the wicked, it would be wise on our part to listen. Second Timothy 3:15 comments on the good results to us. [Read.]” We can then offer the subscription, highlighting specific points of interest in the current issue. The January 15 issue will feature the material “Why Will a Loving God Exact Vengeance?”
4 What if some people in your territory are not very interested in the Bible? You may approach them in this way: “I’m calling out of concern for my neighbors. You probably feel the effects of worsening world conditions. Do you think that mankind will achieve something better in our lifetime? [Allow response.] Many people do not. However, the oldest history book available tells us that we are living in the ‘time of the end.’ In fact, God has provided us with a written warning. Notice what the Bible tells us at 1 Corinthians 10:11. [Read.] If we are to have a happy future, then we must listen to the warning message the Bible gives and then act upon it. This is encouraged at 2 Timothy 3:15. [Read.] We have found that The Watchtower has aided families the world over for more than 100 years to understand the Bible’s message and learn about a better future.”
5 Magazine routes also serve as a fine avenue for obtaining subscriptions. Those who regularly obtain the magazines have already shown interest in our journals and likely would appreciate getting them through the mail. Often, it is simply a matter of letting them know that they are available on a subscription basis.
6 A regular subscriber to The Watchtower who has been studying a little over a year writes: “I know this is the truth and my life has been changed. Now I am separate from the world and I look to Jehovah for all my answers. The truth has indeed set me free!” Such blessings and experiences can be ours by offering subscriptions.
7 Of course, we may meet some people who feel they cannot afford a subscription at the time we call, but they would like to read the magazines. In some places the delivery of mail is so poor that people do not wish to subscribe for anything coming by mail. So we want to be sure to leave the single issues of the magazines with them. It is always good to take note of these individuals and call back, perhaps developing several such calls into magazine routes.
8 Regardless of the avenue we might choose, we will enjoy much success and Jehovah’s blessing if we present the good news with sincerity and the firm conviction that The Watchtower contains what the person needs.

