“Go Therefore and Make Disciples”
1 Following his resurrection, Jesus gave his faithful disciples a far-reaching commission: “Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations, . . . teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.”—Matt. 28:19, 20.
2 Jesus had already set a fine example for his disciples in teaching and disciple-making. Over 500 of them had the privilege of seeing or hearing the resurrected Jesus before he returned to heaven. (1 Cor. 15:6) Now it was the responsibility of those first-century Christians to carry on the disciple-making work throughout the then-known world. But what about our day? We continue to follow vigorously Jesus’ example in going to the homes of people to teach them and make them true Christian disciples.
IMPROVING OUR DISCIPLE-MAKING WORK
3 Since disciple-making has life-saving benefits, we must be at it urgently in these last days. (John 17:3) Are you having a share in it? If not, would you like help in making return visits and conducting home Bible studies so as to teach honest-hearted people more of the truths from God’s Word? Such help is available right in your own congregation.
4 It is true that we no longer have a Bible study overseer in each congregation. But now the assignment of following up on the disciple-making activity in the congregation has been delegated to the congregation book study conductors, who are usually elders. These brothers have a keen interest in your activity. They would like to help you follow up on any placements or interest you may have found. They are desirous of helping you to start Bible studies with interested ones and even going with you on your studies. By availing yourself of their readiness to assist, you may enjoy this field of service for the first time, if you have not yet done so.
5 It is also good for book study conductors to know who in their group conducts Bible studies as well as who the students are. Congregation secretaries may provide each study conductor with the Bible study reports of the publishers in his group in order to help the conductors in this regard.
6 Reports indicate a need for more to share in the disciple-making activity. For example, during the 1979 service year, over seven million books were placed with people living in this country. The average number of Bible studies conducted each month came to 275,978. So if more share in following up on placements in the field, no doubt many more home Bible studies can be started with the prospect of additional Christian disciples being made.

