From Our Readers
Dealing With Death  Last year, my dear brother, who was only 18 years old, died in a road accident. You can imagine how much I appreciated the series of articles “When a Loved One Dies.” (July 22, 1992) I particularly appreciated the thought that one who does not exhibit intense distress is not necessarily cold or unloving. Because of my cheerful disposition, I tend not to express my grief openly. Others have thus drawn the wrong conclusions about me. Even though Christians have the hope of the resurrection, they still need to feel the loving understanding of those around them.
L. R., Italy
Aliens  I have always appreciated the beautiful, striking artwork on your covers. I was particularly moved, though, by the cover of the May 8, 1992, issue, “Help! We Are Aliens.” While growing up, I often saw prejudice toward foreigners​—racial slurs and violence. I can even remember someone saying to my father that he should go back to where he came from. The irony is, we’re North American Indians and were the very first ones to live here! Where are we to go? I hope that when people read this article with an open mind, they will come to appreciate that all men are equal in God’s eyes.
T. B., Canada
Left-​Handedness  As a left-​handed person and an avid reader of Awake!, may I congratulate you for the excellent way the subject was handled in your article “Left-​Handedness​—Disadvantage or Advantage?” (June 8, 1992) Could you enlighten me, though, as to why the Bible often equates “left” with disfavor?
S. J. M., New Zealand
“God is not partial,” so he certainly has no bias toward left-​handed people. (Acts 10:34) The Bible’s use of the right as the side of favor seems to be rooted in the fact that the vast majority of people are right-​handed. The right hand thus serves as a fitting symbol of applied power or favor. Logically, the left hand would refer to the opposite. However, this is done only in a figurative sense and is not intended to demean left-​handed people.​—ED.
Being Different  I really want to thank you for the article “How Can I Have Courage to Be Different?” (June 22, 1992) The students in my class throw a lot of parties and are very fashion conscious. Their association is bad for me. I was under such pressure that I never had the courage to speak up. The article helped me to overcome my fear. With the help of Jehovah, at the next opportunity, I was able to explain my point of view. Now the pressure has eased off. Many thanks.
M. E., Germany
This article was just what those of us going to school need. For a long time, I tried hard not to cause any waves, not to be conspicuous. There were many temptations, and I was not able to bring myself to give a witness. But at the beginning of my second year in high school, I introduced myself to the class by saying: “I am one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. My hobby is Bible study.” Having said that, I couldn’t say or do things that were questionable. It was still a real trial for me to witness to school friends, and I hated being different. But one day a girl said she was envious of my way of life and my conviction. This caused my thinking to change. Now I realize that I am not the one who is different​—other people are. Serving God is normal!
M. A., Japan

