Something Better Than Christmas Giving
“SIX-​YEAR old Christopher told me, as though it were the most natural thing in the world, that at Christmas he gets ‘nothing at all.’ But he spoke with no trace of disappointment. Alexander (8) expressed himself similarly, saying: ‘We are Jehovah’s Witnesses.’”
Thus the German newspaper Kölner Stadt-​Anzeiger began an article about a family that the paper says “ignores Christmas because it is not the date of Jesus’ birth and because it has pagan roots.” But aren’t Christopher and Alexander to be pitied? Not at all, since, as the article pointed out, the boys’ toy shelves bear no evidence of parental neglect.
However, some parents attending a parent-​teacher discussion in southern Germany charged that the failure of Jehovah’s Witnesses to give Christmas gifts to their children makes them feel insecure. Yet, this isn’t true, as their teacher noted. She said that the “children of Jehovah’s Witnesses express themselves freely, are well balanced, and are fully able to explain their faith, something other children cannot do.”
Indeed, tens of thousands of families throughout the world have replaced Christmas giving with something better, making it a point to bring their children gifts year-​round. This has proved to be a source of joy for all.
One advantage is that it makes for many happy occasions in the year, and the children can appreciate each individual gift more. Another advantage is that the children know that it is their parents who are giving the gifts out of love, and their appreciation goes to them. The parents are not pouring out money and effort only to have their children’s gratitude go to some imaginary Santa Claus or to have them become ingrates, feeling that it is Santa’s job to bring presents and that no thanks are due.
The Gift of Excelling Value
Often Dominik, age ten, and Tina, age six, find small surprises from their parents​—a piece of chocolate on the pillow, a pen or notebook they can use at school, or an appropriate toy to keep them occupied during the winter months. But what do they appreciate the most? Their parents answer: “When we spend time with them​—for example, playing in the snow.”
Many other parents who are Jehovah’s Witnesses concur. “In this hectic world,” Edelgard explains, “time is the most important thing I can give my children.” And young ones agree! Ursula says her children rank time spent together on family outings as being “the best gift of all.” Even the chairman of a teachers’ union in Germany recently said that the finest Christmas gifts parents can give their children are time and patience.
No doubt about it, the giving of oneself​—one’s time, concern, and attention—​whether it be to one’s family or to one’s friends, is a gift of truly excelling value. That such gifts need not be confined to certain days of the year should be obvious.
Joyful Giving That Satisfies
Consider examples of Jehovah’s Witnesses who share in something better than Christmas giving. Wilfried and Inge in Germany said: “We generally give gifts spontaneously, although we do plan larger ones.” Similarly, Dieter and Debora make a conscious effort to provide gifts for their young son throughout the year. They explain that “the size or the value of the gift is secondary, and large or expensive gifts are rare.”
Many children expect gifts at Christmastime, so the element of surprise is lost. Helga says her “children are more joyful when they get unexpected gifts than they are when they get things on occasions when gifts are expected.” Natascha, a 15-​year-​old, agrees that “it’s nicer to receive a surprise gift that comes from the heart than one given at a fixed time because custom demands.”
Similarly, it is important to be alert to the kind of gifts that children enjoy. Regarding this, Fortunato, who also lives in Germany, reports: “The gifts we provide are mostly things the children have indicated they would like to have. But we try to provide them at an unexpected moment. You should see their joy!”
Parents also find that giving children a gift when they are at home sick in bed cheers them up. Others provide gifts before school vacation to help keep the children occupied. For example, before vacation, Stefan was given a microscope. “It came as a total surprise,” his father reports, “and he literally jumped for joy.” Indeed, spontaneous, uncompelled giving brings great happiness both to the giver and to the receiver.
True, children have wishes of their own. Jörg and Ursula explain: “When our daughter tells us what she would like, we talk to her about it. Is her wish reasonable? Is the item appropriate to her age? Do we have room for it? If we cannot satisfy her wish immediately, we at least keep it in mind and try to comply at an appropriate occasion later on.” Of course, it is wise not to spoil children by satisfying their every whim, which would deprive them of the joy that receiving gifts can bring.
Parents who practice giving pass on to their children a spirit that will be joyfully reflected. Says ten-​year-​old Sebastian: “I don’t have to wait for holidays to make my parents or sisters happy. I just need to be in a good mood and have a few coins in my pocket.”
Families of Jehovah’s Witnesses find that gifts of another kind, too, are much better than Christmas giving. These are planned trips or excursions, say to a zoo, a museum, an exhibition, or a place in the country. These gifts are both educational and truly enjoyable for young ones.
The Blessings of Joyful Giving
By applying Bible principles in giving, we will avoid the pressure and frustration that go with Christmas giving. And remember, giving of our time and abilities to edify and build others up mentally and spiritually is a gift more valuable than material presents. This superior giving strengthens family ties, cements friendships, and brings true joy all year long not only to the receiver but especially to the giver.​—Acts 20:35.
So instead of the customary forced giving at Christmastime this year, why not try a different approach? Why not try a better way?
[Box/​Picture on page 12]
But Won’t the Children Miss It?
  Rebecca, 16: “I don’t miss Christmas, since I get gifts all year round. I enjoy a surprise gift far more than I do a forced one.”
  Tina, 12: “I really enjoy getting suitable gifts, not at a set time, but at any time during the year​—and not gifts for which I have to say thank you and yet really do not even want.”
  Birgit, 15: “All the gifts in the world are worthless if there are problems in the family. That is why we do many things together as a family.”
  Janosch, 12: “We children love our parents even when they don’t give us any presents. Their love is a grand gift in itself.”
[Picture on page 10]
A beautiful gift​—your time!

