
How to Reach the Heart of Those We Teach




 1. What effect did Jesus’ teaching have on the hearts of his listeners?
1 Jesus Christ reached the heart of his listeners. On at least one occasion, the hearts of his disciples were “burning” after he clearly explained the Scriptures to them. (Luke 24:32) Since obedience to God must come from the heart, how can we stir the emotions of those whom we teach in order to prompt them to make changes in their life?—Rom. 6:17.
 2. What role do tact and discernment play in reaching a person’s heart?
2 Use Tact and Discernment: For many people, simply telling them what is right and what is wrong will not move them to action. In fact, attacking their religious beliefs with a barrage of scriptures may even push them away. To motivate a person, we must first discern the reasons why he believes and acts as he does. Tactful, well-chosen viewpoint questions will encourage him to express his innermost thoughts. (Prov. 20:5) Only then can we select information from God’s Word that may touch his heart. Therefore, we must show personal interest and be patient. (Prov. 25:15) Remember that individuals make spiritual progress at different rates. Allow time for Jehovah’s holy spirit to influence their thinking and actions.—Mark 4:26-29.
 3. How can we help those whom we teach to cultivate positive qualities?
3 Help Them Cultivate Positive Qualities: Bible passages that illustrate Jehovah’s goodness and love can help those we teach to cultivate positive qualities. We can use such scriptures as Psalm 139:1-4 or Luke 12:6, 7 to show the degree of God’s personal interest in each of us. When individuals develop heart appreciation for Jehovah’s undeserved kindness, their love and godly devotion will grow. (Rom. 5:6-8; 1 John 4:19) Also, when they learn that their conduct affects Jehovah personally, they may be motivated to act in a way that will please and honor him.—Ps. 78:40, 41; Prov. 23:15.
 4. When teaching individuals in our ministry, how can we show respect for a person’s freedom of choice?
4 Jehovah does not force anyone to obey his commands. Rather, he appeals to individuals by showing them the wisdom of following his advice. (Isa. 48:17, 18) We imitate Jehovah when we teach in a manner that helps people to reach their own conclusions. When individuals convince themselves of the need to make changes in their life, the results are long-lasting. (Rom. 12:2) It also draws them ever closer to “the examiner of hearts,” Jehovah.—Prov. 17:3.




