Make Wise Use of Vacationlands
MAJESTIC mountains and verdant forests both have their own special beauty. Towering trees, high peaks and bold cliffs have defied wind, rain and snow for centuries. But at times they are marred by man. Hence, strict regulations have been put in force to preserve a number of these areas.
An example is the White Mountain National Forest, a vast wilderness of more than 730,000 acres (about 300,000 hectares) situated mainly in New Hampshire and partly in the adjoining state of Maine. Although not yet facing the great influx of visitors drawn to similar parks, the White Mountain National Forest is being overused, especially during summer months.
Problem of Preservation
Years ago, discerning individuals came to realize that wilderness vacationlands need protection from misuse by man. Hence, back in the early 1900’s, the United States Forest Service began setting aside certain scenic landmarks.
To keep them pleasant, however, your cooperation is also needed. As you hike through a national forest you may come upon ‘Restricted Use Areas.’ Possibly, fragile plants are sprouting. They may be capable of withstanding extreme weather conditions, but they cannot survive being trampled on. If plant communities are destroyed, surrounding soil succumbs to erosion.
Hikers are required to obtain ‘wilderness permits.’ This arrangement restricts the number of people permitted in particular areas. To illustrate: Part of the White Mountain National Forest is known as the Great Gulf Wilderness Area. There the limit per night is 60 persons. The maximum size group for hiking is restricted to 10, and people can remain in the area only four nights at a time. Permits for climbing are reserved no more than 30 days in advance. In some locations only overnight camps are allowed.
Are these restrictions unduly harsh? Well, did you realize that 62,000,000 people live within 500 miles (800 kilometers) of this forest? Failure to limit the number of hikers could result in trampling the plants out of existence.
Some Safety Tips
During the past 80 years, 43 persons have died in the Mount Washington area. So, visitors here and in similar areas are urged to do their utmost to ensure a safe trip. This calls for careful planning.
Study the latest guidebook and trail maps before beginning your trip and take note of alternative trail routes. Check weather conditions. Frequently, cold fronts and storms arise suddenly on Mount Washington, and these can spell disaster. It is important to carry extra clothing for the high altitudes. Include windbreakers, hats and gloves. Take along some high-energy foods, as well as some first-aid items. And don’t forget the shorter period of daylight during fall and winter.
Tell others where you are going. Leave with a family member or close friend a copy of the route that you plan to follow. Rather than trying to hike alone, keep together in groups of three or four.
Also, don’t forget to leave camping areas in good condition for the next group. A motto promoted by the National Forest Service is: ‘Take nothing but pictures; leave nothing but tracks.’ If you build a fire, rather than cutting wood from living trees, use wood that is dead or lying on the ground. Plan to carry your own garbage out of the area. And bury human waste away from water sources.
A trip to forested vacationlands can bring benefits in many ways. Properly controlled hiking in these areas is healthful. It causes more rapid circulation of blood that has been purified due to cleaner air. Seldom-used muscles get a workout and achieve better tone. Perhaps best of all, one can obtain a better outlook on life. Tranquil surroundings help chase away the anxieties and tensions of life in noisy, crowded, fast-paced cities.
Increasing numbers of people today enjoy hiking, camping, fishing, skiing or just taking a weekend drive through scenic national forests. Do you have similar plans for the future? We hope that this discussion will aid you to use such vacationlands wisely.

