From Our Readers
Prayer  The article “Young People Ask . . . Will God Hear My Prayers?” (June 22, 2001) really strengthened me. I received this magazine while lying in bed in the hospital. I was unable to go to the Kingdom Hall or to our convention. I was really sad and couldn’t seem to get my feelings under control. Praying to Jehovah settled me down, and to a surprising degree, my heart was refreshed. I am comforted to know that Jehovah will never forget me.
A. O., Japan
I am 18 years old and a regular pioneer, a full-time evangelizer. For the past few months, I have felt depressed. I felt like Steve, the youth mentioned in the article who said that sometimes he felt that he shouldn’t bother God with his problems. But I took to heart the counsel at Luke 12:6, 7. I started to feel calmer and was moved to pour out my heart to Jehovah.
M. D., Nicaragua
Raised in Nunnery  The article “Abandoned by Parents—Loved by God” (June 22, 2001) brought back a lot of memories. I remember my mother telling us about her life in the convent and how the nuns treated her. When she left the convent at age 16, she had no place to stay. Many people have suffered this kind of mistreatment and are afraid to talk about it. So I’m glad this article came out.
G. E., United States
Health  In your June 8, 2001, issue, I read the article “Modern Medicine—How High Can It Reach?” As a layman in medicine and science, I found your explanations and references to the history of medicine to be most interesting and of personal benefit. This issue is one I’m going to keep.
E. F., Germany
Drug Abuse  I regularly receive your magazines from a workmate, and I read them. But I have a big problem with the strong implication in the series “Drug Abuse—There Is a Solution!” that all rock musicians are drug addicts. (July 8, 2001) There are countless rock musicians who have nothing to do with drugs and who take their work seriously.
M. M., Japan
“Awake!” responds: We did not mean to imply that all rock musicians abuse drugs. Nevertheless, the popularity of drug use among many rock musicians and among fans at rock concerts is well established.
Niagara Falls  I just finished reading the article “Niagara Falls—An Awesome Experience.” (July 8, 2001) I thoroughly enjoyed reading it. Recently, my husband took me there for our anniversary. I thought it would be boring. How wrong I was! Seeing the falls was only matched by hearing the sound of the falls.
C. K., United States
You said that the erosion of the river gorge has taken place over the past 12,000 years. This would not tie in with the Bible’s account of a global deluge.
R. P., Britain
“Awake!” responds: We simply presented the current estimates given by geologists, with no comment as to how accurate they might be. Such estimates obviously do not take into consideration the Bible’s account of the Noachian Flood, which evidently took place less than 5,000 years ago.—Matthew 24:37.

