The Allure of Ice Fishing
By Awake! writer in Finland
THE beautiful snowy winter days of the North provide numerous opportunities for outdoor activities. To enjoy the glistening white scenery and cold fresh air, people head out to walk, ski, skate, or toboggan. Then there are those who prefer to fish through the ice. I have long wondered, ‘What is so attractive about ice fishing?’ So I asked my friend Martti, an experienced ice fisherman, to take me along on an ice-fishing excursion.
The day is dawning when I meet Martti in front of his home. He has already packed all the equipment: rods, lures, bait, seats, and the key tool—a big ice auger for drilling holes in the ice. The only thing I needed to provide was suitable clothing for myself. Clothes need to be both plentiful and warm. An ice fisherman stays seated for long periods of time, and in the wide-open spaces on seas and lakes, the wind may be frigid. Martti nearly always fishes on the sea because he lives near it. If he lived inland, he would probably enjoy ice fishing on a lake or a river.
When we arrive at the coast and step onto the ice, I think to myself, ‘Is it safe to walk on the sea ice?’ This time it is quite safe. Thanks to the freezing temperatures in the early winter, the ice is now exceptionally thick. Still, it is always necessary to be careful when on the ice. Even during severe winters, the ice may be thin in places. It is important to know the ice conditions and the risks involved and to be properly equipped. After we walk a bit, Martti starts to drill a hole in the ice. It is like butter for the ice auger, and a 30-inch-deep hole is made in what seems like an instant. Using a skimmer, Martti cleans the hole of ice and slush. Then he sits down on his portable seat, sets his line, and drops the hook through the ice.
Although the basic idea of ice fishing is simple—drill a hole in the ice and start fishing—the process goes more smoothly with a little know-how. For example, choosing the right location is essential. Since fish use less energy to find food in the winter, it is important to know where the fish congregate. Martti pinpointed today’s location on his earlier ice-fishing outings. If we had gone to strange waters, he would probably have made a careful survey on the map and planned beforehand where to look for fish. An ice fisherman also learns to observe the weather and its effects on the movement of fish. He can look for fish by drilling holes in the ice in various places. A fisherman may drill dozens of holes during a day.
Today, it seems that the fish are hiding or are not hungry. Whatever the case, this does not bother us. After all, I have learned what the real allure of ice fishing is. More important than catching fish is being out and enjoying nature. Martti sums it up this way: “Especially for city dwellers, it is like a vacation. You forget all your other concerns.”
[Picture on page 27]
Drilling through the ice
[Picture on page 27]
Ice auger

