1980 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses
Millions of people today find themselves with ‘no hope and without God in the world.’ (Eph. 2:12) Notwithstanding the glowing human promises made in this century for a better future, they despair of ever seeing the troubled world conditions straightened out. They are swept along with the spirit of the world, thus becoming apathetic, depressed and cynical. In their frustrations many turn to violence, drugs, sexual immorality, crime and even suicide. Thus a report from New Zealand states: “Never have people been so demoralized, so dissatisfied with human government.”
But there is a notable exception. There is a group of people, upward of two million of them, scattered throughout some 200 lands and islands of the seas, who have a ‘living hope’ regarding the future. Why? Because they have implicit faith in the ability and willingness of the Creator to set matters straight in his own due time. And they have strong reasons for believing that that due time is close at hand. Who are they? They are Jehovah’s Witnesses. They have experienced in their own lives the fulfillment of these inspired words: “May the God who gives hope fill you with all joy and peace by your believing, that you may abound in hope with power of holy spirit.”​—Rom. 15:13; 1 Pet. 1:3.
THEIR HOPE
Their hope is based on God’s sure promises. What has God promised? His promises are highlighted in the words that his Son, Jesus Christ, spoke while here on earth, and in the prayer that he taught his followers to pray: “Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified. Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.” Here, he was giving Christians something for which to hope. (Matt. 6:9, 10; 7:7) For in making these petitions, Christians would be looking forward in faith to the vindication of God’s name, the triumph of righteousness, and the doing away with religious hypocrisy and all other evils on earth.
Yes, for God’s will to be done upon earth means that God “will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.” (Rev. 21:4) Those words, in effect, promise everlasting life in perfection and happiness on a paradise earth for billions of Adam’s offspring, living and dead. Furthermore, the time for these things to be realized is near at hand. This is seen by the physical facts in fulfillment of such prophecies as those found at Matthew chapters 24 and 25, Mark chapter 13, Luke chapter 21, 2 Timothy 3:1-5 and Revelation 6:1-8.
For all mourning and tears to be done away with, there would also need to be the returning of loved ones from the graves. So we are given the hope of a resurrection of “all those in the memorial tombs,” “of both the righteous and the unrighteous.” Because of this hope Christians do not mourn as do others.​—John 5:28, 29; Acts 24:15; 1 Thess. 4:13.
STRONG BASIS FOR HOPE
Why can Jehovah’s Witnesses be so confident about their Christian hope? First of all because Jehovah God, the Creator, does indeed exist. All his visible creation testifies to that; and not only to his existence, but also to ever so many of his marvelous qualities or attributes, such as his wisdom, power and love. (Rom. 1:20) Further, his dealings with humankind, as recorded in his Word, prove that he is a faithful God, that he simply cannot lie. (Titus 1:2; Heb. 10:23) Because of this Christians “have strong encouragement to lay hold on the hope set before” them. What Jehovah God promises he fulfills.​—Heb. 6:18.
The very steps that Jehovah God has taken to bring about the fulfillment of his promises give Christians further basis for strong hope. Foremost among these steps is his sending his Son to earth to die for our sins. Since humankind had been sold into the slavery of sin and death through Adam’s sin, for us to be able to enjoy everlasting life under Kingdom conditions, the slavery to sin and death would have to be abolished. (Rom. 5:12) To this end God “gave his only-begotten Son, in order that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.” Since then God has been making further preparations for Kingdom blessings by calling out and training 144,000 anointed followers of Jesus to be associated with him as the ‘seed of Abraham,’ which will bless all mankind.​—John 3:16; Gal. 3:16, 29; Rev. 14:1; 20:6.
THE POWER OF HOPE
Hope and faith are closely related. But it would be a mistake to view hope as a mere aspect of faith. Bible writers distinguish between the two as at 1 Corinthians 13:13: “Now, however, there remain faith, hope, love, these three.” Faith gives substance to hope, even as we read: “Faith is the assured expectation of things hoped for.” On the other hand, hope strengthens faith.​—Heb. 11:1.
Hope sustained the faithful men of old. Without a doubt the prophecy Jehovah God gave in Eden furnished Abel a basis for hope: “I shall put enmity between you [the Serpent] and the woman and between your seed and her seed. He will bruise you in the head and you will bruise him in the heel.” Because of this promise the apostle Paul could write: “For the eager expectation of the creation [the world of mankind] is waiting [although unknowingly] for the revealing of the sons of God [Christ’s anointed body members]. For the creation was subjected to futility, not by its own will but through him that subjected it, on the basis of hope that the creation itself also will be set free from enslavement to corruption and have the glorious freedom of the children of God. For we know that all creation keeps on groaning together and being in pain together until now.”​—Gen. 3:15; Rom. 8:19-22.
The patriarchs Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were sustained by the hope of a “city” having real foundations, God’s kingdom. Because of this they were able to reach out for a better place, to one belonging to heaven. Hope also sustained the prophet Moses.​—Heb. 11:10, 13-22, 24-26, 35.
And was it not hope that sustained Jesus Christ? Yes, for we read that it was “for the joy that was set before him” that he was able to endure so much and come off victoriously. He had strong confidence in the ultimate triumph of righteousness, even as can be seen by his Model Prayer. He also had the hope of again sharing the glory he originally had with his Father.​—Heb. 12:2; John 17:5.
What a sad picture Jesus’ apostles and other disciples presented when their Master was put to death! At that time they were without hope, depressed, fearful, inactive. But what a change took place when their hopes were revived by means of the resurrection of Jesus from the dead!​—Luke 24:17, 32.
How prominently hope loomed up in their lives after that! In particular did they have strong hope in the return of their Master and in the resurrection of the dead. Their hope, in fact, became the issue between the rulers and those Christians. Thus on one occasion the apostle Paul stated in court that it was because of “the hope of the promise that was made by God to our forefathers I stand called to judgment.”​—Acts 26:6, 7; 23:6; 3:21.
No question about it, hope has sustaining power. It supports us when under trial, when tests and disappointments come. The Christians at Thessalonica demonstrated this, for Paul wrote them, “we bear incessantly in mind your faithful work and your loving labor and your endurance due to your hope in our Lord Jesus Christ before our God and Father.”​—1 Thess. 1:3.
Hope also serves as a protection. That is why it is likened to a helmet: “Let us keep our senses and have on the breastplate of faith and love and as a helmet the hope of salvation.” (1 Thess. 5:8; Eph. 6:17) Just as the helmet of old, made of various materials, protected a soldier engaged in carnal warfare, so hope, the spiritual helmet, protects our minds against attacks by doubts as to our teachings and against temptations to violate Bible principles.
Because hope also makes for security it is likened to an anchor. “This hope we have as an anchor for the soul, both sure and firm.” (Heb. 6:19) Even as an anchor serves to keep a ship firm, secure and steady in the midst of a raging storm, so our Christian hope helps us survive the storms of life, whatever their nature​—disappointments, injustices, sickness, adversity or persecution.
STRENGTHENING THE CHRISTIAN HOPE
Without a doubt, Jehovah God caused all the foregoing to be recorded in his Word so that “through the comfort from the Scriptures we might have hope.” (Rom. 15:4) It follows then, that by feeding daily on God’s Word we will strengthen our hope. This requires both time and effort. Actually it means taking time that we would ordinarily spend doing other things and using it for Bible reading and study. (Eph. 5:11, 15, 16) Since no Christian is sufficient in himself, we must also meet with fellow Christians. At such meetings we can incite others and be incited by them to love and fine works by making public declaration of our hope. (1 Cor. 12:14-26; Heb. 10:23-25) In fact, whenever opportunities come our way we want to “make fast our hold on our freeness of speech and our boasting over the hope firm to the end.” The more we do so, the brighter and stronger our hope becomes.​—Heb. 3:6.
But let us not overlook that it is also “through our endurance” that we gain hope. Not only does hope help us to endure, but endurance, in turn, strengthens our hope. That is why it is written: “Let us exult while in tribulations, since we know that tribulation produces endurance; endurance, in turn, an approved condition; the approved condition, in turn, hope, and the hope does not lead to disappointment.” Yes, when we keep doing God’s will, resisting opposition and temptations, we gain the realization that God approves us, that we are pleasing to him. This, in turn, strengthens our hope. (Rom. 5:3-5) It is even as we also read: “We desire each one of you to show the same industriousness so as to have the full assurance of the hope down to the end, in order that you may . . . through faith and patience inherit the promises.”​—-Heb. 6:11, 12.
What else can strengthen our hope? Unselfish love will, for “love . . . believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.” (1 Cor. 13:4, 7) Love believes all things that God has promised in his Word, thereby strengthening hope. Love will make us optimistic, positive, forward looking; it will make us hope for the best. Hope does not easily give up as to prospects for improvement in others. It is ready to give them the benefit of the doubt. Love will cause a Christian mate to keep on hoping that the unbeliever will eventually become a believer. Time and again such hoping has been rewarded after as much as 25 years! When we are going from house to house with the good news of God’s kingdom, love will make us hopeful about finding sheeplike ones who are hungering and thirsting for righteousness.
Holding a good conscience, being honest with ourselves and having a good relationship with our heavenly Father will also serve to strengthen our hope. Because of having a bad heart Judas saw his case as hopeless and so committed suicide. (Matt. 27:3-5) Because of having a good heart the apostle Peter was able to recover from his having denied his Master three times. (Matt. 26:75; John 21:15-17) Due to his having a good conscience the apostle Paul could hopefully ask others to pray for him: “Carry on prayer for us, for we trust we have an honest conscience.”​—Heb. 13:18.
As has been previously observed, prayers are, in effect, expressions of hope. We strengthen our hope by expressing it in prayer and we should also pray for God to strengthen our hope even as Jesus emphasized that always we should ‘pray and not give up.’ (Luke 18:1) So, we keep praying for our hopes to be realized in God’s due time. Since the more we pray, the stronger our hope will become, let us ‘keep praying incessantly,’ yes, keep ‘persevering in prayer.’​—1 Thess. 5:17; Rom. 12:12.
That Jehovah’s Witnesses have this kind of hope can be seen from the reports of their hope-inspired activity for the 1979 service year.
GOOD NEWS DUE TO HOPE-INSPIRED ACTIVITY
“AS cold water upon a tired soul, so is a good report from a distant land.” (Prov. 25:25) Good reports have indeed come this year from many lands. This is truly cause for rejoicing, for Jehovah’s people have experienced severe testings in recent years. There have been testings due to disappointments regarding the realization of certain hopes. In more and more lands nationalism is making the witness work more difficult. There are ever-increasing economic pressures due to inflation and unemployment. The modern trend toward materialism, pleasure-seeking and the gratifying of fleshly desires has been taking its toll. (For example, had it not been for disfellowshipings, the United States would have seen an increase of almost 3.5 percent instead of almost 1.5 percent.)
That there truly is cause for thanksgiving can be seen from the fact that in spite of slight decreases in literature placements during the 1979 service year there was an increase of about 14 percent in baptisms for a total of 113,672. There were also increases in hours, about 4 percent, and also slight increases in return visits and home Bible studies. Also cause for thanksgiving are the reports from such lands as Nigeria and the Philippines. After a few years of decreases in the number of Witnesses in these lands, recent months have seen a definite upswing. In one African land​—in spite of a ban—​Witnesses by the thousands were able to attend circuit assemblies, and hundreds have been baptized. Their hopes are bright and strong in spite of their situation.
The news from Malawi, on the whole, is encouraging. Our brothers have won out. (Isa. 54:17) The year 1979 marked a turning point, for most of our brothers there have been released, although thousands remain in refugee camps across the border in Mozambique. Currently, government officials are stressing the paying of taxes, so that now a tax receipt rather than a party card is what they require. This furnishes no problem for the Witnesses. Relief was also provided for those who were in need of material things. In many places brothers are making a good name for themselves by working hard on community projects. The number of circuits and home Bible studies have increased, along with baptisms.
Hope-inspired activity in Brazil resulted in an all-time peak of 106,970 Witnesses as well as an all-time peak Memorial attendance of 299,453. During the year a total of 9,387 persons symbolized their dedication by water baptism. Hong Kong saw a 10-percent increase; Italy an 8-percent increase, for a total of 77,774 Witnesses, and Japan a 10-percent increase, with a peak of 50,473 publishers. It was also happifying to see increases this year, though not large, in such lands as the United States and Great Britain. By consulting the chart one can note many other lands that showed increases. Germany saw hundreds more baptized than were last year.
Among the most encouraging aspects of the 1979 service year report is the greatly increased number of those who shared in the pioneer and especially the auxiliary pioneer work; the latter requires devoting 60 hours a month to preaching and teaching. This shows that ever so many of Jehovah’s Witnesses have the self-sacrificing spirit in spite of the world’s trend to ever more self-indulgence.
Thus the past year saw Japan reach a peak of 15,194 pioneers, which at the time was more than 30 percent of the total Witnesses. In Korea there was a 46-percent increase in the number of auxiliary pioneers over last year. There one Witness taxi driver serves as such although working the greater part of each day to earn a living. How does he do it? He leaves a Bible study aid in the back seat of his cab, and that often results in opportunities to witness. In this way he has been able to place as many as 142 books in one month. Also in Korea, on an average each month 15 percent of the brothers imprisoned because of their stand on neutrality manage to do auxiliary pioneer work.
Among other lands that give encouraging reports of this feature of the witness work are Great Britain, France and the United States. In Great Britain mothers with several small children manage to arrange their affairs to serve in this way six to nine months out of the year. In Mexico mothers with six, seven and even ten children occasionally manage to do the same. In Newfoundland one mother successfully served as such for one month although working eight hours a day at a secular job, having an unemployed husband and seven children to care for!
THE PRINTED PAGE GIVES HOPE
Can one tract cause a truth-hungry person to embrace the Bible hope that the Witnesses bring? Indeed it can. A Witness going from house to house in Sesotha, South Africa, met a woman who, as the result of reading the tract “Why Are We Here?” was waiting for the Witnesses to call. She wanted to become a member of their “church,” for it was clear to her from reading this tract that the Witnesses had the truth. A Bible study was started with her and a year later she dedicated herself to God and was baptized.
Can reading one copy of a magazine inspire hope in a person? Again, the answer is Yes. A prisoner in Portugal chanced to receive a copy of the Awake! magazine for the first time. His response? He wrote to the branch there: “Dear Sirs: I read Awake! magazine for the first time and would like to express my appreciation for this splendid magazine which I found endowed with non-political, humanistic and one hundred percent realistic tenor. I am really unable to express all that I felt, however, I will try to give a picture of what could have been my career if I had spent my leisure time reading a magazine like Awake! Then I would have followed a course different to that which brought me behind prison bars . . . Nevertheless, I am convinced that with the precious aid of Awake! magazine, I will succeed in making a new course for my life.”
From the following it is clear that reading just one book can also give one the Bible-based hope: In Mexico a young woman, a drug addict and in miserable shape both physically and morally, asked for some cigarettes from a Witness who was visiting a prison. In place of cigarettes she was given a copy of the Truth book. Circumstances prevented making a return visit on her but a year later the Witness who had given her the book met her on the street. She was very happy. She had overcome her drug habit and was now associated with the Witnesses. She had liked the book so much that she got in touch with the publishers of it, began studying the Bible with the Witnesses and before long dedicated herself to God and was baptized.
In particular has the beautifully illustrated publication My Book of Bible Stories been an effective instrument in building hope in people. Thus from Belize, Central America, comes this report: “The book My Book of Bible Stories seems to have taken Belize by storm. One eighty-year-old man, in appreciation for what he had learned, said: ‘After all these years I just discovered that I was still a boy.’ It is common for people to approach a Witness on the street and ask for ‘one of those books like my neighbor has.’ Books are requested by people who have never listened before. Among schoolchildren it is THE book to have.” An experienced Nigerian Witness expressed similar sentiments. It is a “book that appeals to both friend and foe . . . I have seen people come to Jehovah’s Witnesses’ homes asking for a book. . . . I see that even persons that never allowed Jehovah’s Witnesses to stand at their doors before come asking for the book. In our territory it is known as ‘The book.’ Schoolteachers like the book . . . even illiterates want it.”
An Austrian girl of eight years wrote the Society: “I would like to let you know how much I enjoy the book ‘My Book of Bible Stories.’ Especially do I find enjoyment in looking at the powerful pictures again and again. All the stories are wonderful. I have read the entire book and now start reading it again with all the Bible texts. I have also been able to show the book to my teacher and I am also reading out of it to my girl friend. I want to thank you so much for it.”
A Witness in Japan introduced the Bible Stories book to the president of his company with whom he rides to work. After carefully reading it he procured 300 copies for his employees. In presenting it to them he encouraged them to read it with their families.
In Nigeria a Witness was able to place 37 copies of the Bible Stories book with the students at the college where he worked. One 15-year-old Witness girl placed over 400 copies of this book with her teachers and fellow students.
In the Dominican Republic a certain Protestant pastor liked the Bible Stories book so much he ordered 50 copies of it for his church members. In New York a Sunday-school teacher ordered 60 copies for her pupils and friends.
In Fiji a young man obtained a copy of Bible Stories and took it with him to his outer island. When a Witness called some weeks later he found a group of 15 young children who were eager to tell him the things they had learned from this young man. A producer of radio Bible quizzes personally stated he benefited from reading this book. Now people are asking for copies so as to be able to answer his quizzes.
The book Your Youth​—Getting the Best out of It has also been well received in Fiji. A Witness with a large family tries to get some witnessing done by translating articles from the Society’s English publications into the vernacular language and presenting them to the local radio station. As a result of the translation and broadcast of the chapter “Your Clothes and Appearance Talk​—About You” she received 40 requests for copies of the Youth book from which this was taken. People are now calling at her home to request Bible studies.
In Ecuador two missionaries make it a practice to visit schools and ask permission to speak with the students. In nine months they placed 5,817 copies of the books Your Youth​—Getting the Best out of It and Did Man Get Here by Evolution or by Creation?
The printed page continues to be used mightily in helping truth-hungry people to gain a solidly based hope.
THE BIBLE HOPE CHANGES PEOPLE’S LIVES
Preaching the good news of the Kingdom hope caused people of Bible times to be “washed clean” of all sorts of bad practices. (1 Cor. 6:9-11) The same is true today, even as the following experiences show.
In Sweden a Witness got a telephone call from a man at whose door he had left a “not-at-home” slip. The man had been at home but was too depressed to answer the door. But upon reading the slip, which was entitled “Alive and Healthy Forever,” he asked the Witness to call immediately. The man had been so greatly depressed that morning that he had loaded his revolver and was ready to do away with himself when the Witness called. But upon reading the slip about ‘staying alive and healthy forever’ he changed his mind. The Witness was able to comfort him with the Kingdom hope, upon which he subscribed for the Watchtower and Awake! magazines.
In Canada a mother who had recently become a Witness asked that someone witness to her son in prison. He turned out to be such a violent alcoholic wrongdoer that he had received an indefinite prison sentence making it likely that he would never get out of prison. The prison officials warned the Witness elders about this man. But he responded so well to the Kingdom hope that, after 19 years in prison, he was released on parole. He will always have a parole office checking on him. Now he is such a quiet, smiling, happily married father that one could not imagine him ever having been a violent alcoholic!
In Austria a Witness going from house to house met a young man who was still in bed although it was late afternoon. Disappointed with life, he had turned to alcohol and drugs as being the only alternative to suicide. A regular Bible study was started with him. After the second study he quit smoking; after the third study he got rid of his outlandish beard. In time he overcame other problems. Asked at a recent circuit assembly what was the highest point in his life, he replied that it was getting baptized the day before.
How the ‘living hope’ helps people to straighten out their married lives is seen from two experiences from Belize, Central America. In going from house to house Witnesses placed the book Making Your Family Life Happy with a woman who was living out of wedlock with a man. The couple immediately started to read the book together, spending long hours looking up the scriptures. Upon the next visit the Witnesses noticed that the Family book was on the center table. The woman had written out the entire passage of Genesis 2:24, which reads: “That is why a man will leave his father and his mother and he must stick to his wife and they must become one flesh.” By the time the Witnesses called again the woman announced that she was now Mrs. _________________ . Her husband gladly welcomed the Witnesses and a home Bible study was started.
In the same country there was a woman who had lived with a man for 25 years and had nine children by him. Upon becoming familiar with the Kingdom hope and its requirements she asked the man to marry her. He refused, and so she left him, taking all her nine children with her. Elders in her congregation not only kept helping her spiritually but also were able to find a way for her to make a living and provide for her children as well. No question about it, the Bible hope changes people’s lives for the better.
SPREADING HOPE DESPITE PERSECUTION
The lot of many of Jehovah’s Witnesses today calls to mind the words of the apostle Paul: “We are pressed in every way, but not cramped beyond movement; . . . we are persecuted, but not left in the lurch; we are thrown down, but not destroyed.”​—2 Cor. 4:8, 9.
How Jehovah is providing such help in our day can be seen from this report from an African land where there is much persecution:
‘When we were arrested, the police confiscated all our literature, Bibles, books and magazines. Later, when some political prisoners from another area were transferred to our camp we were happily surprised to see that they had some of our publications. The police had decided to sell the books they had confiscated from our brothers to make a profit. These political prisoners, in turn, were willing to sell these books to us. In this way I was able to have a considerable supply of literature. Imagine my happiness when I could see the name of a brother I knew written on the inside cover, and there I was, in prison, now benefiting from his confiscated literature!’
The past year saw a new law passed in a certain African land whereby stricter measures were to be taken against all those practicing an unauthorized religion. However, the Witnesses there have not let this deter them in the least. During the past year more than 2,000 newly dedicated persons were baptized; new highs were reached in the number of full-time preachers and nearly 30,000 Bible studies are being conducted with interested persons.
In another land where the Witnesses’ activity is banned, four brothers spent four months in prison because of obeying God as ruler rather than men. Upon their release two of them lost their jobs. One of these started a small grocery business, which enables him now regularly to auxiliary pioneer. His example impelled four others in his congregation to join him in this activity.
There is particularly severe persecution in another land where many hundreds are in prison. Still, those at liberty carry on fearlessly. Thus in one area where there are only three baptized Witnesses seven publishers share in witnessing and 60 attend meetings. One brother is conducting studies with 168 people in groups of about 40.
Adding to the tests the brothers have to face in some lands, opposers try to make them compromise not only as to nationalism, but now in matters of witchcraft and ancestor worship. One brother relates: ‘I was beaten with the butt of a gun mostly around the head. However, Jehovah strengthened me. What brought me joy was that on the next day the persecutors came back to my home and asked for literature, for which they contributed.’
In still another land where the Kingdom work is banned a Witness schoolteacher makes it a point to call on all the parents of her students. She discusses with them the progress their children are making, behavior problems and the like. This has opened many opportunities for her to give a witness concerning God’s kingdom and as a result she has several home Bible studies.
THE “LIVING HOPE” CONVENTION
Jehovah God commanded his ancient people Israel to come together three times annually in festivals. He well knew how faith-building and hope-inspiring such gatherings would prove to be for his people.​—Deut. 16:16.
In keeping with this divinely appointed pattern Jehovah’s people in most lands gathered during 1979, twice for circuit assemblies and once for the “Living Hope” convention. The number of “Living Hope” district conventions in each land ran from one to over ninety.
These conventions undoubtedly served their purpose in building up the faith and strengthening the hope of Jehovah’s people. They also served to give a grand witness to Jehovah’s name and kingdom. In fact, much favorable newspaper, radio and TV publicity resulted. They featured stories telling what changes for the better the truth had made in the lives of people, how even “prisoners find God through Witnesses.” TV stations featured the baptism service, and newspapers carried pictures and stories about it. One newspaper showed a picture of ‘an inmate of a Federal correction institution who was starting a new life with his being baptized into the faith of Jehovah’s Witnesses.’
All who attended were conscious of their spiritual needs, and they received rich blessings. Thus one zealous pioneer couple was heard to exclaim at the close of the first Milwaukee convention: “This absolutely was the very best convention we ever attended. We feel so encouraged and built up!” A report from Sweden stated: “Never before [were] so many spontaneous remarks heard about the value of the program during and after the assembly. It reached the hearts of all categories and gave clear and straightforward counsels.” Expressions such as, “This is what we need!” and, “This is what we want, clear guidelines!” were repeatedly heard.
Of course, to report on the “Living Hope” convention with the same candor Bible writers displayed, it would be necessary to observe that not all in attendance showed the same appreciation. There were still some who milled around in the corridors during the program, or engaged in extended conversation while brothers were speaking from the platform. There was also scrambling for preferred seats, which was hardly in keeping with the love that should mark Christ’s followers.​—John 13:34, 35.
Among the foremost blessings of the convention were, of course, the releases. On Friday afternoon the conventioners received the Commentary on the Letter of James. This textbook, which contains a verse-by-verse treatment of James’ letter, caused great excitement. It will be used in many lands as a textbook in the Theocratic School for the next two years. Saturday the conventioners were delighted to receive Choosing the Best Way of Life, which contains much fine counsel based primarily on the two letters of the apostle Peter. And Sunday morning the conventioners were pleasantly surprised to receive the release of two cassettes containing a recording of the book of Acts.
Greatly appreciated by all were the three dramas based on Bible themes. The first, “What Are You Choosing?” graphically depicted the choice that Moses had to make between all that Egypt had to offer and being a servant of Jehovah God. Next came “The Need of the Fatherless Boy​—Can You Help Him?” It deeply touched the hearts of all who heard and saw it, and no doubt its effect will be felt in the greater attention congregations will now pay to those who are, literally and spiritually, widows and fatherless boys. Powerful, timely and most thought-provoking was the drama “Be Transformed by Making Your Mind Over.” It really had a soul-searching message for all who were getting careless as to the kind of entertainment they are choosing these days.
Many were the fine, upbuilding talks that were given, but space permits touching on just a few of these. The 100-year record of The Watchtower and of those associated with it as ‘messengers of hope’ was not only enlightening but most encouraging. The talk dealing with our conscience directed the pointed counsel to those who blithely say, “It doesn’t bother my conscience.” That talk showed how important it is to make certain what God’s Word has to say about a matter, and how it will affect our brothers as well as what effect it might have on ourselves. And because of the inroads that the world’s unclean spirit is making among some of God’s people, other talks stressed the Christian requirements of chasteness, self-control and “holy acts of conduct.”
Many were the appreciative comments heard on the symposium dealing with “Soundness of Mind in a Mixed-up World.” These talks underscored the value of cultivating a realistic view of life; of forming trusted relations with Jehovah God and our brothers; of strengthening our Bible-based hope and the will to live, as well as of allowing for variety and recreation in one’s life. A fine point made in the talk “Choosing the Best Way of Life” was that Jehovah God will save us from stumbling​—even as he did David in the case of Nabal’s insolence—​but we must do our part. The brothers also appreciated the candor of this same talk, which acknowledged the Society’s responsibility for some of the disappointment a number felt regarding 1975.
“Christlike Modesty​—Evidence of Wisdom” made the point that modesty means to be aware of one’s limitations. The Bible shows that God is humble, but since he is without limitations the term modesty does not appropriately apply to him. Then again, a Christian may be humble and yet not be fully aware of his limitations, as in the case of the apostle Peter.​—Ps. 18:35; Mark 14:27-31, 66-72.
The heartwarming message contained in the public talk, “Mankind’s Only Hope​—God’s Unshakable Kingdom,” also elicited many expressions of appreciation. And ending the convention on a very positive and encouraging note was the final discourse, “Spurred on by Our Living Hope.”
The witnessing from house to house and on the streets, preaching the good news of the Kingdom and advertising the convention on Friday morning, was again a high point. And let it be noted that it fitted in so well with all the admonition that was given on the importance of the witness work. It furnished a fine opportunity for newer publishers to share in the house-to-house activity as well as for all others to have a taste of Kingdom-preaching. Such field service is especially fruitful and is appreciated because of its effectiveness. In many places the fact that thousands share in this activity at the same time resulted in much favorable publicity, both in the newspapers and on TV. Featured extensively were descriptions of this work under such headings as “Watchtower Carrying Message for 100 Years.” “Witnessing for God is a labor of love,” and “15,000 Witnesses blanket area with Watchtower today.”
In passing it might be noted that the simplified feeding program in some lands allowed so many more of the brothers to enjoy the convention program. Furthermore, many expressed great pleasure at the fine arrangements of Kingdom songs presented by means of recordings before each morning and afternoon session.
The “Living Hope” conventions did indeed furnish “food at the proper time.” All, whether Witnesses or not, who came to these conventions “conscious of their spiritual need,” had their faith and love strengthened and their ‘living hope’ made more bright and real.​—Matt. 24:45-47; 5:3.
[Chart on pages 24-31]
1979 SERVICE YEAR REPORT OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES WORLD WIDE
(See publication)

