“Standing Firm As One Flock” in Chad
Like their fellow Christians around the world, Jehovah’s Witnesses in Chad appreciate the annual assemblies that are arranged for their spiritual upbuilding. Here is the account of a trip to a series of special assembly days held in the southern part of this landlocked, central African country.
Because of distance and travel difficulties, assemblies in Chad are usually held in small groups, their timing being determined by the weather. From June to September, the rainy season renders travel difficult and in some areas impossible. The special assembly days are held after the heavy rains have passed. The end-of-year holidays are convenient for the larger district convention. And before the rains begin again in June, the two-day circuit assemblies are presented.
IT WAS a hot and sticky Sunday afternoon. The Kingdom Hall at N’Djamena, the capital of Chad, was packed with 184 persons. Despite the heat, they were paying rapt attention to the main talk, “Standing Firm in One Spirit.” That morning they were happy to witness three persons symbolize their dedication to Jehovah God by water baptism. This was the first of six special assembly days that a local traveling overseer and I were privileged to serve.
The theme of the series, “Standing Firm as One Flock,” was particularly appreciated by the 267 Witnesses in Chad. They live far from fellow Christians in other lands. Yet, their receiving the same spiritual food and being cared for in the same way encourages them to continue to work in unity with their brothers worldwide. The practical counsel of this program also fortified them to stand firm against the subtle influence of Satan’s world and the winds of persecution or opposition.
In N’Djamena
The first congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Chad was formed in N’Djamena in 1964. Now it has over 90 publishers of the Kingdom good news. It was a pleasure to look out at the audience and see many who have been serving faithfully since the early days of the work in Chad. One brother had three wives when he first learned of the Bible’s truth. Soon he saw the need to conform his life to Bible standards. He legally married his first wife and separated from the others, though making caring arrangements for them. He was baptized in 1973 and has been active in the work ever since.
One elder who participated in the program had undergone a severe test of faith. In 1975 the government of that time enforced participation in certain customs that were based on worship of the dead; anyone who failed to comply could be put to death. When the brother stood firm and would not compromise his faith, the authorities began searching for him. Only a change in government at that crucial time spared him.
On the Road to Pala
After N’Djamena, the trip south to serve the remaining five assemblies began. We had often taken the route before but only in the dry season. Now, in late September at the close of the rainy season, everything was green and luxuriant. It was an enjoyable time to travel. We passed field after field of millet. The heads on the tall stalks lining the road were now ripening. Soon they would be harvested, dried, and stored in the cone-shaped earthen granaries that dot the countryside. Millet is the staple food for most Chadians. It is pounded in a large wooden mortar with a pestle that is often taller than the person using it. Then the flour is mixed with boiling water and molded into a ball to be eaten with a sauce made with okra or peanuts as a base.
We saw more and more fields of cotton as we traveled farther south. Because the terrain is flat in this part of the country, the flowering fields seemed to reach right to the horizon. Soon whole families would be out in the fields picking the cotton by hand. Cotton is the largest cash crop in Chad, 133,000 tons being harvested in 1988. By late afternoon, we were passing Lake Léré. Here the country is hilly and very picturesque, particularly at this time of the year. Being there at just the right time, we were able to purchase freshly caught carp that was fried right along the road. It was a meal that any host would be proud to serve.
One thing that makes travel more difficult during this season is that if it should rain, barriers are put across the roads to stop the flow of traffic. Why? To preserve the roads. So our hearts sank as we saw the sky ahead suddenly turn as black as ink. We surely did not relish camping in the rain by the side of the road. But more important, we would be late for the next special assembly day. Happily, the heaviest part of this late rain missed the road. Even though we had to wait for a while at several barriers, late that night we arrived safe and sound in Pala, a town of about 32,000 people. What a treat was in store for us! The moonless sky after the rain gave us a spectacular view of the stars and of the Milky Way, a breathtaking sight that most city dwellers never get to see. It reminded us of the reason for which we stand firm​—to honor the Grand Creator of the marvelous universe.
Two small congregations and an isolated group assembled at Pala. Three young brothers had walked over 60 miles [100 km] to this assembly. Since the assemblies in the south are small and there are few elders, parts of the program were recorded at the assembly in N’Djamena and replayed. This ensures a high-quality program even with a small number in attendance. We were happy to have one candidate for baptism.
The Zealous Group at Kélo
Next, there was a short trip to Kélo, where 194 were present for the program on Sunday. Many families with young children had walked over 20 miles [30 km] to attend. Two newly dedicated persons were to be baptized. During the dry season, baptism is often a problem if an assembly is not held near a river; hence, a number of persons have had to be baptized in a barrel. But our being there at the end of the rainy season made things easier. Nonetheless, it was necessary to drive more than 12 miles [20 km] to a suitable site.
One of the baptismal candidates was a young girl whose faith had been severely tested. Her family had promised her in marriage to a man who was not interested in studying the Bible. Moreover, he preferred to be united by tribal customs rather than by legal marriage. Because he was willing to pay a large bride-price, her family put much pressure on her. She even had to move elsewhere for a time so as to avoid the unscriptural union that her family wanted. She stood firm through all of this and made fine progress. Since her baptism, the family opposition has ceased. We thank Jehovah that we have such faithful persons among us.
The brothers here have other reasons to be grateful to Jehovah. Chad suffered a bitter civil war and then, in 1984, a severe famine. A local elder recalls that at one point during the famine, he looked around the Kingdom Hall and wondered if any of those present would still be alive in a few months. However, Jehovah’s organization provided aid in the form of food, relieving their plight. Their appreciation for that is now reflected in their zealous service. There is a strong pioneer spirit in Kélo. During October 1989, over a third of the Kingdom publishers arranged their affairs so they could share in the preaching work full-time.
Their experience with the famine taught them that they too must be generous. Last year an elder in the congregation suddenly took ill and died. He left behind a family of nine children, the youngest only a few months old. His wife faced family pressure to participate in mourning rites that involved worship of the dead. The brothers gave her needed support, so that she was able to resist the intense pressure. Then the congregation worked together to build a home for her and the younger children, in addition to helping materially in various other ways. This resulted in a very fine witness to the town, demonstrating the happy result of Christianity in action.​—Acts 20:35.
Koumra, Doba, and Bongor
Our next stop was Koumra. Gravel roads made the 180-mile [300 km] trip much easier. On the way, we passed through the city of Moundou, an industrial center of over a hundred thousand people. Seventy-one attended in Koumra. A young brother who had never received any formal schooling spoke from the platform. He explained how the learn-to-read-and-write program taught at the Kingdom Hall helped him and gave him the needed confidence. He now conducts studies in the Bible with four other persons.
After the special assembly day in Koumra, we headed back toward N’Djamena, with our next stop to be at Doba for the fifth assembly in our series. Some of those attending were caught in a late rain and had to spend the night along the road. Still, everyone arrived on time for the beginning of the program at Doba. Fifty-one were present, and one person presented himself for baptism.
The final stop was in Bongor. This is a rice-growing area, and we marveled at how flat the terrain was. The attendance at Bongor brought the total of those who heard the program in Chad to 630. And with two more immersed, the total number of persons baptized was nine.
Our return to N’Djamena completed a trip of nearly 1,200 miles [2,000 km]. It was a pleasure to associate with servants of God who have stood firm for many years, as well as to meet many new ones who are making wonderful progress. Their zeal for the ministry was particularly encouraging. During October 1989, there was a new peak of 267 publishers in Chad, a 20-percent increase over the previous year.
United Though Far Away
Traveling through the country made us appreciate what a challenge it is to spread the good news in a land where over 200 languages are spoken. Although French and Arabic are the official languages of Chad, at each of the special assembly days, the program had to be translated from French into a different language. Even so, many who came to an assembly location did not speak the language of the region, so it was still a problem to help them understand the program.
In all the places we visited, our brothers and sisters treated us with hospitality. The meals generally were a millet or rice-flour ball and spiced sauce mentioned earlier. Sometimes a young girl brought the food on a tray covered with a brightly colored cloth. The tray was gracefully balanced on her head, and you had to admire her grace.
The population of northern Chad is predominantly Muslim; people in the south are mainly Catholic, Protestant, or animist. The government upholds the policy of freedom of religion, and we are happy to be able to meet together freely.
The special assembly day program helped the small band of Witnesses in Chad to appreciate that although geographically they are far away from their brothers in other parts of the world, they are truly united in one flock with them. It enabled them to ‘stand firm in one spirit’ despite the pressures and opposition they experience.​—Philippians 1:27.

