R769 : page 1 

VOL. VI. PITTSBURGH, PA., JANUARY, 1885. NO. 5. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 

NO. 40 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, 
relative to what shall appear in these columns, 
which he cannot and does not cast aside; yet he 
should not be understood as endorsing every expression 
of correspondents, or of articles selected 
from other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS:-Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. 
You may send by Draft, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 



Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign 
subscribers will be 65 cents a year. Please 
send us no foreign money or postage stamps, as we 
can make no use of them. Remittances may be 
made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's 
poor who will send a card yearly requesting it. 
Freely we have received and freely we would give 
the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye 
to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, 
buy and eat-yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price." And you that have it~ 
"Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth 
not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is 
good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "- 
ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



page 1 

NOTE the removal of our business office 
to No. 40 FEDERAL ST., ALLEGHENY, 
PA. There, we will be pleased to receive 
a visit from any of you, when in the city. 



OUR TERMS are, IN ADVANCE. Some 
whose subscriptions are a year or more 
in arrears, will be dropped this month, 
the supposition being that they are not 
interested in the teachings presented. 
Should any who still desire it, or who 
have already paid for it, be missed, it 
will be but an accident. Such will please 
notify us at once. 



WALL CHARTS. -We still have a supply 
of the "Chart of the Ages," such as 
appears in FOOD FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS, 



page 105, only enlarged-33 inches 
long, mounted on rollers. These we 
will send free to our SUBSCRIBERS who 
are willing to pay expressage on the 
same. Express charge is 15 cents each 
by special contract, either by Adams or 
American Express. 



R707 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



The opening year finds the whole 
world in a state of financial depression 
which will doubtless be worse before improvement 
comes. Since we are advised 
in Scripture that the Day of the Lord's 
presence will be a time of trouble such 
as was not since there was a nation, some 
may be inclined to anticipate too much, 
too speedily. This is a tendency which 
all need to guard against. 

We should not for a moment lose sight 
of the apostles striking illustration of the 
trouble of this day, as recorded in 1 Thes. 5:3. 
From this illustration we should expect 
spasmodic trouble and distress of nations: 
and that these will become more 
frequent and more serious until they 
reach the climax stated by the prophet, 
and result in the death of present systems 
and the delivery of the children of this 
world into the New and better, the "golden" 
Millennial age, in which the King of 
righteousness shall rule and reign Lord 
of all, blessing all the families of earth. 

To those who have made the Lord 
even the Most High their refuge and 
habitation, we would say: "Trust in the 
Lord and do good;" "He shall bring 
forth thy righteousness as the light and 
thy judgment as the noonday." In this 
connection we commend to your careful 
study Psalms 37:1-19 and 91 entire. 
Strengthen yourselves, arm and equip 



yourselves with the whole armor of God, 

remembering your part in the conflict of 

this day, that it is not with flesh and 

blood but with the spiritual darkness, 

and spiritual wickedness in high (controling 

or leading) places and the fiery 

darts of the wicked one. Thus so much 

the more as ye see the day drawing on 

"strengthen ye the weak hands and confirm 

the feeble knees. Say to them that 

are of a feeble heart, BE STRONG! FEAR 

NOT! Behold your God will come with 

vengeance, even God with a recompense; 

He will come and save you." The signs 

then of the days of vengeance and recompense 

are sure signs of the Lord's 

presence, and that our redemption, deliverance, 

and exaltation, and the blessing 

of the world, are nigh at hand. 



R707 : page 1 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS 

New Orleans, La. 
C. T. RUSSELL:-Dear Brother:-I 
am by birth a Norwegian. My prayers 
of late have been that the Lord would 
raise up some one in my Norway home 
to explain the Glad Tidings as it is in 
Jesus. To-day the thought has come to 
me to contrive to have the pamphlets 
"Food" and "Tabernacle," with October 
number of the TOWER, translated 
into that language. You see the interest 
your publications have found among the 
Swedes. Now, I believe that the Norwegians 
are a still more religiously inclined 
people than the Swedes in general. 
In short, I believe the truth would 
meet with a still better reception among 
them. You will probably question: 
"Do not the Swedish publications 
meet the demand of the Norwegians 
also?" I answer, "No; the two 



languages differ so much that the 
Swedish number of the TOWER is 
almost of no use to the Norwegians, 
and will hardly be read by any of them." 
There is also a little prejudice existing 
between the two nations. I pray God 
to open a way to have it published in 
Norwegian. The "Food" and the 
"Tabernacle" would, I know, be a great 
blessing to the saints in Norway. 

I have an instrument for the work 
with me now, in the shape of a young 
man-a relative of mine-thoroughly 
versed in both English and Norwegian, 
and he would gladly undertake the task, 
if I could find the means to keep him 
with me long enough for the work. But, 
then again, comes the publication, which 
requires a great deal of money. 

Submitting this thought to your kind 
consideration, I will make it a subject of 
prayer. If it is our Father's will, the 
means will be forthcoming. 

My friends in Norway have been desiring 
me, for a long time, to come home. 
Would it not be a precious work to republish 
the WATCH TOWER in Norway, 
and distribute the Glad Tidings over 
there? Your brother in the hope, 



[This and similar expressions of interest 
and effort remind us of the Macedonian 
cry, except that it comes now 
from all quarters, wherever a few of the 
saints have been led into the light- 
Come over into Norway, Sweden, Germany, 
and let us have the truth in our 
own tongue. As rapidly as opportunity 
and means offer, we shall heed the call. 
-ED.] 

page 1 

Cumberland, Ind. 
ED. WATCH TOWER, Dear Friend:- 
Many, many thanks for the November 



number of your paper; also for the back 
numbers of March and July. I am, indeed, 
deeply grateful that they ever 
came into my hands, and for your kindness 
in continuing to send them. Since 
reading them, the Bible has seemed a 
new book to me, and I might almost 
say I have found a new heaven and a 
new earth. Surely it betokens His 
presence when such glorious light is 
shed on His word. I am more and more 
amazed at the feast of knowledge. The 
grand truths displayed in their simplicity 
one after another, until I am compelled 
at times to stop reading, and think and 
ponder on it a little at a time; it is so 
wonderful, and one of the greatest of 
all wonders is that I-surely, if a saint- 
the least of all, should have been brought 
to this light. Blessing and honor, and 
glory and power, be unto His Holy 
Name! Amen, and Amen! And may 
you, the honored instruments of His 
royal bounty, receive the blessed reward 
promised to his faithful ones. I hope 
soon to send your subscription price- 
such a mite for so much. Oh, if I only 
possessed any of this worlds goods beyond 
the merest necessaries of life, how 
freely would I lend my aid in dispensing 
the glad tidings! Butheknoweth 
best. Yours most gratefully, . 



R707 : page 1 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY. 

A charter of incorporation for Zion's 
Watch Tower Tract Society was granted 
December 13th, 1884. In accordance 
with the same, Certificates have just been 
sent to each contributor to the Fund, 
whose donations (all told) amounted to 
Ten Dollars or more. Each ten dollars 
representing one voting share. 



The certificates are neatly printed and 
bear the Society's seal upon the face. 
On the reverse side is a brief statement 
of the object and past efforts of the 
Society, the time and mode of electing 
its officers, etc. The Incorporators are 
the Directors, named below, from among 
whom the officers indicated have just 
been elected for the year 1885: 

DIRECTORS. 

C. T. RUSSELL, Pres., W. I. MANN, Vice Pres. 

M. F. RUSSELL, Sec. and Treas., J. B. ADAMSON, 

w. c. McMillan, j. f. smith. 



R708 : page 1 

TRACT FUND REPORT. 

This report is for two years, none 
having been made last January. 

Indebtedness January 1, 1883 $2,571.34 

Total expenditure for publications 
during 1883 and 1884, 
including those in the Swedish 
language 2,366.10 



$4,937.44 
Total cash receipts, voluntary 
contributions, including those 
of German and Swedish funds 2,491.43 



*Balance owing $2,446.01 

It will be remembered that in order 
not to allow the debt to hinder the publication 
of missionary papers in foreign 
languages the proposition was accepted, 
to start a German and also a Swedish 
fund, which, though included in the 
general work of the Society, should be 
specially applied to publishing matter in 
those languages. 



We have to report that the total 
donations to the German fund amounted 
to $126.54. The total receipts on account 
of the Swedish fund amounted to 
$360.14. 

We published nothing in German, the 
fund being insufficient for even a start, 
but, growing gradually, it may be of use 
some day; meanwhile, we have obtained 
the addresses of some, able and willing to 
assist, by translating, when we are ready. 

In Swedish we published four numbers 
of the same size as the English TOWER, 
containing selected articles-translations 
from English numbers. Many among 
the Swedes were deeply moved by the 
truth, and we regret that the number of 
such (about 800) would not justify at 
present the regular publication of the 
TOWER in that language. However, the 
truth is spreading among them, and it 
may not be long before this will be practicable 
and possible. The total amount 
expended on this account was $744.16, 
or $384.02 more than the receipts on 
account of the same. 

Aside from the mailing of several 
thousand copies of "Food for Thinking 
Christians," etc., already published and 
accounted for, we published, paid for 
and distributed, since last report: - 
39,000 Swedish Missionary papers and 
79,000 English " 



118,000 in all; equal to about four and 
a half millions of tract pages 
of the ordinary size. 

Those who have assisted in the work, 
both by donations and in circulating-by 
giving and loaning literature to those 
supposed to have an "ear to hear," are 
too numerous to mention. It is one 
source of great encouragement to us to 
note the holy and pure zeal which inspires 
so many to labor and sacrifice to 
give to others, so soon as they taste of 
the "good word of God" themselves. 



It seems to be an unvarying rule, that 
light and opportunity afforded by the 
truth must be used, or these talents for 
service will be taken away. We must 
let our light so shine as to glorify our 
Father in heaven, else it will become 
darkness. 

After all, the principle of our Father's 
dealing with us-allowing us to be light-bearers 
to others, seems to be as much 
or more to develop and bless us through 
the incidental labor and sacrifice, as to 
bless those to whom we bear the light; 
for unquestionably God could spread 
the truth without our feeble aid. 

The Lord has so placed us that our 
sacrifices must be free-will offerings, and 
the measure of our sacrifice and self-denial, 
in whatever form, must in our 
Lord's sight be the measure or gauge of 
our love and appreciation of his favors and 
exceeding great and precious promises. 

When presenting themselves before 
the Lord in the parable of the Talents, 
each one was approved equally, who 
had used what talents he had, few or 
many, "every man according to his 
several ability." And our Lord showed 
that it was the spirit of sacrifice which 
he appreciated when he said of the poor 
widow who cast two mites into the Lord's 
treasury, "She hath cast in more than 
they all." She, in her penury, had made 
a greater sacrifice than some who had 
given much more. 

Some, and probably most, of the 
money accounted for in the above 



*We here remark that the Florida land donated 
to the Society, is not included in the above account, 
as it did not come into the Society's possession 
before the close of 1884. When it has all been 
sold we hope to be more than out of debt, so that 
virtually we may so consider the matter now. 



R708 : page 2 

statement was "hard-earned," and only 
sent by a similar self-denial to that of 
the widow mentioned by Jesus. Such 
gifts only as cost us self-denial in 
some form are sacrifices, whether it costs 
us friendships, or conveniences, or 
luxuries, or ease. 

Let us make sure of the Master's 
"Well done, good and faithful servant, 
thou hast been faithful over a few things, 
I will make thee ruler over many 
things." Such, having sacrificed with 
Christ, shall enter into the joys of the 
Lord. May it be true of us as of Mary, 
"She loved much"-"She hath done 
what she could." 



R708 : page 2 

AN INCONSISTENT CONTEMPORARY. 

We have not an inch of space to waste, 
nor a moment of time to devote to mere 
contention or argument, hence omit many 
of the moral reform topics which though 
good, are not vitally important to our 
readers, the majority of whom we trust 
are past the necessity for such exhortation. 
In any event these themes have abler 
advocates than us, to set forth their claims. 

But as we long since (1880) pointed 
out, a great and severe trial of faith 
coming with increasing force upon the 
church-"the fire of that day" which 
"shall try every man's work of what sort 
it is." We saw that this fiery trial then 
coming, aimed to destroy the very foundation 
of Christian faith and hope, the 
first principles of the doctrine of Christ 
-"How that Christ died for our sins 
according to the Scriptures" (1 Cor. 15:3) 
and that he thus redeemed, ransomed, 
bought us with his own precious blood. 



And because truth on this subject is the 

"meat in due season" for the household of 

faith now, as well as because there are 

few to publicly champion this truth 

which is now being attacked on every 

hand, therefore, we feel that time and 

space spent in criticizing and exposing 

the arguments and sophistries of those 

who would make the Cross of Christ of 

none effect, is most necessary. Hence if 

to any there seems to be an excuse or 

apology necessary for the pointed and 

critical analyzing of the utterance of contemporaries 

on such subjects, our apology 

is, our zeal for the truth; that its force 

may be seen in contrast with error: and 

for you, that you may be strengthened, 

prepared, and armed against all the wiles 

of the devil, and that thus, many may be 

able to answer and refute his sophistries; 

thus helping and strengthening themselves 

and others also. 

The recent issue of a contemporary 
devoted to the NO RANSOM theory, presents 
in its leading Editorial some glaring 
inconsistencies, in its effort to make 
use of Scripture phraseology, and at the 
same time to discard the doctrine of 
redemption and remission of sins through 

R709 : page 2 

the blood of the cross. We were about 
to say-and at the same time maintain its 
theory-but conclude that its theory, 
severely pressed for arguments, is changing 
and it would be difficult now to state 
what the exact theory is, except that the 
unchanged purpose is still plainly evident 
--the denial of the ransom. 

Before pointing out its sophisms, we 
place some of its open and palpable contradictions 
side by side, thus:- 



"We not only claim that 



He was Lord when He gave 

himself a ransom; or when 

he "bought us with a price," 

but we also claim that an appreciation 

of His divinity 

and lordship as the express 

image or manifestation of the 

Father's substance is necessary 

to a just estimate of the 

nature and value of the great 

atoning sacrifice which he 

made. The advocates of the 

theory that the divine law 

was satisfied with the substitution 

of one mere human 

sacrifice instead of the billions 

of human beings must 

have strained ideas of equity 

and justice; must ignore the 

statement that man cannot 

"redeem his brother nor give 

to God a ransom for him." 

Psa. 49:7.... 

"The extremely literal materialist 
may exclaim in horror, 
Can Divinity die? Oh 
no! it cannot die, in the 
sense in which you are 
thinking of death. He cannot 
lose his existence. But your 
idea of death is at fault."... 

"The GROSS MATERIALIST 
could he but revise his theology 
and open his eyes, 
might see a sublime truth in 
this mystery of life imparted 
instead of extinguished by 
means of death. THIS is the 
grand MYSTERY of the cross 
of Christ." 



"It seems as if the 
idea of God accepting 
an innocent substitute 
for the life of 



the guilty criminals 

is so grossly inconsistent 

with both love 

and justice that instead 

of winning to 

God it must have repelled 

many thinking 

minds from Him. 

It places God in the 

attitude of demanding 

all men owe, instead 

of in the gracious 

attitude of extending 

mercy and 

forgiveness to the 

helpless sinner. 

What is fully paid 

for, cannot be accepted 

as an expression 

of the Father's 

love and grace." 

In a former 
issue the same 
contemporary 
gave the following 
explanation 
(?) of the nature 
and value of the 
death of Christ, 
viz.: 

"Christ died to the 
old relation which 
he had COME INTO 
by Adam's sin." 
"The blood which 
must be shed, without 
which there is no 
remission of sins, IS 
that which is the 
evidence of the 
death of the ENMITY 
WITHIN US-death 
to sin." 



If this contemporary had more than one 



editor, we should suppose that they were 
of opposite minds, and that by some accident, 
the writings of the two had gotten 
mixed. But the mixture is the more deplorable, 
as it gives evidence of a fierce 
struggle between a theory and Scripture, 
in which the former has the control. 
Judging from the conflicting arguments 
advanced and tried, our contemporary's 
plan and policy seems to be:-Any argument 
to get rid of the RANSOM-as a 
"corresponding price." 

Extreme indeed must be its need of 
supporting argument, when it finds it 
necessary to claim as above, that life is 
imparted instead of extinguished by 
death. The very meaning of the words 
is the reverse. Does this contemporary 
endorse Satan's lie in Eden and contradict 
Jehovah? (Gen. 3:3-5). And then 
call it: "a sublime truth"-- "the grand 
mystery of the cross of Christ"-"this 
mystery of life imparted instead of extinguished 
by means of death." Would 
it claim that DEATH is a great blessing 
and that Satan by whom it was introduced 
and "who has the power of death" 
(Heb. 2:14) is really the one who imparts 
life, instead of extinguishing it? 
If so it should at once claim that Satan 
is the one by whom all the families of the 
earth shall be blessed! 

The new mixture is shown in the left 
column; and as we have heretofore 
shown the views of the other column to 
be unscriptural, we now merely note the 
expression above- "What is fully PAID 
FOR cannot be accepted as an expression 
of the Father's love and grace"-and 
remark that if our contemporary cannot 
accept of the Father's grace and love and 
gift, in and through the ransom sacrifice 
of Jesus, we fear it can never accept it 
at all, for "there is none other name, under 
heaven, given among men whereby 
we must be saved." (Acts 4:12.) In 
this was manifested the love of God, that 



he sent his Son to be the propitiation 
[covering] for our sins. (1 John 4:9,10.) 

We now pass to a hasty review of the 
expressions of the left column. The idea 
that it was necessary for a God to die, as 
the "great atoning sacrifice" for a man's 
sin, cannot be called new, even if it should 
by some be considered light. It is the 
commonly held, inconsistent, unscriptural, 
and "mysterious" view of the 
atonement, handed down from the dark 
ages, which we thank God we got rid of 
years ago. 

The peculiarity of fallen human nature 
to go from one to the other extreme like 
a pendulum is remarkably illustrated in 
the treatment of this subject-it either 
wants to say that there was no ransom 
necessary, and none given, or else, that 
the penalty was so great that nothing 
short of the sacrifice of a God could be 
an "atoning sacrifice" for human sin. 

In its confusion our contemporary says 
both. (See the contrasted statements of 
the two columns.) Would to God it had 
the courage and humility to acknowledge 
its confusion and accept the favor of God 
in His appointed way. 

How contrary to this is the teaching 
of Scripture, that the penalty of human 
sin was the forfeiture of HUMAN EXISTENCE, 
and that in order to be man's 
ransom and give a "CORRESPONDING 
PRICE" it was necessary that Jesus 
should become a man, that as by MAN 
came death, by a man ALSO the resurrection 
or restoration of the dead might 
be accomplished. (1 Cor. 15:21.) And 
therefore, He who ransomed us, left his 
former glory and spiritual "form of 
God," and humbled himself to our 
nature and was "MADE FLESH," (Phil. 2:6-8, 
and John 1:1-3,14), and gave 
himself a ransom for all. And the 
apostle distinctly tells us, that "the MAN 
Christ Jesus" who "gave himself" was 
therefore highly exalted, and given a 



"name above every name"-Lord of 
all. Phil. 2:5-11. 

This fact, that Jesus' right, and power, 
and control of men as their Master and 
Lord, was gained by his sacrifice as a 
MAN, hence not as claimed above, is 
clearly stated by the apostle, thus: "For 
to this end, Christ both died, and revived, 
and rose, THAT HE MIGHT BE 
LORD both of the dead and living." 
Rom. 14:9. 

The statement above concerning one 
MERE human sacrifice, is not a quotation 
from the columns of the TOWER. Our 
contemporary does not thus favor us. 
The expression, "MERE man," would 
convey to many minds the idea of an 
imperfect man; hence we would not use 
it. When Jesus "WAS MADE FLESH" 
it was neither on "the lowest round of 
the ladder," nor on any other than the 
very highest, a glorious perfect image of 
God, in the flesh. Had he been one 
whit less perfect than the first perfect 
man, he could not have been the Redeemer 
of what Adam lost for himself 
and his race. Had he been one whit 
higher than PERFECT MAN, he could 
not have given himself as "a corresponding 
price." See YOUNG'S GREEK 
HEBREW and ENGLISH CONCORDANCE 
for definition, under head of Ransom, 
1 Tim. 2:6-antilutron "a corresponding 
price." 

By reason of the "fall" of its representative, 
Adam, the whole race is now 
depraved, imperfect, ungodlike, and all 
condemned to death; HENCE all being 
under the same condemnation, "None 
can by any means REDEEM his brother, 
nor give to God a ransom for him." 
(Psa. 49:7.) 

This text is most too much for the 
views presented in the right-hand column. 
If it means anything, it proves 
that God's law did demand a RANSOM, 
that he would not excuse sin in the way 



that can be "accepted" by our contemporary 
"as an expression of love and 
grace." No, he will by no means clear 
[excuse] the guilty." (Exod. 34:7.) 
But when the guilty had proved the futility 
of their own efforts to redeem and 
cleanse themselves, God in great mercy 
and love ransomed us by giving His Son 
to be a propitiation [covering] for our 
sins-- "In this [way] was manifested the 
love of God." (1 John 4:9-10.) 

At the time of his consecration, at 
baptism, Jesus offered up himself-a man 
to redeem men-and there he received 
special power from on high, by which 
he was enabled not only to carry out his 
consecration by a life of self-sacrifice even 
unto death-even the death of the cross, 
but by which also, as a foretaste of his 
future power [as a partaker of the DIVINE 
nature, by which he could restore all 
things, and have all power] he was ennobled 
to do the "many wonderful 
works" with which those three and a 
half years abounded. 

Farther on in the same article, after 
the query-"Does not 'redeem' 'ransom' 
or 'price' imply substitution?"- 
it answers that question thus:-"The 
terms are commercial in common usage, 
but have also another use not uncommon. 
The means NECESSARY to secure 
any end are commonly and properly 
spoken of as the cost, or price of the object 
thus gained. The pioneer labors to 
secure a cleared farm; the cost is great, 
but he will be well repaid. The son 
costs his mother labor and pain, but his 
true manhood is her joyous reward. The 
means are the price and are adapted to 
secure the desired end." 

Very good! But cannot all see that 
the cost of each item had to be substituted 
or given up for each result specified, 
before it could be had? The same principle 
is involved whether you pay a dime 



R710:page2 

for a loaf of bread, or pay a year's labor 
for a clearing. This is nothing short of 
the commercial and only usage of the 
word bought. 

The cost is whatever is NECESSARY to 
procure the thing desired, whether it be 
a son, a farm, or a race. Jesus bought 
us with his own precious blood [his sacrificed 
life] whatever may have been the 
attendant circumstances, by which this 
result was accomplished [such as leaving 
the heavenly glory, humbling himself to 
become a man, etc.,] the fact remains, 
that all those incidentals were not the 
price; they merely enabled, or were the 
necessary preparation, for giving the 
price. The price was his death-He 
"suffered [death] the just for the unjust 
TO BRING US TO GOD. (1 Pet. 3:18.) 

The question arises, Did Jesus give 
too much? Did he give more than was 
needful to procure the results attained- 
the liberation of man from sin and death. 
To say that the sacrifice of Jesus-his 
death- was not necessary, is not only to 
charge him with folly, but to deny those 
Scriptures which state that the giving 
up of his life was the price of one ransom. 

If the thing given was the price, then 
our price or cost of our liberty from death 
was Jesus' death. Now follow the train 
of reasoning-The reason he died, was 
that we as a race were all under the dominion 
of death and his aim was to set 
us free from sin and death. Why did 
he not set us free without becoming a 
man? Because Jehovah's just penalty, 
death, rested upon us all, and his justice 
is as unalterable as his love. Why did 
not Jesus die as a spiritual being without 
becoming a man? Because it was men, 
who were condemned and God's law 
demanded a corresponding price. Why 
then did Jesus become a man? It was 
that he by the grace [favor, love, kindness] 



of God, should taste death for every 

man. Was this an equivalent or corresponding 

price for an entire race? Yes, 

when God condemned all because of 

one man's transgression, it was in order 

that as a result of one man's [Jesus'] 

obedience even unto death, he might 

deliver the race from condemnation 

which was upon all through one man's 

sin. Was not the death of Christ an 

example of resisting evil? It was that, 

but it must have been more; for many 

prophets and righteous persons resisted 

evil unto death, and they would have 

answered for examples, if nothing more 

had been needed. What more was 

needed than to be shown by a good example, 

to refrain from sin? Much more, 

for even if it were possible for all men to 

live spotlessly, still there was the penalty 

of sins that were past-which came upon 

all and continued upon all until Jesus 

"bare our sins in his own body on the 

tree." Could not something else meet 

the requirements and lift from men the 

penalty? No, without shedding of blood 

there is no remission of sins. Heb. 9:22. 

So then, Jesus gave none to great a 
price, but one which corresponded exactly, 
with the penalty, viz.: --man's 
death. "Wherefore God also hath highly 
exalted him and given him a name 
[power, and authority, and honor] which 
is above every name." "He [now] is 
Lord of all." Phil. 2:9; Acts 10:36. 

Again we quote our contemporary: 
"Paul says that Christ redeems us from 
all iniquity (Titus 2: 14). Now, if to 
redeem from death means to give death 
a substitute, then to redeem from iniquity 
means to give iniquity a substitute. 
Will any one claim that Christ gave himself 
a substitute for iniquity?" 

Such sophism is not really worthy of 
refutation. Sin and iniquity are two 
names for the same thing. When death 
passed upon the race, it brought with it 



depravity-a liability to sin-an inability 
to refrain from sin. It brought in a word 
not only physical disease, but also moral 
degradation-iniquity-hence, in redeeming 
us from death, it was at the 
same time a redemption from iniquity of 
which death was the wages or penalty. 
The price or cost of iniquity was death, 
and to redeem us from its dominion, Jesus, 
as our substitute, paid that penalty, 
that in due time we might be made free 
from it. He made his soul [his being or 
existence] an offering for sin, to redeem 
us from all iniquity. 

And now in view of the many sides 
of this question which this contemporary 
advances, arguing in one column that 
there is no ransom, no price, no substitution, 
and in the next column of the 
very same article that there was a price, 
a ransom, &c, but a spiritual and divine 
one, we candidly and seriously advise 
it to either abandon its various theories 
of no corresponding price being 
given in man's redemption, or else discard 
the Bible altogether as a text book; 
for the crudity and inconsistency of the 
above statements must be apparent to 
the most obtuse, not to mention the effect 
upon intelligent Bible students. 



R708 : page 3 

HOW CAN I KEEP FROM SINGING? 

My life flows on in endless song, 

Above earth's lamentation; 
I catch the sweet, the glorious hymn 

That hails a new creation: 
Through all the tumult and the strife, 

I hear the music ringing; 
It finds an echo in my soul, 

How can I cease from singing? 

Though earthly joys and comforts die 



The Lord, my Saviour liveth: 
What though the darkness gather round? 

Songs in the night he giveth: 
No storm can shake my inmost calm 

While to that refuge clinging; 
Since Christ is Lord of heaven and earth, 

How can I keep from singing? 

I lift my eyes: the cloud grows thin; 

I see the blue above it; 
And day by day this pathway shines 

Since first I learned to love it: 
The peace of Christ makes fresh my heart, 

A fountain ever springing, 
All things are mine since I am his- 

How can I keep from singing? 
--F. J. Hartley. 



R710:page3 

THE SIGN OF HIS PRESENCE. 

'What shall be the sign [indication] of thy 
presence, and of the consummation of the age?" 
Matt. 24:3.-Diaglott. 

Perhaps remembering that Jesus' first 
advent had been obscure and unrecognized 
by many, so that even John 
who baptized and announced him sent 
and inquired, "Art thou he that should 
come, or look we for another?" the 
disciples may have been wondering 
whether the second coming of Jesus 
would be likewise obscure and unrecognized, 
and whether some might 
not at the time of the second presence, 
as in their day, be ignorant of the Lord's 
presence. Or, their query may have 
been suggested by Jesus' answer to the 
Pharisees when questioned about the 
kingdom to come- "The kingdom of 
God cometh not with observation [outward 
demonstration and show], neither 
shall they say, Lo here! or there! for lo, 



the kingdom of God is in the midst of 
you." Luke 17:20,21. R.V. margin. 

Whatever induced the question, it is 
evident from the Lord's answer, that 
they suspicioned that he might be present 
yet unrecognized by the world, and 
possibly by even his saints, unless some 
expected sign should indicate his 
presence. 

Some who overlook the Lord's statement 
that the kingdom of heaven cometh 
not with outward demonstration, and 
who think that the second advent of 
Jesus will be accompanied with wonderful 
outward demonstration, put a very 
forced construction upon this word sign, 
and look for some visible manifestation 
in the sky. With their ideas of the 
manner of Christ's coming, no sign 
would be necessary. But such an interpretation 
of the word sign is out of 
harmony with common as well as Scriptural 
usage. Clouds are a sign of storm 
and rain; smoke is a sign of fire; frost 
and snow may be signs of cold weather; 
falling foliage is a sign of autumn. Likewise 
when the Lord is present, and the 
specially appointed work of his presence 
is in progress, those works will, to those 
who can appreciate them, be a sign of 
his presence. 

All Christians should be most deeply 
interested in this question, What shall 
be the sign, indication or evidence of 
the Lord's presence and the closing of 
our age? In his answer, the Master's 
first aim was to put us (for his words 
were specially for all the Church) on 
guard against some who would assume 
his name (Christ-ians), and deceive 
many by saying that the kingdom of 
God has come; that they are the DELIVERER 
or Messiah, and that their 
dominion is the kingdom of God. He 
says: "Beware that no one deceive 
you, for many will assume my name 
saying, I am the Messiah." (Matt. 24:5 



-Diaglott.) They say, We are Christ's 
vice-gerents, his representatives; our 
Church is the body of Christ, and his 
rightful and promised representative to 
rule and conquer the world. 

As the Lord forewarned, we can see 
that many have assumed his name, 
claimed to be his body, and as such the 
right to rule, and that his kingdom had 
come. We see this taught not only by 
Papacy, but by all her daughters- 
especially those united with the governments 
of Europe, and who claim that in 
them God's kingdom has come. In harmony 
with this claim is the addition 
made to the original Lord's Prayer, by 
which it was made to read, "For thine 
IS THE kingdom, and the power and the 
glory forever." These words do not 
occur in either the Sinaitic or Vatican 
manuscripts. 

Passing on, Jesus tells that a long 
period must elapse, with its wars, and 
commotions, persecutions, betrayals, 
false teachers, etc., and that "the love of 
the many will cool" (become lukewarm, 
Rev. 3:16), and that patient endurance 
to the close of the race is needful for all 
running for the prize held out in this 
Gospel age. Before this age shall have 
fully ended the glad tidings of the kingdom 
will be published in the whole 
world for a testimony to all the nations, 
and then will the end come. 

These remarks of the Master are in 
place and needful, but we must remember 
that they are only a preface to his 
answer to the question asked, which 
he now proceeds to answer, saying: 
"When ye therefore shall SEE the 
abomination of desolation spoken of by 
Daniel the prophet stand in the holy 
place" (v. 15). Here was to be a sign, 
which when seen, would be an indication 
of time for a certain action, because, as 
we shall see, it will be a part of the evidence, 
or sign of the presence of the Son 



of man. 

The setting of the abomination is not 
the sign, but the recognition, or discernment 
of the abomination as such, and of 
its improper place, is a sign that greatly 
increased light is shining, that knowledge 
is increased, which is elsewhere 
stated to be evidence of "the time of the 
end," Dan. 12:4. 

R711 : page 3 

The abomination spoken of by Daniel, 
and again by Paul, is the false system of 
systems which, assuming the name of 
Christ, have misrepresented the character, 
plans and Word of God, and 
deceived many. It includes not only 
the mother system, Papacy, but the 
daughters as well, for she is the mother 
of abominations as well as an abomination 
herself; and the entire abomination 
system being ONE, and of the same 
spirit, it is so referred to by Jesus, Daniel 
and Paul. It is "Babylon the great," 
"the mystery of Iniquity," the "Abomination 
of the earth." Rev. 17:5 and 
2 Thes. 2:7, Dan. 12:11. 

The "Mystery of Iniquity" came into 
place gradually, and it was not until it 
had sat for a long time in the holy place, 
ruling and governing it, that its abominable 
and detestable character was seen, 
and still it is not seen by all the saints, 
many of whom still bow to the teachings 
and commands of that system which 
God calls abominable. 

The god of this world- Satan-has 
by many devices blinded the eyes of 
many, while exalting and keeping in 
power this system, which is "after" or 
like him, whose child it is. When his 
power begins to fail, because the stronger 
than he begins to spoil his house (Matt. 12:29), 
then this system will begin to 
be seen, to be revealed and recognized 
in its true character as "The Mystery of 



Iniquity." Of this time when the abomination 
shall be seen occupying and ruling 
in the Church, the apostle says: "Then 
shall that wicked be revealed [literally 
uncovered or exposed] whom the Lord 
shall consume with the spirit of his 
mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness 
of his coming" [literally-destroy 
with the bright shining of the present 
one].2Thes. 2:3-6. 

This accords perfectly with Jesus' 
words: "When ye shall see the abomination;" 
that is, when the mask shall be 
pulled off and you shall be enabled to 
see "The Mystery of Iniquity" as such, 
then you may know that you are in the 
consummation of the age, in "the time 
of the end." Your knowledge will be 
the sign of this. 

The significance of the statement, 
"Then let them which be in Judea flee," 
etc., we do not here refer to, as it has 
already been explained, merely pausing 
to remark that this prophecy evidently 
referred to more than the destruction of 
Jerusalem and the time of trouble which 
came upon that land in A.D. 70. Proof 
of this is furnished by comparing verse 21 
with Danl. 12:1. This greatest time 
of trouble is at the close of the Gospel 
age unquestionably, though the closing 
features of the Jewish age were typical 
of it. 

"Then [in "the time of the end"] if 
any man shall say unto you, Lo here is 
Christ, or there, believe it not.... 
Wherefore if they shall say unto you, 
Behold he is in the desert, go not forth; 
behold he is in the secret chambers, 
believe it not" (vs. 23,26). Why should 
not Jesus' disciples at such a time [now], 
knowing that they are living in "the 
time of the end" expect Jesus? Why 
not then be waiting for a Philip or a 
Peter to meet us and say, We have found 
the Lord, Lo here, or lo there? The 
answer is, that at his second advent 



he will not be a man limited to place, 
but a spiritual being, personally present, 
yet invisible because spiritual, as all 
spiritual bodies are invisible to human 
sight. As the lightening (the electric 
current or fluid) unseen, yet powerful, 
its presence widely manifested by the 
light which it causes, "so shall also the 
presence (improperly translated coming) 
of the Son of man be." ver. 27. 

In verse 28 Jesus teaches that instead 
of going out to seek him in the wilderness, 
etc., we shall be gathered together, 
not physically, but mentally, that all 
who are his shall come to recognize his 
presence by the instinct of their new nature, 
being brought together by the 
mutual apprehension of the truth as 
eagles would be drawn to their food. 

"And he shall send his angels [messengers 
--servants] with a great sound 
of a trumpet [the "seventh trump," or 
"trump of God"], and they shall gather 
together [into union and oneness] his 
elect from the four winds, from one end 
of heaven to the other. [The church 
nominal is the present heavens; the 
little flock, when by-and-by exalted, 
will be the new heavens.] The little 
flock as eagles are being gathered from 
out the present "heavens." "From the 
four winds" from every direction; from 
all denominations. Matt. 24:28 and 31. 

Immediately after the tribulation of 
those days shall the sun be darkened, 
etc. (v. 29). Verses 29 and 30 go back 
to take up the chain of events belonging 
to "the time of the end" as they 
relate to the world. That the tribulation 
referred to is that of verse 9, and not 
that of verse 21 and Dan. 12:1, will be 
evident as we proceed. [In those days 
before they end, 1798], but after the 
tribulation of those days-as Papal persecutions 
and that of other abominations 
(systems) began to draw to a close-in 
1780 the "Dark Day" occurred, concerning 



which we read: 

"May 19th, 1780.-The darkness 
commenced between 10 and 11 A.M., 
and continued until the middle of the 
next night. The wind was from the 
south-west, and the darkness appeared 
to come with the clouds, drifting from 
that point. It covered the country from 
New Jersey to Maine, and appears to 
have been greatest in Massachusetts and 
the adjoining portion of New Hampshire; 
yet it was intense in Connecticut 
and Rhode Island. It was much less in 
New York, and in New Jersey it 
was not particularly noticed. Where it 
most prevailed it was impossible to read 
ordinary print, or read the time by a 
watch or clock, or do ordinary business 
without artificial light. An intelligent 
observer says: 'Candles were lighted 
in the houses; fowls retired to roost; 
the cocks were crowing all around as at 
break of day; objects could not be distinguished 
but at a very little distance; 
and everything bore the appearance and 
gloom of night."'-Library Universal 
Knowledge, page 647. 

Again we quote: 

"The Dark Day, May 19, 1780.~So 
called on account of a remarkable darkness 
on that day extending all over New 
England. In some places persons could 
not see to read common print in the 
open air for several hours together. 
Birds sang their evening song, disappeared, 
and became silent; fowls went 
to roost; cattle sought the barn-yard; 
and candles were lighted in the houses. 
The obscuration began about ten o'clock 
in the morning, and continued till the 
middle of the next night, but with differences 
of degree and duration in different 
places. For several days previous 
the wind had been variable, but chiefly 
from the south-west and north-east. 
The true cause of this remarkable phenomenon 
is not known. "-Webster's 



Unabridged Dictionary Explanatory 
and Pronouncing Vocabulary, p. 1604. 

Herschel says: "The Dark Day in 
Northern America was one of those 
wonderful phenomena of nature which 
will always be read of with interest, but 
which philosophy is at a loss to explain." 

"In the month of May, 1780, there 
was a very terrific dark day in New 
England, when 'all faces seemed to 
gather blackness,' and the people were 
filled with fear. There was great distress 
in the village where Edward Lee 
lived; 'men's hearts failing them for 
fear' that the judgment day was at 
hand. "--Tract No. 379 of American 
Tract Society, Life of Edward Lee, of 
Massachusetts. 

The moon was correspondingly darkened 
at this time from the same causes, 
whatever they may have been. 

In 1833 came the falling of the stars. 
Not the falling of "fixed stars," truly, 
for that which can fall is not fixed. 
Neither could stars many times larger 
than this earth fall upon it as a fig-tree 
casteth her unripe figs when shaken by 
a mighty wind (Rev. 6:13). Hence it 
is very evident that Jesus could not have 
meant these. But a remarkable meteoric 
shower, just such as fills the description, 
and the like of which is not recorded in 
history, did occur in November, 1833. 

We quote the following account from 
"The American Cyclopaedia," Vol. XL, 
page 43 1 : 

"The year 1833 is memorable for the 
most magnificent display on record. 
This was on the night of November 12, 
and was visible over all the United 
States, and over a part of Mexico and 
the West India Islands. Together with 
the smaller shooting stars which fell like 
snowflakes and produced phosphorescent 
lines along their course, there were 
intermingled large fire-balls, which darted 
forth at intervals, describing in a 



few seconds an arc of 30 or 40 degrees. These 

left behind luminous trains, which remained 

in view several minutes, and 

sometimes half an hour or more. One 

of them, seen in North Carolina, appeared 

of larger size and greater brilliancy 

than the moon. Some of the 

luminous bodies were of irregular form, 

and remained stationary for a considerable 

time, emitting streams of light. At 

Niagara the exhibition was especially 

brilliant, and probably no spectacle so 

terribly grand and sublime was ever before 

beheld by man as that of the firmament 

descending in fiery torrents over 

the dark and roaring cataract. It was 

observed that the lines of all the meteors, 

if traced back, converged in one quarter 

of the heavens, which was Leonis Majoris; 

and this point accompanied the 

stars in their apparent motion westward, 

instead of moving with the earth toward 

the East. The source whence the 

meteors came was thus shown to be independent 

of the earth's relation, and 

exterior to our atmosphere." 

Following this, we have had violent 
shakings of the heavens, or wind storms, 
the cyclones, etc., of our own day, which 
answer well to the statement, "The 
powers of the heavens shall be shaken." 

But though we recognize in the events 
mentioned a literal fulfillment of Jesus' 
words, it is far from our opinion that 
this was their complete and only fulfillment, 

R712:page3 

or even the most important one. 
Though the literal meaning is real, and 
prominently marked, yet none the less 
real and marked is the meaning conveyed 
through these words as symbols. 
The darkening of the sun (symbolic) is 
the obscuring of the great central light 
of the gospel, which, even in the dark 
ages, never ceased to shine-and that 



central thought is the Ransom. It has 
been in the past, and to the little flock 
will continue to be the centre of light 
and life, around which every other interest 
revolves, and from which springs 
every living hope, and which is the 
author and mainspring of every green 
and precious promise. No discerning 
mind can fail to note the fact that in our 
day this great central fact of the gospel, 
the Ransom, is being darkened. 

R712:page4 

So called "advanced thinkers," in all 
denominations, are fast either ignoring 
the Scriptures altogether, or else-far 
worse-mutilating them by wresting 
from them the cross and the ransom, 
attempting to "climb up some other 
way" and inviting others to do the same. 

As we have heretofore shown, this 
error will prove very successful, and 
cause many to fall. Many of the brightest 
stars, the most eloquent and most 
esteemed in the present heavens, will 
fall. Alas! has not this begun? 

The shaking of the heavens, as the 
Apostle indicates, "signifieth the removing 
of those things that are shaken, 
as of things" that are imperfect and of 
human construction (Heb. 12:27). So 
the present nominal church system shall 
be "shaken," says Jesus; be "removed," 
explains the writer of Hebrews; "pass 
away with a great noise" [commotion], 
adds Peter; Babylon shall be "cast as a 
great millstone into the sea," adds John 
the Revelator (Rev. 18:21); and thus 
all agree. 

"THEN shall appear the sign [evidence] 
of the Son of Man in heaven." 
Some have imagined that the events 
mentioned above [the literal darkening 
of the sun, etc.] were the sign, but the 
language is explicit; after these events 
comes the sign here referred to. But 



notice: it is a sign to the world, not to 
the saints; they will have had evidence 
of the Lord's presence long before. 
Then shall appear the sign [evidence of 
the presence] of the Son of Man in heaven, 
in the new heavens-new spiritual 
powers then coming into control and 
supplanting the old shaking and falling 
spiritual powers. The passing away of 
present nominal church influence and 
power, will seriously affect all the tribes 
of earth. Already the wise and mighty 
of this world, such as Prince Bismarck, 
are beginning to see the value of the 
nominal church, with its threatenings of 
eternal torture, as a restraint upon the 
people; and as these systems are 
"shaken," it becomes the precursor of 
the overthrow of kingdoms and all 
organized society, for earth shall be 
shaken as well as the heavens. 
Heb. 12:26. 

These shakings in the church nominal, 
and the raising up of new heavens 
or spiritual powers, BECOME A SIGN to 
the peoples of earth, that their course in 
evil, oppression and injustice is surely 
and swiftly drawing to a close. They 
see with dread the changes coming, 
being unable to discern what shall be 
the outcome. They see the mighty overturning 
power and mourn because of 
him (Christ) long before they realize 
that it is the Lord's doings, or that he 
wounds to heal and smites to bless. 

But long before this-yes, before 
Babylon shall have completely fallen, 
and before these outward signs shall 
have convinced the world that great 
changes are in process-the saints, by 
taking heed to the sure word of prophecy, 
know of the presence of the Lord. 
He has not left them in darkness, that 
that day should come upon them as a 
thief (1 Thes. 5:4). And in this same 
connection the Lord tells us that as the 
fig tree putting forth leaves would be a 



sign of summer nigh, so likewise, when 
these things begin to come to pass, at 
the very first we should be in such a 
watching attitude that we would note 
the first indications of the new rulership 
and the overturning of the institutions 
and systems condemned by our King. 

What, then, is the sign of Jesus' presence? 
To some, sign was unnecessary; 
they being instructed by the sure word 
of prophecy were awake and looking, 
and when they saw the mystery of 
iniquity, Babylon, in the holy place, and 
heard from the Scriptures that she was 
cast off from favor, they said, This as 
well as prophecy tells me that the King 
is here, for this is his first work, to separate 
in the Church the wheat from the 
tares, and to "cast away" or "spew 
out" the unfit. Hence the words, "Babylon 
is fallen, is fallen; come out of her 
my people," became corroborative of 
the Lord's presence, who shall destroy 
her by the bright shining of his presence 
(2 Thes. 2:8). The evidence of 
the King's presence is increasing, and 
soon all will be able to recognize that a 
new ruler has the control. 

OTHER SIGNS. 

One of the signs which Jesus gave 
John when he asked, "Art thou he 
that should come?"-a sign that he, the 
true Messiah, was then present, was, "Go, 
tell John what things ye have seen and 
heard; how that the blind see, the lame 
walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf 
hear, the dead are raised, to the poor 
the gospel is preached. And blessed is 
he whosoever shall not be offended in 
me." Luke 7:20,23. 

And when we remember that the first 
advent was but a foretaste of the blessings 
which the second advent was to 
bring in fullest, grandest measure, we 
cannot but suppose that similar manifestations 



will accompany Jesus' second 
presence in this world. Since now he 
is a spiritual being, and no longer human, 
we might reasonably expect that 
human agencies would be the channels 
by and through which the lame would 
be made to walk, the blind to see, the 
deaf to hear, and the poor to have the 
real gospel, "good tidings," preached 
to them. 

And is not this the case? Are not 
eyes and ears long closed by prejudice, 
superstition and human tradition being 
opened? Are not those who have long 
been lame, and who have halted between 
the service of God and the devil, 
been healed by the truth? Is not the 
gospel, "good tidings," being preached 
to the poor and to them that have no 
money? Truly yes; the work now is 
the same as at the first advent, but in 
harmony with every other part, it is on 
a higher plane. 

Undoubtedly those prophecies which 
refer to the blessings of the Millennial 
age, which tell of the blind eyes being 
opened and the deaf ears unstopped, 
refer primarily and chiefly to the opening 
of the eyes of the understanding, 
and the removal of the impediments of 
ignorance and prejudice from the hearing 
of faith, yet we know that restitution 
will bring with it also physical healing, 
and the two, mental and physical healings 
will go hand in hand throughout 
the world blessing the sin-crippled of 
earth in the name of him who bought 
them with his own precious blood. 

This being the case, it should not, 
and does not, surprise us that now both 
phases of healing are in progress, and 
being blessed each to its class. Nor 
should it surprise us that different messengers 
or agencies are used in the different 
branches of the work. The one 
carrying a natural blessing to natural 
men, and the other bearing spiritual 



blessings to the spiritual. To every 
man his work. 

And so it is. While we are busily 
engaged ministering the spiritual blessings, 
we note with pleasure the progress 
of physical blessings to natural men- 
the beginning of restitution. Truly 
wonderful and very gracious manifestations 
of God's power are the faith-healings 
of which we now so frequently 
hear, and in contact with which we are 
sometimes thrown, though to us not so 
precious, nor so refreshing, nor so frequent 
as the evidences of spiritual blessing 
with which we come in contact daily. 

We call attention to the fact that the 
nominal church is entirely ignored, and 
stands unused of the Master in the distribution 
of either the physical or spiritual 
healings. She is neither cold nor 
hot, and is spewed out of the Lord's 
mouth and is no longer used as his 
agency or mouthpiece. Would that she 
could see her blindness and would put 
on the eye salve, that she might realize 
her poverty and nakedness; but instead, 
she says, "I am rich and increased with 
goods, and have need of nothing." 
Rev. 3:17. 

Notice again, that the physical healings 
now, as at the first advent, are not 
performed upon the saints, but rather 
upon those not consecrated to sacrifice, 
and even among the worldly. Note 
the class now healed physically, and 
then read of those healed by Jesus and 
the disciples; they are alike. Jairus' 
daughter, the widow's son, the ruler's 
servant, the men at the pool, the ten 
lepers. Lazarus even is not mentioned 
as a disciple; none of the disciples were 
ever miraculously healed. Paul's sore 
eyes were not healed, though he besought 
the Lord on the subject thrice; 
Timothy had "often infirmities" (1 Tim. 5:23); 
Epaphroditus was sick nigh unto 
death (Phil. 2:25,27), and Trophimus 



also (2 Tim. 4:20); yet there is no 
record of any faith-healing or miracle 
for their recovery. The saints have been 
treated physically, much as other men. 

The reason of this is not difficult of 
apprehension. As with the Master it 
was said, "He saved others, himself he 
cannot save," so it may be said of the 
saints: They may pray for and be the 
instruments in healing others, but themselves 
they cannot heal. They follow 
the Master's foot steps of sacrifice even 
unto death. 

If Jesus had attempted to save his 
own life after having consecrated it to 
death, he would thereby have lost it, as 
well as have failed to become Redeemer 
of the race, since to violate his covenant 
would have been sin. So with those 

R713 : page 4 

who, being purged from sin, justified as 
men by Jesus' ransom, and who then 
have presented their justified manhood 
a living sacrifice-joining it in sacrifice 
with that of Jesus, to thus become sharers 
in the bearing of the sins of the world. 
They are then bound to and by their 
covenant, and when in harmony with that 
covenant, human honors, pleasures, comforts, 
health and life are surrendered, it 
would certainly be an attempt to take 
back our sacrifice should we ask for 
human blessings and privileges to be restored 
to us, though we may ask these 
human blessings for any who have not 
consecrated them in sacrifice. Thus is it 
true of the body as it was of the head, 
"He saved others, himself he cannot 
save." "As he is so are we in this 
world." 1 Jno. 4:17. 

TO ALL WE WOULD SAY. 

We are living in a favored and precious 
time, for though it is the hour of 



trial coming upon earth (Rev. 3:10), it 
is to those who can discern the Lord's 
presence, etc., a precious and favored 
time correspondingly. Jesus' first advent 
was a time similar-of trial to all Israel, 
and of special favor and blessing to 
every Israelite indeed. In reference to 
his presence Jesus said: "Blessed are 
your eyes for they see, and your ears for 
they hear; for verily I say unto you, 
that many prophets and righteous men 
have desired to see these things which 
ye see, and have not seen them; and to 
hear those things which ye hear, and 
have not heard them." Matt. 13:16,17. 

Their privilege to hear from Jesus' 
lips "dark sayings" and "parables" 
was great, but how much greater is the 
present privilege of having the Master 
gird himself and cause us to sit down to 
meat and come forth to serve us (Luke 12:37), 
disclosing to us the mystery hid 
from ages and generations, and expounding 
to us his parables and dark 
sayings. Truly, the bright shining of 
the present one shall not only consume 
and destroy Babylon and all other systems 
of error which enslave the redeemed, 
but also enlightens, cheers and 
refreshes all in harmony with truth. 

Now, as at the first advent, those who 
most quickly conform heart and life to 
Jesus' teachings will be soonest and 
most blessed, while those who like the 
Pharisees will not see, but on the contrary 
pervert the truths now due and 
oppose them, shall have their portion 
with the hypocrites in the fire of trouble 
now kindling. 

The words of inspiration now applicable 
are, "Be wise now therefore, O 
ye kings, be instructed ye judges of the 
earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and 
rejoice before him with trembling. Kiss 
the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish 
from the way when his anger is kindled 
but a little. Blessed are all they that 



put their trust in him." Psalm 2:9-12. 
The kingdoms of earth that would stand 
should know that the present is but a 
brief space-a moment as it were before 
the conflict. Now or never (as nations) 
they may recognize the new King by 
abandoning oppression and establishing 
justice-righteousness. Now is the time 
to concede to all men their natural 
rights, restore and remunerate for past 
wrongs, and agree with their adversary 
quickly. It is almost too late now to fill 
the chasm which the torrents of human 
passion daily make wider. But they 
will not heed, and shall be dashed in 
pieces as a potter's vessel (Rev. 2:27). 
The word of the Lord does not profit 
them, not being believed. Nevertheless 
it has been unto them "line upon line," 
and "precept upon precept," "that they 
might go, and fall backward and be 
broken, and snared and taken." 
Isa. 28:13. 



R714 : page 4 

HOLINESS. 

"Follow peace with all men, and holiness, 
without which no man shall see the Lord." 
Heb. 12:14. 

Seeing the cold, lifeless formality that 
increasingly prevails in the Nominal 
Church, the evident lack of growth in 
grace, and its growing disposition to 
imbibe the spirit and conform to the 
customs, ideas, etc., of the world, many 
of God's children, still fettered in a 
measure by her supposed divine authority, 
are becoming interested in what is 
generally termed the holiness movement. 
Holiness meetings, holiness 
camp-meetings, conventions, etc., as well 
as holiness periodicals, are becoming 



quite common. 

That the movement is one actuated 
by right motives, and measurably in the 
right direction, we do not question; yet, 
were these courageous enough to cast off 
all the slavish fetters of Babylon, and to 
walk out fearlessly into the liberty 
wherewith Christ hath made them free, 
trusting in him alone, they would come 
much nearer the true idea of holiness. 
Holiness means a setting apart, sanctifying, 
separating from the world, by divine 
authority, and for the accomplishment 
of the divine purposes. That 
holiness means separation from the 
world all will agree, though few consult 
the Scriptures sufficiently to know to 
what intent the Lord would have them 
separate. 

May we not be separate from the 
world and still be far from the narrow 
path to which we have been called? 
The class termed holiness, people generally 
believe that their single aim should 
be to so subdue sin in themselves as to 
be able to stand approved of God, being 
in complete conformity to all his requirements 
in thought, word and deed. 
Some claim to have reached this desirable 
perfection, while others, painfully 
conscious of their weakness and discouraged 
by their repeated efforts and 
failures, are almost in despair of ever 
reaching it. And not discerning the 
Lord's purpose in calling them to separation 
from the world, they fall into the 
error of looking upon these efforts as a 
means to their salvation. Many become 
self-righteous and boastful of their attainments, 
and consequent hopes of salvation, 
while the more humble discouraged 
almost lose faith in God and entertain 
but a faint indefinite hope of salvation. 

After all the lessons given, it should 
be plain to all that no imperfect man is 
able to keep blamelessly God's perfect 
law. The law is the full measure of a 



perfect man's ability, and Adam and 
Jesus were the only perfect men, and 
hence the only two who could keep it. 
Israel tried it for nearly two thousand 
years, and though that people have furnished 
us many worthy examples, not 
one of them was able to merit life by 
keeping the law, save Jesus only. The 
very object of the giving of the law to men 
who were unable to keep it, was to convince 
of shortcomings, and to lead to 
trust in Christ, alone, for salvation. It is 
only self-deception to claim actual perfection, 
though the weakest child of 
God clothed with the imputed merit of 
Christ, is reckoned perfect by our Father. 

This trusting in the merit of Christ, 
and striving to live in exact harmony 
with his revealed will, which implies the 
diligent searching of the Scriptures to 
know what that will is, is the true life of 
holiness-of separation from the world 
--and of union and communion with 
God. Such cannot help bearing fruit. 

It should be borne in mind that the 
statement of Heb. 12:14 is addressed 
to the Church. The Church were taught 
to look for the Lord's appearing, which 
Paul explained would be in a manner 
unobserved by the world, and as a thief 
in the night. When his presence is due, 
only those will be able to see (Gr., 
horao-discern) it who are separate from 

R714:page5 

the world in spirit, and who are searching 
the Scriptures to know the signs of 
his presence. Without holiness [separation, 
setting apart to God's service] 
no man shall see [discern] the Lord. 
But a time shall come when many 
who are not holy will discern the Lord's 
presence; for we are told that "every 
eye shall see him." The world will see 
-recognize him, when his judgments 
make his presence manifest to all. 



Isa. 26:9. 

This text has very frequently been 
misused in urging the world to become 
Christians. Christian people who have 
not carefully considered its meaning tell 
the world that without holiness they 
shall not see the Lord; and then, when 
controverting the truth as to the manner 
of Christ's coming, the very same class 
will confidently quote, "Every eye shall 
see him." Do they believe that all shall 
become holy? No; this is far from 
their thought. Where then is the harmony? 
Is there discord in the statements 
of God's word? To believe so is 
to believe the Scriptures unsound and 
unworthy of confidence. But such is 
the sad confusion into which the teaching 
of the nominal church has led, and 
such the results which its too careless 
handling of the word of God has brought 
about. The confusion is fast ripening 
into open infidelity. 

May God help those of his children 
who are still within her to see her confusion, 
and then courageously to come 
out and pursue holiness, without which 
no man shall now be able to discern the 
Lord's presence. 

MRS. C.T.R. 



R713 : page 5 

AFTER THE ORDER OF MELCHISEDEC. 

"Jehovah hath sworn and will not 
repent, Thou art a priest forever after 
the order of Melchisedec." Psa. 110:4. 

A priest, in the only true sense, is 
a mediator between God and fallen 
creatures, the object of such mediation 
being to restore and establish harmony. 
To accomplish this work the mediator 
must be one who is acceptable to both 



parties; otherwise the work of reconciliation 
cannot be accomplished. 

The office of the priest or mediator 
between God and man is to restore to 
perfection and consequent harmony with 
God, a whole race of beings condemned 
to death, and already dead or dying. 
Hence this priest must of necessity be 
"mighty to save." (Psa. 89:19.) He 
must have both right and power to recall 
the dead to life, and ability to instruct 
and discipline, and thus to lead 
every willing subject back to the perfect 
estate from which Adam, and the race 
through him, fell. To secure this right, 
he must first satisfy the demands of Justice, 
which required the extinction of the 
human race; and these demands of Justice 
could only be met by a sacrifice of 
equivalent value-a human life for a 
human life. The life of Adam, and all 
represented in him, might only be redeemed 
by another perfect human being. 
And so it was-- "Since by man came 
death, by man came also the resurrection 
from the dead." (1 Cor. 15:21.) By 
the sacrifice of a perfect human existence, 
then, the right of the priest to restore is 
secured. 

But beyond the right, or privilege, of 
restoring, the priest must have the power, 
and power would of necessity presuppose 
his own everlasting existence. He must 
have power to create, since to restore to 
being that which had completely lost 
existence, is to re-create it, and is a 
greater work even than the first creation; 
he must also have perfect knowledge, 
both of God's requirements and 
of human necessities, as well as perfect 
ability, to guide a race so destitute, back 
to the glorious heights of perfection and 
blessed harmony and communion with 
God. 

What an office! Who would presume 
to assume such a title? It belongs really 
and only to Jehovah's Anointed. Even 



Jesus, "the Anointed one, did not glorify 
himself to become a High-Priest," but 
he has "been declared by God a High-Priest 
according to the order of Melchisedec." 
(Heb. 5:5,10, Diaglott.) 
Jehovah honored him by inviting him 
to that position, and giving him all power 
to fill it. In harmony with God's plan, 
not only has Jesus, his anointed one, 
been chosen as the Chief or High-Priest, 
but the "little flock" who follow him in 
sacrifice now are called to be "joint 
heirs" with him in the same honor. If 
we suffer with him we shall also be 
glorified together. 

Jesus alone is the priest, but when redeemed 
by his death and associated 
with him in sacrifice now, and in divine 
power hereafter, we are counted in with 
him, and together with him constitute 
the great prophet, priest and king 
promised to bless the groaning creation 
-the seed of promise. 

From these considerations it should 
be plain to all that the real priest is just 
as truly a king, in whose hand absolute 
power is vested. And in looking back 
to the types or illustrations God has 
given us, we find just such an illustration 
in Melchisedec, who was "a priest upon 
his throne." Other illustrations of Christ 
as a priest are given in the Aaronic 
priesthood, where the special features of 
the redemptive sacrifice are shadowed 
forth-its perfection, its completeness, 
its acceptableness, as also the share 
which the little flock has with him in 
that sacrifice. 

Christ was not constituted a priest 
after the Aaronic order. The Aaronic 
priesthood sprung from the tribe of Levi, 
while "our Lord (according to the flesh) 
sprung from the tribe of Judah, of which 
tribe Moses spake nothing concerning 
priesthood"; and the members of his 
body are chiefly chosen from among the 
Gentiles. As a man, Jesus was not a 



priest, neither as men are the saints 
members of the royal priesthood, but as 
"new creatures" they shall hold and 
execute their office. Jesus as a "new 
creature," "partaker of the divine 
nature" (which he was from the time of 
his baptism) was the priest, and as a 
priest he offered up his perfect human 
nature an acceptable sacrifice to God. 
He consecrated or offered himself in 
sacrifice before he became the priest, but 
the anointing was necessary to enable 
him to accomplish the sacrifice as well as 
to apply its benefits to men. The human 
nature, when sacrificed, could do nothing 
more; it must remain a sacrifice forever; 
but the new nature, fully developed in 
the resurrection, has "all power in 
heaven and in earth." Matt. 28:18. 

The new nature (the priest) is not of 
the Aaronic order; it does not trace its 
lineage to any human source. This fact 
is strikingly typified in the priesthood of 
Melchisedec, whose lineage is not recorded, 
and thus is typified the endless 
life of Christ. In this type the work of 
sacrifice is not shown, as he represents 
the Christ glorified and reigning after the 
work of sacrifice has been completed, 
and the divine nature fully perfected. 

In Heb. 7, this Melchisedec is declared 
to be greater than Abraham, thus showing 
that the divine Christ will be greater, 
and therefore able to bless the "friends 
of God" on the human plane. 

"Wherefore he [Christ] is able to save 
them to the uttermost, that come unto 
God by him, seeing he ever liveth to 
make intercession for them. For such 
a high priest became us, who is holy, 
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, 
and made higher than the heavens" 
[of the divine nature]. Heb. 7:25,26. 
And this blessed assurance of such a 
priest, so mighty to save, is confirmed 
unto us by the oath of Jehovah. (Heb. 7:21; 
Psa. 110:4.) What strong consolation 



then may those have, who have fled to 
Jehovah's Anointed for refuge: "Jehovah 

R714:page5 

hath sworn, and will not repent. Thou 
are a priest forever after the order (or 
manner) of Melchisedec." What believer, 
then, may not read his title clear 
to the promised restitution? and what 
justified one who has offered himself as 
a living sacrifice may not read his title 
clear to joint-heirship with the Head in 
that glorious anointed body. 

"Wherefore, holy [justified] brethren 
partakers of the heavenly calling, consider 
the Apostle and High Priest of our 
profession, Christ Jesus... for we 
have become associates of the Anointed 
if indeed we hold fast the beginning of 
our confidence, firm to the end." Heb. 3:1,14, 
Diaglott.) 

We conclude, then, that while the 
Aaronic priesthood furnishes typical 
illustrations of the sacrifices and sufferings 
of Christ and the blessings to follow, 
yet, as a system, it does not completely 
illustrate the glorious, everlasting 
and unchangeable character of his priesthood 
during the Millennial Age; and 
for this cause Melchisedec was presented 
that thus might be shown his glorious 
office of priest while king-a priest upon 
his throne. Here, too, the body of 
Christ is no longer shown as separate 
individuals, but in the ONE, complete. 
In the work of sacrifice we have seen the 
head or chief priest and the under priests 
more or less separately sacrificing, as 
represented in Aaron and the under 
priests, but in the future glory, all will 
be united as represented in Melchisedec 
alone. 



R714:page5 



"TO US THERE IS ONE GOD." 

John Wesley preached a sermon on, 
and in support of, the Trinity, from 
1 John 5:7. In that sermon he quotes 
the words of Servetus, viz., "I scruple 
using the words Trinity and Persons 
because I do not find those terms in the 
Bible." His belief in the doctrine of the 
Trinity was based upon 1 John 5:7. 
Said he, "I would insist only on the 
direct words, unexplained as they lie in 
the text." Had the Sinaitic Manuscript 
(the oldest, most complete and most 
authentic MS.) been found in Wesley's 
time, would he have believed in the 
union of three persons in the Deity? 
We think not. He labored hard to prove 
this doctrine because he believed that 
1 John 5:7 was genuine. 

There is a good bit of sophism in 
some of Wesley's argument, as there 
always is where men attempt to make 
error appear as truth. He asks-"How 
do the rays of light from a candle 
brought into the room, instantly disperse 
into every corner? Again, here 
are three candles, yet there is but one 
light. Explain this, and I will explain 
the three one God." 

(1) We would suggest, bring three hundred 
or three thousand candles into the 
room and there is but one light, in just 
the same sense that the rays from the 
three candles make but one light. (2) 
Bring a candle, an oil lamp, a gas lamp 
or an electric lamp into the room; 
would not their light blend into one? 

Of these light-givers, might not one 
be greater than all the others, and yet 
the light, or rays of light, blend so as to 
be one light? The lamps are not one 
lamp, yet they may be one in the sense 
of giving one light, because their rays 
of light so agree, or harmonize as to 
blend into one. Therefore we believe 



the Father and Son are two, and not 
one being. 

They are one, only in the sense of 
being in harmony. So far as light or 
truth is concerned, that which shines from 
the Father, through the Son [For said 
Jesus, "I can of myself do nothing." 
"I seek not mine own will; but the will 
of him that sent me," John 5:30. "The 
Son can do nothing of himself," etc., John 5:19.], 
and through the saints blends 
into one, and is one light. 

In this sense Christ is one with the 
Father, and his followers are one in him, 
even as he is one in the Father. 
(John 17:11,21,22,23.) 

R715 : page 5 

The truth, like light, always blends 
and harmonizes, through whatever medium 
it shines. Whether you bring 
into the room three hundred candles, or 
whether the rays of light shine from 
various objects-the candle, the oil lamp, 
the gas jet, or the sun-the light will 
blend and harmonize, thus forming but 
one light. 

All light being of the same nature, it 
blends and harmonizes into one, yet the 
objects from which the rays of light 
shine may differ in their capacity to 
transmit it. Then if all light and all 
truth is the same, may not all life be the 
same, and do not these all issue from 
the same fountain? Is not God that 
fountain? 

None of these mediums through which 
light is given have any exhaustless 
supply in themselves. So with life. 
None but God possessed underived, unlimited, 
exhaustless life. The word in 
Scripture used to denote this independent 
life is immortality. It signifies death-proof. 
Scripture ascribes it to God, as 
it is written, "God only hath immortality," 
etc. (1 Tim. 6:16, and 1:17.) 



But, again, we read that the Father 
who alone possessed this independent life, 
has bestowed this same nature upon our 
Lord Jesus Christ. "For as the Father 
hath life in himself (God's life being in himself 
and not drawn from other sources 
or dependent upon other things), so hath 
he given to the Son to have life in himself," 
John 5:26. Thus we see that the 
Father gave to the Son to possess 
immortality. 

And again, we see that God purposes 
to call out of the human race a few, a 
"little flock," who by obedience to certain 
conditions shall become "sons of 
God," "new creatures"-partakers of 
the divine nature. 

Thus we see that immortality was 
given to the Son, and is also promised 
as a gift to those believers in and followers 
of Christ, "who by patient continuance 
in well doing, seek for glory, 
honor and IMMORTALITY" (Rom. 2:7); 
who "fight the good fight of faith (and 
thus), lay hold on eternal life, whereunto 
thou art also called." 1 Tim. 6:12. 

Christ's followers, the "little flock," 
the "bride" company, when united to 
him will be given immortality-become 
partakers of the divine nature, be 
adopted into the divine family of God, 
thus becoming heirs of God, and joint 
heirs with Jesus Christ-being made one 
with him in the same sense that the 
Father and Son are one. John 10:30, 
and 17:11,21,22,23. Thus will their 
lives harmonize and blend, yet the Father 
will be greater than all (John 10:29), 
even "the Son himself being subject 
unto him, that God may be all in all." 
1 Cor. 15:28. 

Let us not attach a meaning to one 
portion of Scripture that will flatly contradict 
another. That the Father and 
Son are one we acknowledge, but not 
in a sense that contradicts the words, 
"My Father is greater than I" (John 14:28); 



"my Father is greater than 

all" (John 10:29), and many other 

scriptures. 

"To us there is one God, the Father, 
of whom are all things, and we unto 
him, and one Lord Jesus Christ through 
whom are all things, and we through 
him" (1 Cor. 8:6), and if there be one 
hundred and forty-four thousand heirs 
of God, and joint heirs with Christ 
(partakers with him of the divine nature), 
yet all these may be one, in harmony 
with the Father, but not in person, as 
taught by the creeds of men. 

WM. C. MACMILLAN. 



R715 : page 5 

SUGGESTIONS TO BIBLE STUDENTS. 

A brother writes, inquiring, "From 
what source are the meanings of the 
Bible symbols derived?" and says he 
cannot get away from their wonderful 
aptness and the remarkable light they 
throw on the word, but that he cannot 
always trace their derivation. And again 
he inquires, "How do you know which 
is symbolic and which literal? Where 
does the one end and the other begin?" 

These queries suggest to us the propriety 
of calling attention to several 
items which we think should be observed 
by students of the Scripture: 

First, we should remember that the 
Scriptures were intended to be the theological 
text book, and the statement and 
interpreter of divine law for all the 
world; that it was written from a standpoint 
of scientific knowledge and prophetic 
foresight beyond the knowledge 
of men either in the past or present, 
and that, what is prophecy to one age 
becomes history to a future age. It was 
not God's purpose to disclose all his 



plans to man at once, nor yet to leave 
him in total ignorance; hence truths 
relative to the future are generally expressed 
in types and symbols and dark 
sayings. 

Secondly, we should always observe 
the various classes to which the epistles, 
gospels, prophecies, &c, are specially 
addressed; for although all the Scriptures 
will in the future be profitable to 
all men, certain portions of them have 
special reference to special classes now. 
For instance, the law given only to Israel 
to bring them to, or to prepare them to 
accept Christ, will in the future be to all 
men, to bring them to perfection. So 
also the instructions now given specially 

R715 : page 6 

to the gospel church, pointing out their 
stormy pathway of suffering, will in the 
future, show the world how well the 
Christ is prepared to sympathize and 
succor all those then striving to overcome 
evil, and grow up to perfection. 

If we carefully note the opening address 
of each of the epistles, of the Acts 
of the Apostles, and the Revelation, we 
will notice that, with one exception (the 
epistle of James), each is addressed to 
the saints, the sanctified in Christ Jesus, 
either as a class, or, as in a few cases, to 
individual saints, the contents being applicable 
to the entire church. It will 
also be noticed that the teaching of 
Jesus, as recorded in the four Gospels, 
was not an effort to persuade men to be 
his disciples, but rather to confirm the 
faith of those who had already become 
his disciples. He opened his mouth in 
parables and dark sayings to the multitude, 
and explained them privately to 
his disciples. So we find the O.T. 
abounding in types, symbols, and many 
peculiar items of history, which to the 
world, at the present time, have little or 



no interest except as matters of jest and 
ridicule, but which by the consecrated 
Bible student are found to contain concealed 
links of truth which form parts of 
the one unbroken chain of the divine 
testimony. 

In the present time the Bible proves 
therefore to be of special interest and 
profit, only to consecrated students, and 
vain is the hope of converting the world 
by opening its pages before eyes blinded 
by prejudice and pride. Within the 
present century, Bibles have been printed 
by the million and scattered over the 
world like autumn leaves, but they are 
not read by the million, and they are not 
studied even by those who are so zealously 
engaged in the commendable 
work of publishing them. All except 
consecrated saints are in profound ignorance 
of the mass of its precious truth. 
Is it then asked, How is the world to be 
brought to a knowledge of the truth? 
We answer, through the agency of the 
living teacher. By this means, either 
directly or indirectly, the first interest is 
always awakened. It has been so in the 
past; it is so in the present, and it will 
be so in the future. And for this reason 
God has never left himself without a 
living witness in the world. Paul said, 
How shall they hear without a preacher? 
(Rom. 10:14.) And again he said, "Ye 
are our epistle known and read of all 
men." The world will read the living 
epistles, when they will not read the 
written one. 

For this reason Jesus said, "Ye are 
the salt of the earth," and again, "Ye 
are the light of the world"-"Let your 
light shine." If men see our light, they 
will in time believe in it, and will be attracted 
to the fountain whence we received 
it-the word of God. This explains 
why the Scriptures are directed 
so expressly to the saints. The great 
Prophet, or Teacher of the next age-- 



the Christ, head and body-(Deut. 18:15) 
is now being prepared, educated, 
disciplined and instructed for a great 
missionary work. The school of Christ 
in this age is preparing the teachers of 
the world for the incoming Millennial 
age. 

Thirdly, we should notice that spiritual 
truths, or those truths relating to our 
"high calling" to a spiritual nature, have 
only been brought to light since Pentecost; 
and whatever reference is made to 
these spiritual truths in former writings, 
was only shadowed forth in types and 
symbols, and dark sayings, impossible 
to be interpreted until the spirit (mind) 
of God, through the Apostles' writings, 
revealed their significance to the saints. 
Even Jesus did not teach this line of 
truth, except in parables and dark sayings, 
for the time had not yet come. 
He said, "I have yet many things to say 
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now; 
howbeit when he the Spirit of truth is 
come, he will guide you into all truth." 
(John 16:12.) Consequently we find 
those portions of the Scriptures written 
after Pentecost devoted largely to the 
expounding of the O.T. Scriptures, as 
well as adding new elements of truth in 
the light of which other dark sayings 
and symbols become luminous. The 
New Testament thus becomes the key 
to the old. 

Let us look, for instance, at a few 
illustrations as to how the key is used. 
Paul declares (Heb. 9:8-10, and 10:1) 
that the Tabernacle, and its service and 
ceremonies were typical. This key 
throws open a wide door for investigation; 
and following the Apostle's exposition, 
we see the deep significance of 

R716 : page 6 

its many ceremonies. [See "Tabernacle 
Teachings."] We are also shown that 



the rule in interpreting types and symbols 

is their exact fitness to their antitypes 

and their perfect harmony with 

every principle and statement of the inspired 

writers. If our interpretation of 

any type or symbol jars in the least with 

any other statement of the word, we have 

no right to use it. We may be sure we 

are not correct. 

Take, for instance, the symbols earth, 
sea, mountain, hill. We know that they 
are used in a symbolic sense when they 
have a fitness as symbols, and when, if 
understood literally, they would be out 
of harmony with the context, or with 
other portions of Scripture. Thus, in 
Rev. 21:1, "I saw a new heaven and a 
new earth, for the first heaven and the 
first earth were passed away." If this 
were literal it would be a contradiction 
of Eccl. 1:4 "The earth abideth forever." 
But being elsewhere informed 
that society, as at present organized 
under civil and so-called religious restraint, 
but really held in slavery under 
Satan, the prince of this world, is to be 
dissolved, and that the elements of 
tyranny, ignorance and superstition, 
which heretofore bound them are to 
melt away (2 Pet. 3:10-12; John 12:31) 
we see that the expression, "the first 
earth passed away," would be a fitting 
symbol of such an event, and that the 
new earth would strikingly symbolize 
the new organization of society under 
"The Prince of Peace." And we find 
that this application fits, in every instance, 
where earth is used as a symbol. 

While earth thus represents organized 
and settled society, sea, in contrast with 
it, fittingly represents the more unrestrained 
and ungovernable masses of 
men easily stirred and influenced by the 
storm, hence the fitness of the statement 
that under the new heavens there shall 
be no more SEA. 

As mountains and hills tower above 



the earth, so the civil powers of earth 
are aptly symbolized by them, mountains 
being the great powers, and hills the 
lesser. "Therefore, will not we fear though 
the earth be removed, and though the 
mountains [present governments] be 
carried into the midst of the sea"- 
overthrown by a general uprising of the 
people. (Psa. 46:2.) 

These will serve as illustrations. They 
might be multiplied beyond the limit of 
our space. The fitness of their application, 
and their harmonious fitness in 
every instance where they are used symbolically, 
is clear evidence of the correctness 
of their application. In fact, 
symbols, types, parables and all dark 
sayings of Scripture, are subject to this 
same test. When asked to interpret one 
of his parables, Jesus replied, "Know 
ye not this parable? and how then will 
ye know all parables?" (Mark 4:10-13.) 
He expected them to think if they 
would see the point in his sayings. He, 
therefore, only explained the one parable 
and left us to find the significance of the 
others by study, comparison and observation 
of his methods and principles. 
Any interpretation which is out of harmony 
with the general principles laid 
down in the Scriptures, or at variance 
with any plain, direct statement, may be 
set down as incorrect, whether we see a 
better one or not. 

Since it is necessary to have the mind 
or plan of God clearly before our minds; 
and to do this requires sympathy and 
harmony; and since to have sympathy 
of thought, and to be able to appreciate 
God's plans, is requisite to our preparation 
for the study of the symbols of 
Revelation and the types of the Old 
Testament, it is evident that these symbols 
are not, at the present time, given 
to, nor for, any but the saints: "To you 
it is given to know the mysteries of the 
kingdom of heaven." It is further evident 



that these revelations of God's plans, 

etc., are not given to produce sanctification 

(consecration), but to strengthen, 

and confirm, and upbuild, those who are 

sanctified (set apart)-- "that the man of 

God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished 

unto all good works"-that 

such, being acquainted with the divine 

designs, may be thus enabled to work 

and sacrifice in harmony with the progressing 

development of that plan. 

Hence the appreciation of the fitness 
of the symbols and types, is the result of 
possessing the spirit or mind of Christ; 
and this spirit of truth guides quietly 
into one truth after another, as each becomes 
due. With that guidance the fitness 
is manifest; without it, it is undiscernable. 
MRS. C. T. R. 



R716 : page 6 

TELESCOPIC AND MICROSCOPIC VISION. 

The human eye is beautifully adapted 
to human needs and human enjoyment, 
yet only when aided by the telescope, 
and the microscope, do we discover 
those wonders of nature which hold us 
in mute astonishment. The naked eye 
gathers in much of the glory that surrounds 
us, but unaided it cannot explore 
the seeming secrets of nature. 

Assisted by the telescope men view 
the distant heavenly bodies, and study 
their order of arrangement, magnitudes, 
distances, motions, periods of revolution, 
eclipses, etc., and the causes of their 
various phenomena, and aided by the 
microscope we are enabled to study 
forms of earthly life and agencies of 
power invisible because of their minuteness. 
Thus telescopic and microscopic 
vision together display the glory of 
God's work. But suppose the eye were 



so formed as to have naturally both the 

telescopic and microscopic vision, would 

it be to human advantage? No, the 

vision of immensity, were it continually 

spread before us, would be wearisome to 

eye and brain, and leave no field for investigation 

and the joy of finding something 

new; and the constant vision of infinitesimal 

matter and life would mar 

almost everything of beauty. 

As the natural eye is aided by the 
telescope and the microscope, to behold 
the wonders of the material universe, so 
we find the Word of God furnishing 
both the telescope and the microscope 
of divine truth. By the aid of the divine 
telescope we have been enabled to view 
God's plan as a whole, and to see that 
it contemplates the highest glory, perfection 
and permanent establishment of 
all things in the heavens and in the earth. 
By its aid we are enabled also to study 
the order of God's plan, to estimate 
the relative magnitudes of his various 
promises, to compute the distances in 
time, to observe the orderly motions in 
the various parts of God's plan, to mark 
the periods of the revolution of each 
part, and also to discover the causes, by 
which such changes are brought about. 

You who have learned to use it, adjust 
your telescope again, that you may 
view the wondrous plan of God, which is 
wide as the material universe which he 
created, and includes in its gracious provisions 
all of his creatures both heavenly 
and earthly. 

Viewing it as a whole, we have seen 
its order to be, first, creation; secondly, 
discipline and development; thirdly, 
perfection, blessedness and eternal glory. 
We first find that Jehovah's direct creation 
began and ended in his Son, our 
Lord and Saviour. He was the first 
and only begotten, and by him as 
Jehovah's agent, is all the divine purpose 
to be accomplished (Rev. 1:8). 



The Father's delight is in the Son, and 
the Father's glory is manifested in him. 
Yet just as truly does it teach that it is 
Jehovah's work, since it is his plan and 
power exercised through his Son. 

Leaving our observations of his 
creative work, we turn to view the 
great plan for the discipline and development 
of his intelligent creatures. We 
have seen that all were created perfect, 
yet free to choose good or evil, and that 
for wise and benevolent purposes in 
God's economy, evil has been permitted 
to run its dreadful course in the human 
race and among some of the angels. 
We see also that the great plan for 
human redemption and restoration, is so 
far reaching in its results as to finally 
settle the great controversy between 
good and evil for all time and for all 
creatures. Evil is now permitted to 
exist and flourish for purposes of discipline 
and development, and when this 
is accomplished it shall be forever banished, 
never again to mar the face of 
God's finished work. 

If God's creative work declares his 
glory, with at least equal force, will his 
work of discipline and development declare 
it when fully comprehended. 

But again, leaving these observations, 
turn your telescope to the still more distant 
future. Dimly outlined because of 
its greater distance, the glorious future 
of eternal blessedness bursts upon our 
enraptured vision, beginning at the close 
of the millennium with the great jubilee 
of jubilee-the jubilee of the universe- 
when Christ shall have put all enemies 
under his feet. 1 Cor. 15:25. 

Having taken these telescopic observations 
of the outlines of God's great 
plan, we note the order of its development, 
and from the data furnished in the 
Scriptures, and our observations of passing 
events, we are enabled to compute 
the distance in time, even to the final 



consummation-to the great jubilee of 
jubilees. We have already marked the 
completed revolution of several great 
dispensational periods, and now realize 
that we are in the ending of another and 
just approaching the dawn of the day of 
Christ, whose blessed reign shall wipe out 
the last vestige of evil and usher in the 
universal jubilee. 

As we study these great revolutions 
in their minor details, we discover the 
principles and causes of their movements. 
We see that the first dispensation 
under the ministration of angels, 
completed its revolution at the time of 
the flood, proving the inability of angelic 
power to rescue man; we see the 
law dispensation closing at the first advent 
of Christ, proving the inability of 

R717 : page 6 

man to save himself by obedience to the 

law; now we see also the gospel dispensation 

ending, completing the selection 

of God's anointed priest who alone 

can accomplish the great work. At 

the same time we see the dominion of 

evil completing its course. In all these 

great and the many minor movements 

of the various agencies of God's plan 

which have been brought to our attention, 

we see the one central and unchangeable 

purpose of God- -the final, 

permanent establishment of righteousness, 

peace and everlasting bliss on a 

basis which recognizes the freedom of 

the individual will, yet by the tender 

cord of love links that will indissolubly 

to the divine will as the only 

condition of everlasting life and favor. 

Seeing thus the grandeur of the work 
to be accomplished through our Lord 
Jesus, and the high honor bestowed 
upon him by the Father, we are enabled 
to estimate, to some extent, the exceeding 
great and precious promises made TO 



US as members of his church-the "eternal 
weight of glory" to be shared by us, 
his joint-heirs. And indeed this is the 
chief object and value of these glorious 
telescopic visions of the divine purpose; 
and that we may be encouraged to pursue 
the narrow way to its end, we should 
take frequent observations. Astronomers, 
as they study the material universe, 
become completely absorbed in it, and 
seem to live in an atmosphere and be 
filled with a joy above other men; but 
how much more inspiring are the views 
which we have been permitted to take, 
and the wonderful truths and calculations 
deduced from them! Here is a 
science which towers above every other, 
and a philosophy which, divinely directed, 
probes the hitherto hidden things 
of God. 

But none can enter the watch tower 
of Zion, or use the divine telescope, who 
do not come with meek and teachable 
spirit, with consecrated hearts, and a 
student's purpose to know the truth. 
To such the Lord will blessedly disclose 
the riches of his grace. 

But what of the microscope? Thus 
far we have only been glancing briefly 
at the telescopic visions of God's Word; 
but what, in comparison, we may term 
the microscopic views, also wondrously 
declare the glory of God. They declare 
his glory most emphatically to the natural 
man, for they are such as the natural 
man can more readily grasp and accept. 
These relate to the natural man, 
and his restoration to human perfection. 
The telescopic views are chiefly for those 

R717 : page 7 

who are "new creatures" and heirs together 
with Christ. We turn the telescope 
heavenward, the microscope 
earthward; and the latter discloses the 
promises of restitution. Close examination 



shows the blessedness of that restored 
estate-perfect manhood-and the 
necessary discipline to lead the race to 
it; the judgments of God in the punishments 
of the wicked for their correction, 
and rewarding the righteous; and the 
doom pronounced against present evil 
systems, ecclesiastical, civil, and social, 
which, defying the power of the Almighty, 
bind and oppress mankind. 

These microscopic views disclose to 
the vision of faith a physical earth that 
shall be man's Paradise restored- "The 
wilderness and the solitary place shall 
be glad. ..and the desert shall rejoice 
and blossom as the rose. It shall blossom 
abundantly and rejoice even with 
joy and singing. The glory of Lebanon 
shall be given unto it, the excellency 
of Carmel and Sharon.... And 
the parched ground shall become 
a pool, and the thirsty land springs of 
water." It points to the fact that all 
obstacles shall be removed from the way 
to holiness-"No lion shall be there, 
nor any ravenous beast shall go up thereon; 
it shall not be found there, but the 
redeemed shall walk there." It shows 
that all eyes and ears shall be opened to 
receive the truth, to be instructed in the 
right ways of the Lord- "Then the 
eyes of the blind shall be opened, and 
the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. 
Then shall the lame leap as a hart, and 
the tongue of the dumb sing." 

It tells of the joyful progress of mankind 
towards perfection under that wise 
beneficent reign of Christ "And the 
ransomed of the Lord shall return and 
come to Zion with songs and everlasting 
joy upon their heads; they shall obtain 
joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing 
shall flee away." (Isa. 35.) 

Thus these microscopic views reveal 
the blessed transformation which not 
only awaits mankind, but which also 
awaits the earth, which was "made to 



be inhabited." 

"And still new beauties do we see, 
And still increasing light." 

Let every child of God dig for these 
treasures of divine truth, long buried by 
divine wisdom, for our present comfort 
and joy, and proclaim to the world the 
blessed assurance that its paradise is 
to be restored, and that the great Restorer 
is soon to begin the glorious work. 

Truth on every subject, has always 
met with opposition. Science and philosophy 
have had to contend for every 
inch of footing gained. The use of the 
telescope and microscope were once 
condemned as improper, prying into 
God's secrets. And none the less is the 
searching of the Scriptures, this making 
use of the Divinely-given telescope and 
microscope, opposed to-day on the very 
same ground-an improper prying into 
the mysteries of God. Blinded indeed 
is that child of God who cannot discern 
such sophistry, and the dark source 
from whence such suggestions come. 
Does our Father give us a revelation of 
his will and purposes, and forbid our 
study of it? Let us search and see, and 
be filled with the spirit and inspiration 
of these blessed truths; so shall we be 
enabled to run joyfully and with patience 
the race set before us. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R717 : page 7 

THE PROPHETIC ASPECT. 

Babylon is fallen, is fallen. Rev. 14:8; 17:5; 
18:2. His watchmen are blind: they are all 
ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot 
bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber. 
Yea, they are greedy dogs which never can have 
enough, and they are shepherds that cannot 
understand: they all look to their own way, 



every one for his gain. Isaiah 56:10,11. 

The words here used by the Prophet 
and Revelator to describe the last or 
Laodicean (Rev. 3) stage of the gospel 
house and her ministers (watchmen) 
are evidently now fulfilling in the demoralized 
condition of the nominal 
church, and in her culpable negligence 
and wilful ignorance of the character of 
God, and the plan of redemption. This 
is shown by the tenacity with which she 
holds to theories of the dark ages established 
on false premises, borrowed from 
heathen fables without a shadow of 
foundation, and out of harmony or in 
direct conflict with positive Scripture 
testimony; and more recently by the 
endorsement and adoption of Evolution 
and other devices of Satan which ignore 
by inference or positive statement the 
fall of man and his redemption, and yet 
professedly and with great inconsistency 
maintain that the Scriptures are the 
word of God, as was done recently by 
the directors of a Presbyterian Theological 
Seminary, as reported in the 
Toledo Blade, which we quote below: 

EVOLUTION ENDORSED BY 
PRESBYTERIANS. 

Report of Dr. Woodrow's Address- 
The Creation of Adam- -Four Synods 
to Adjudicate the Matter. 

COLUMBIA, S.C., Sep. 20.-The annual 
meeting of the Board of Directors 
of the Theological Presbyterian Church 
has adjourned. The directors had an 
exhaustive discussion of the recent address 
of Prof. James Woodrow on 
"Evolution," which has attracted so 
much attention and discussion, and 
which consumes a large portion of 
nearly every Presbyterian publication in 
the United States, and especially its 



State Synods, which control the Seminary. 
The following was finally adopted 
--eight to three: 

The Board having carefully considered 
the address of Dr. Woodrow, 
published in pursuance of the request of 
this Board, adopts the following: 

First- That the Board does hereby 
tender Dr. Woodrow its thanks for the 
ability and faithfulness with which he 
has complied with their request. 

Second-That in the judgment of 
this Board the relation subsisting between 
the teachings of Scripture and the 
teachings of natural science are plainly, 
correctly and satisfactorily set forth in 
said address. 

Third-The Board are not prepared 
to concur in the view expressed by Dr. 
Woodrow as to the probable methods 
of the creation of Adam's body, yet in 
the judgment of the Board there is 
nothing in the doctrine of evolution as 
defined and limited by which it appears 
inconsistent with perfect soundness in 
faith. 

Fourth-That the Board takes this 
occasion to record its ever-growing 
sense of the wisdom of our Synod in the 
establishment of the chair of the "Perkin's 
Professorship of Natural Science, 
in Connection with Revelation," and of 
the importance of such instruction as is 
thereby afforded, that our ministry may 
be better prepared to resist the objections 
of infidel scientists and defend 
the Scriptures against their insidious 
charges. 

The minority then entered their protest 
against the action of the Board in 
refusing to enjoin one Prof. Woodrow 
not to teach that evolution is God's 
plan of creation, and that the body of 
Adam was probably evolved from lower 
animals. The matter will be carried 
before the four Synods controlling the 



R718:page7 

Seminary, and be adjudicated by them. 
These are the Synods of South Carolina, 
Georgia, Alabama and Florida. 



There are two theories of evolution 
both equally false and subversive of 
God's word. The older, and that from 
which the other has probably proceeded, 
is known as that advocated by 
Darwin, Huxley and others, which 
teaches that man was evolved or developed 
from the lowest order of animal 
life. The other, which seems like an 
attempt on the part of theologians so 
called to accept evolution as a fact only 
in a modified sense, claiming that Adam 
was not evolved from the lower animals, 
but from lower races of men, is 
said to be based on the dissimilarity of 
languages, because of which it is claimed 
mankind could not have sprung from 
one common parentage, and that the 
Caucasian or European, the highest 
type of man, only is the offspring of 
Adam. This they endeavor to make 
more plausible by misapplying the 
promise of God to Abraham, "In thee 
and in thy seed shall all the families of 
the earth be blessed" (Gen. 28:14), as 
being fulfilled in the civilizing influence 
exerted by this so-called Adamic seed 
over the rest of mankind. But that this 
promise could have no fulfillment whatever 
through men in the flesh, is conclusively 
shown by that great theologian 
who never assumed the titles of Doctor 
of Divinity or Reverend. 

Paul says, To Abraham and his seed 
were the promises made;. ..he saith 
not, and to seeds, as of many; but as of 
one. ..which is Christ. ..And 
if ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's 
seed, and heirs according to the promise, 



i.e., heirs to the promise of being 
made a blessing to all families of the 
earth; and we shall cease to be heirs when 
we obtain the promised inheritance. But 
the advocates of this theory not only 
misapply this promise and ignore or 
reject the "fall" and the Ransom, but they 
either twist or limit Moses' account of 
the deluge and the confusion of tongues, 
as recorded in Genesis: "All flesh died 
that moved upon the earth... every 
living thing that creepeth upon the 
earth, and every man... and every 
living substance was destroyed... 
both man and cattle... and Noah 
only remained alive and they that were 
with him in the ark" (Gen. 7:21-23). 

If, as is asserted, the word earth 
means land, and the distinction was 
limited, did God then destroy the highest 
of mankind excepting only Noah 
and his family and spare the lowest entire? 
For it is evident all were equally 
sinful and depraved, and because of this 
God destroyed them. Of Noah's posterity 
assembled in the plain of Shinar to 
build Babel, it is said, "The whole 
earth (all mankind) was of one 
language and of one speech.... 
the Lord did there confound the 
language of all the earth (Gen. 11:6-9). 
Therefore the confusion was not in that 
which did exist, but was the result of 
the introduction of new elements- 
strange languages. And as a type it is 
very significant, and more particularly 
so now, because fulfilled in its anti-type, 
the Babel of the nominal gospel church, 
that has said, as in the type, "Let us 
make us a name" (Gen. 11:4). Catholic, 
Methodist, Episcopal Baptist, Presbyterian, 
etc.: into which have been introduced 
new elements-traditions and 
precepts of men which make the word 
of God of no effect; all this the Lord 
calls "Babylon the great" (the great 
confusion). 



We further add to this the testimony 
of Jesus and his Apostles that the 
last days or end of the gospel dispensation 
would be characterized by general 
declension in religion, and especially by 
the falling of pastors or teachers from 
the truth, of such Jesus said, as 
spoken by Isaiah, "In vain do they 
worship me, teaching as doctrines 
the precepts of men" (Matt. 15:9); and 
adds: "Leave them; they are blind 
guides: and if the blind lead the blind 
both will fall into the pit" (verse 14, 
ED.). These words, though applied by 
Jesus to the Jewish house, were also intended 
to apply to that of which it was 
the shadow, the gospel house, and corresponds 
with a like command to those 
who would be faithful to the Lord in 
her. Come out of her, my people, that 
ye be not partakers of her sins 
(Rev. 18:4). 

This very evident blindness and apathy 
of the teachers of the nominal church, 
and their consequent unfitness to minister 
to the "sheep," are well illustrated 
by the prophet in likening them 
to "blind watchmen." The blindness 
charged is evidently not the lack of 
natural vision so necessary to watchmen, 
but of mental perception; "they are 
ignorant" of the character and purposes 
of God, therefore they cannot speak- 
and are contemptuously compared to 
"dumb dogs that cannot bark" faithfully 
for the Master, but love to lie down 
in slumber-serf-gratification and ease. 
They have turned away their ears to 
fables and science falsely so called- 
"every one their own way" or ism: 
and "as greedy dogs which never can 
have enough," the majority seek high 
sounding titles and lucrative church 
appointments- "every one for his gain" 
(Isaiah 56:10-1 1). This application of 
the prophecy was undoubtedly intended 
and is fully sustained by Jesus in his 



charges against the seventh or last stage 
of the gospel house-"in Laodicea." 

First, by declaring himself "the faithful 
and true witness, the beginning of 
the creation of God," he implies that she 
is not a faithful witness for the truth, 
and in acknowledging the supremacy of 
the Father as his Creator, shows his opposition 
to the man made dogma of the 
trinity. He then amplifies his charge 
by declaring her "neither cold nor hot": 
I would that thou wert (he prefers open 
hostility to half-heartedness), so then, 
because that thou art lukewarm and 
neither cold or hot, I will spue thee out 
of my mouth, i.e., I will no longer use 
you to give expression to my word... 
thou art the wretched, and miserable, 
and poor, and blind, and naked one. 
(Var. Rend. Rev. 3:14-17.) Her 
misery and wretchedness is caused by her 
blindness and unnatural alliance with the 
world by which she is being overcome. 
The Lord informed his disciples in 
strong negative language, that few rulers 
would be found giving to the household 
of faith meat in due season at his 
coming (presence). "Who then (at 
this time) is a faithful and wise servant, 
whom his lord hath made ruler 
over his household, to give them MEAT 
IN DUE SEASON? Surely not these unfaithful 
'watchmen.' Blessed is that 
servant, whom his lord when he cometh 
shall find so doing" (Matt. 24:45,46). 

In fulfillment of the Master's words, 
the rulers of the nominal church have 
not only not given them the meat now 
due, but have positively warned them 
against tasting it, and continue to feed 
their flocks on milk mixed with the 
muddy waters of tradition on which 
Babylon is built. And this pitiable condition 
is very contrary to the self-satisfied 
opinion she entertains and statements 
she makes concerning herself. 
The Lord says, "Thou sayest I am rich 



...and have need of nothing" (i.e., I 
have all the truth-I am Orthodox- 
Evangelical-I need nothing more), and 
knowest not, etc. is not aware of her 
true condition (Rev. 3:17). 

We quote below some very startling 
statements made at a recent meeting of 
the Evangelical Alliance, held at Copenhagen, 
published in the Cleveland 
Leader September 30: 

"Professor Christlieb, of Bonn, Germany, 
read a paper before the recent 
meeting of the Evangelical Alliance at 
Copenhagen which contained some very 
startling statements. According to the 
statistics of the last twenty years, he said, 
there has been a large falling off in 
attendance upon religious services 
throughout Europe, and this has been 
followed by an increase of crime. Paris 
has more atheists to-day than ever before 
existed in any great city. In no 
Christian country, however, were things 
so bad as in Germany. In many districts 
of Berlin there was only one 
church to every 59,000 of the population. 
In New York there were 200 
places of public worship; in Berlin only 
50. Besides this, out of the whole population 
of Berlin, nearly 1 ,000,000, only 
20,000, or 2 per cent., attend divine service. 
Hamburg was even worse, for, 
out of a population of 400,000, public 
worship on Sundays was attended only by 
5,000. In certain provinces of Germany 
there are suicides at the rate of forty a 
week. The ordinary religious teaching 
of the country is quite dead, and Christianity 
resolved into mere education. 
Skeptical works are popular with the 
working classes, and in the middle and 
upper classes hundreds are led away by 
the influence of scientific discovery and 
invention." 

These calculations embrace a period 
of twenty years, and show that the great 
river Euphrates (people), on which 



Babylon is built, is being dried up-"a 
large falling off." Her epitaph is written, 
--"The ordinary religious teaching... 
is quite dead." They received not the 
love of the truth; and for this cause 
God is sending (Sinaitic MSS.) them 
strong delusion, that they should believe 
a lie." The father of lies has 
been permitted to delude them into 
building on falsehood and making lies 
their refuge, and now "none speaketh 
publicly in truthfulness (Var. Rend.), 
nor any pleadeth for truth. They hatch 
cockatrices' (adders') eggs... he that 
eateth them dieth, and that which is 
crushed (analyzed) breaketh out into a 

R718:page8 

viper (Isaiah 59:5). The adders' eggs 
are Satan's (the serpent's) lies, these 
men made systems have hatched them; 
thinking minds, unable to see their 
origin, have analyzed them, and the 
vipers, Infidelity and Spiritualism, 
the progeny of Satan, have come forth. 
The application of these and other 
Scriptures to the times we live in, to 
those who are wakeful and watchful, confirm 
the accuracy and truthfulness of 
the prophetic records as being from 
God; but to those who are not taking 
heed unto the "sure word of prophecy," 
everything is doubt and uncertainty; 

page 8 

and notwithstanding that they say 
"peace and safety" and give assurances 
of growth and prosperity, the facts are 
to the contrary. The Bishop's report 
at the last General Conference of the 
M.E. Church, shows an increase of less 
than four to each church in four years, or 
less than one to each church per year; 
and this includes probationers; and 
if only one in each church goes back to 



the world per year, which would, we 
think, be a very small number, probably 
far below the average, then as a result 
there is not only no increase, but there 
is a positive falling off. We have quoted 
these Scriptures and applied them with 
no uncharitable or unkind feeling to 
anybody, but in a spirit of love, that we 
might confirm the faith of some, and 
that we might, if possible, awaken others 
to the signs of the times as confirming 
the words of prophecy. 

S. O. BLUNDEN. 



R719 : page 8 
AIONION-EVERLASTING. 

New Jersey, Jan. 6th, 1885. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-May I 
take the liberty to express my surprise 
on reading some of your remarks in answering 
questions relating to "Sheep 
and Goats?" 

Answering the question does the word 
everlasting in verse 46 (Matt. 25.) indicate 
that the punishment will last forever? 
You say "It certainly does," and 
add, "When some one told you that the 
Greek word aionion here rendered everlasting, 
had no such meaning, but ALWAYS 
meant a limited period of time, 
they misinformed you, and merely applied 
a definition common to a sect 
called "Adventists," but nevertheless an 
error." And further on you say:-"If 
Adventists and Universalists claim that 
aionion here always means a limited 
period, they should, to be consistent, 
hope only for a life of limited duration 
for the righteous, since the same Greek 
word is used in reference to both. 

The surprise is that you should say 
such things of the "Adventists." I have 
known them, and was among them, one 



of them for more than thirty years. 
They have always admitted that the 
same Greek word used with reference to 
both the righteous and the wicked in this 
place, must have the same force in each 
case, as to duration; that the "everlasting" 
punishment of the one class will 
be just as long as the "eternal" life of 
the other. And they have always claimed 
it not a question of duration, but of the 
nature of the punishment, and it has been 
very common among them to explain 
Matt. 25:46, by quoting Paul's language 
in 2 Thess. 1:9, making the everlasting 
punishment in the one text the 
exact equivalent of the everlasting destruction 
in the other, absolutely without 
limit. And they have constantly emphasized 
the utter hopelessness of the 
punishment by explaining that the Greek 
word is kolasin, which means, literally, 
to cut off, or lop off, as when a limb, or 
the branches of trees are cut or lopped 
off; this being everlasting, could not 
possibly admit of the idea of limitation. 

I am perfectly sure, dear brother, that 
you would not knowingly misrepresent 
any one's views. 

Yours in Jesus, 

Our glorious Lord and Living Head, 
R. WAKEFIELD. 

P.S. I would add, that the Adventists, 
in speaking of the "everlasting 
fire," v. 41, claimed that, even if forced 
to allow that the fire was everlasting, the 
same word, aionion, being used, still, 
the office of fire being not to preserve, 
but to destroy, it would prove beyond a 
possible question, that the wicked being 
cast into the fire, they must inevitably 
perish. And further, as it was well understood 
that aionion has, sometimes, a 
limited signification, it was suggested 
that the fire having done its work of destruction 
might then (supposing it to be 
literal) be permitted to go out, in perfect 



harmony with the sense of the 
passage. 



We are thankful to our Brother for 
the above correction. We probably had 
in mind when writing the paragraph referred 
to, a class of people who might 
be termed--"Universalist-Adventists." 
The Brother is right, we would not willingly 
misrepresent any. The definition 
given above is entirely satisfactory to us. 

It occurs to us that our views on the 
meaning of the word aionios were not 
fully apprehended by some. We were 
controverting the view-that this word 
always means a limited period. We 
have never claimed that it always means 
never ending but rather a space or 
epoch of time upon which no limit has 
been placed. Thus in the Old Testament 
the corresponding word olam is 
used with reference to laws and regulations 
then in force "This shall be a 
statute unto you [olam] forever" i.e. it 
has no limitation it would last until for 
some cause God its mandator should replace 
it with another. 

Apply this same definition (continuous 
-unlimited) to the word aionios in 
Matt. 25:46, and it would read the 
righteous into continuous life, but the 
wicked into continuous [i.e. uninterrupted] 
punishment, [elsewhere shown 
to be the second death.] Whatever is 
claimed for the word aionios toward the 
one class must be admitted toward 
the other. 

To our understanding, the "fire" of 
Matt, and of Rev. is figurative of destruction, 
to the evil class spoken of 
as cast into it. Hence substituting 
the definition for the figure it would 
read everlasting destruction-the second 
death. 



R719 : page 8 
FLESH AND BLOOD. 

It is claimed by some that the words 
"flesh and blood" when used concerning 
Jesus, are to be spiritually understood. 
Without stating what the spiritual 
meaning of flesh and blood could be, 
they adopt an old style and cheap method 
of reasoning (?) by intimating that the 
natural and worldly minded should not 
be expected to appreciate this statement, 
but that all spiritually minded should see 
it at a glance. 

If we test this theory by the word of 
God, it soon proves to be unscriptural, 
as well as illogical. The words flesh and 
blood used over and over again in the 
Scriptures, always refer to human nature. 
Take your concordance and verify this. 
It is impossible to conceive of any spiritual 
meaning to apply to this expression 
which will meet all the demands of the 
case, and probably it is for this reason 
that our contemporary did not attempt it. 

The text chosen, from which to teach 
this idea, is John 6:51, "My flesh I will 
give for the life of the world." This, 
without other evidence, is quite sufficient 
to refute the idea; for if by Jesus' flesh 
and blood "given for the life of the world," 
we are to understand Jesus' spiritual nature, 
then Jesus cannot now nor ever be 
a spiritual being, seeing he has given 
that FOR the life of the world. This is 
the logical conclusion whatever way you 
look at it: If the common (unscriptural) 
view of the wages of sin be taken, viz.- 
spiritual death [or estrangement from 
God and deadness to all that is holy and 
good and pure] it would prove that 
Christ gave up his harmony with God, 
his holiness, and purity, that we might 
come to enjoy such spiritual life as he 



gave for the life of the world. If on the 
contrary we take the more Scriptural 
view of death, viz., extinction, and apply 
it to spiritual (?) "flesh and blood," 
"given for the life of the world," the case 
would stand thus: Jesus gave [hence 
ceased to possess] life as a spiritual being, 
[became extinct] in order to procure 
life for man. To this we answer that if 
his spiritual existence were given for 
man's he could not now possess a spiritual 
existence, having forfeited or "given" 
it for mankind. The fact that Christ 
Jesus does live-a spiritual being-is 
clear proof that it was not his spiritual 
existence that was "given for the life of 
the world," and hence proves that the 
"flesh and blood" given, in no sense represents 
a sacrifice of spiritual being. 

Is it asked, Could not Jesus have 
"given" a part of his spiritual being and 

R720 : page 8 

retained part? We answer, No, not if 
he is to be believed; for he says, that 
when he was a man, he gave ALL THAT 
HE HAD to effect the purchase. 
(Matt. 13:44.) 

On the contrary how simple the argument 
and how logical and scriptural, that 
He who was in the form of God (spiritual) 
became or was "made flesh" [human] 
in order that he might give "a corresponding 
price," substitute or ransom 
for the condemned fleshly race. (See 
the definition of RANSOM-Greek, antilutron, 
1 Tim. 2:6, in Young's An. Concordance.) 
Yes, the man Christ Jesus 
gave himself-all that he had, a ransom 
for all, for "as by man came death by 
man also came the resurrection of the 
dead." (1 Cor. 15:21.) And to this 
definition the facts all agree, for he never 
took back the "flesh and blood," he 
never will take back our ransom price. 
Though put to death in the flesh, he was 



quickened in the Spirit. 1 Pet. 3:18. 
Diaglott. For a showing of how we 
"eat and drink," or appropriate by faith 
that human perfection which was "given" 
for us, and through the (eating) appropriation 
of which we obtain justification 
from all the imperfections of the fall, 
which justified condition is the basis or 
platform from which the Gospel Church 
is called to sacrifice and to obtain the 
divine nature, see the article under this 
same caption in our issue of April '84. 

This latest device to obtain a Scriptural 
hook upon which to hand the no-ransom 
theory-that we were not bought 
with the precious blood of Christ as an 
equivalent price, is certainly a weak effort, 
though a bold one. 



R719 : page 8 

IMMORAL LITERATURE. 

A people's standard of intelligence 
and morality is invariably regulated by 
their standard of literature. If of a low, 
trifling, immoral type, such will be the 
character of the people among whom it 
circulates. All history, experience, 
and observation demonstrates this fact. 
It is to be found in the rise and fall of 
men and parties, nations and dynasties. 
Deprive a people of their literature and 
they degenerate into barbarism. Limit 
them to immoral literature, and debauchery 
and crime are sure to overtake 
them sooner or later. 

It costs no more to feed people on 
sound philosophy, draped in proper 
language, than it does to surfeit them 
with cheap romance adorned in rags 
and polluted in filth. But another objector 
replies that the public taste requires 
such literature, and the papers 
would not sell without it. If this be 



true, it simply proves that the public 

taste is perverted and public reform is 

seriously demanded. The pernicious 

influence of this standard of literature 

may not be so readily detected 

in the adult population as among 

the youth. In the one case character 

is formed and habits are fixed, 

while in the other character is in process 

of formation, and habits may be changed 

or improved. If the family table or library 

is loaded with indecent literature 

and sensational trash, the youth of the 

country are not to be blamed if they 

grow up to be desperadoes and land in 

the penitentiary or on the gallows. Censure 

belongs not to the wrong-doers, 

but to the parents or guardians who 

placed such temptations in their way. 

There is a prevailing tendency to ignore 

the wholesome restraints which characterized 

the culture of children at an 

early period in our history, and the increase 

of crime in our land is largely 

attributable to this neglect in the education 

of children. No feature of domestic 

discipline should be more scrupulously 

guarded than that which limits 

the selection of family literature to such 

papers and books as produce a sound, 

healthy, moral social and political influence 

on the youth. --Selected. 



page 8 

FLORIDA LANDS. 

Of the Florida Lands donated to the 
TRACT SOCIETY, described in the November 
Supplement, the following plots 
have been taken: Nos. 4, 12, 13, 14, 15, 
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 30, 33, 34, 35, 38, 
39, 40. 

Those who have written saying that 
they are going soon to see these lands, 



are advised that the steamer is not yet 
running between Cedar Keys and Disston, 
therefore the best route, at present, 
is via Jacksonville, Sanford and Tampa 
to Pinellas. 



R706 : page 8 

THE LORD'S POOR LIST. 

As stated in our TERMS on first page, 
we send this paper free to all who cannot 
pay for it and apply to be entered on the 
LORD'S POOR LIST. Such should apply 
at the beginning of each year, that we may 
be assured of their continued interest. 

Modesty is a Christian virtue, and 
while no true Christian gentleman or 
lady will rudely order us thus "Send me 
the paper," none on the other hand 
should feel that they are begging of the 
publisher in accepting this offer. They 
are merely accepting through us one of 
God's numberless blessings. If you appreciate 
the food found in the TOWER 
and cannot pay 50 cents a year, you 
must not be ashamed to receive it of the 
Lord gratis-this would indicate pride 
and such pride must sooner or later 
give way, if you ever receive the greater 
"gift of God-everlasting life-through 
Jesus Christ our Lord," who gave himself 
a ransom for all. Let us remember 
that it is all of God-His gift through 
whomsoever, or in whatever way, it is 
sent. 



R730 : page 8 

"DILIGENCE in Christ's service is a 
sure method of gain and growth in grace." 



"A WISE man ought to hope for the 
best, be prepared for the worst, and bear 
with equanimity whatever may happen." 



"You censured your friend for his 
seeming coldness and indifference in his 
treatment of you in your time of extreme 
grief and trial. You did not know then 
that he was wrestling with a similar, or 
even greater trial. 'Now we know in 
part.' We therefore should judge charitably 
and moderately the conduct of 
others." 



R720 : page 1 



VOL. VI. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., FEBRUARY, 1885. 

NO. 6. 



page 1 



ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 40 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS: Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by Draft, 
P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers 
will be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or 



postage stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances 
may be made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 
without price. " And you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend 
money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



R720 : page 1 



VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The cry is peace! peace! but there is and can be no permanent 
peace until the Prince of peace is Lord of all. Until he has taken 
his great power assumed control and put down oppression, 
injustice, and every error and wrong. 

Storm clouds are gathering thick over the old world. It looks as 
though a great European war is one of the possibilities of the 
near future. 

Overproduction has for the moment clogged the wheels of trade 
the world over, and a halt is called by producers from fear of 
loss. The result is first felt by the wageworkers, so many of 
whom live "from hand to mouth." Unrest is now more quickly 
developed than formally in this class because of a wider range of 
knowledge. Large gatherings of men have assembled in London 
and Paris lately demanding that some Public improvements be 
prosecuted to afford them work and wages. 

Such crises tax the ingenuity of statesmen and not infrequently 
help to foment contentions and war. At present we find all the 
prominent powers of Europe intent on colonization schemes and 
the acquirement of increased territory. The object of this is two 
fold perhaps: to furnish employment and diversion for the 
thousands of regular paid soldiery and maintain among them the 
martial spirit without jeopardizing a revolution at home while at 
the same time these civilized (?) nations hope to take such 
advantage of poor ignorant barbarous tribes as may henceforth 
increase the home treasury by heavy taxes wrung from these 
heathen people for their protection (?) 



France the liberal Republic which claims for itself and each 
citizen freedom, has on hand a war in Africa caused by the 
rebellion of some people who want their own freedom but whom 
France wants to govern and squeeze wealth from. She has 
another war with China growing out of the attempted annexation 
of Annam. 

England's king long ago took possession of Ireland and divided it 
among his supporters who as Lords have since drawn large 
revenues from that little island to be squandered in high living in 
England. The sons of these Lords are now Lords in the British 
parliament and hold tightly to every ill-gotten acre. General 
education among the Irish peasantry has begotten bitterness 
against injustice which is leading to shocking outrages in 
London-dynamite explosions, etc. Unable to cope with their 
master and oppressor otherwise, leads some to attempt to justify 
this course by pointing out when and how Britain with less cause 
destroyed a thousand times as many innocent lives. Selfishness, 
greed and injustice are the causes of all this evidently. 

Greed, a desire to "protect British interests" and to hold to other 
conquered countries from whom directly and indirectly large 
revenues are obtained led the great Christian (?) government of 
Britain which boasts that on its empire the sun never sets, into a 
war with the most ancient nationality of the world- Egypt. 
Failure to attend to its own business and let Egypt attend to her's 
has already cost much money and many lives, and the war seems 
to be but beginning. 

Germany, more cunning, though equally selfish and, 
unscrupulous, rejoices to see her strongest competitors scattering 
their treasures, armies and ships afar and attempts to take the 
position of Umpire and calls conferences relative to the affairs of 
Egypt and the Congo country of Africa, and asks for a share of 
the spoils. Meanwhile Portugal has sent an army and forcibly 
taken possession of the congo country without conference. 

Russia meanwhile is not idle, she has been building railroads and 
massing troops in the direction of the Indian Ocean with evident 
desire to be in a position to injure England's vast interests in 
India should the latter offer objections to the long nourished 
Russian scheme of taking possession of Turkey. 

Thus one thing leads to another and somewhat so only worse and 
worse it will be throughout the "time of trouble such as was not 
since there was a nation" until these present governments with 
their prince (Jno. 12:31 and 14:30,) falsely called "Kingdoms of 
God" shall fall before the true kingdom, and the dominion under 
the whole heavens shall be given to the people of the saints of 
the most high God. No wonder then that those who appreciate 
these matters truly, should and do pray "Thy Kingdom come 
Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. " No wonder that 
those in ignorance should groan for a better government than any 



their present Prince has ever provided. "The whole creation 
groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now waiting 
[ignorantly] for the manifestation of the Sons of God" clothed 
with heavenly power to lay justice to the line and righteousness 
to the plummet. Then "a king shall reign in righteousness and 
princes shall execute judgment [justice] in the earth." Then "all 
the families of the earth shall be blessed," and every man may sit 
under his own vine and under his own fig tree with none to 
molest or make him afraid. Micah 4:1-4. 

While looking forward to the World's emancipation day, let us 
not forget that though the coming trouble is the preparation for 
that lasting peace, yet, the saints have no share in any conflict 
with carnal weapons. Our foes and besetments in this same "evil 
day" are of another, though not less dangerous character. 
Combined with and a part of these kingdoms which call 
themselves Kingdoms of God, are church systems calling 
themselves churches of God whose doctrines on religious 
subjects are as much a libel on God's truth as the earthly empires 
with which they are associated are libels on God's Kingdom. The 
two go hand in hand. The soldiers and guns and swords to 
compel submission, taxes, etc., and false doctrines to bind and 
fetter the poor heathen with fears of hell more awful than even 
their barbaric minds had ever conceived, and to uphold and 
defend the action of their kingdoms, as of God's appointment and 
the enslavement and robbery of the heathen as a mark of God's 
grace. 

For these so called kingdoms of God and their armies, prayers 
are offered to God in the name of him whose command is peace 
good will toward man, and who announces himself as the one 
who shall set at liberty the captives and proclaim love, peace and 
liberty throughout the earth to all-for whose liberty he died. 

Thank God the emancipation proclamation is going forth; 
shackles theological and political begin to break, and the 
groaning creation must shortly be delivered into the true liberty 
of sons of God under the dominion of Immanuel. 



page 1 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Blackburn, Eng., Jan. 13, '85. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I am happy to be able to give an evidence 
of the hope that is in me. I had been a teacher for fifteen years in 
the Sabbath school in connection with the Church of England, 
but I had taught myself fast; in fact I taught things I neither 



believed nor understood, but like the majority of weak-minded 
Christians, I tried hard to persuade myself that the clergy were 
more likely to know than me. And so my reason overcame my 
belief, and I should have been an infidel, but I thought this and 
other planets could not work as they do, without some first 
cause. I was deeply perplexed, and often prayed If there is a 
reality may the First Cause of all things reveal it to me. In this 
state of mind "Food for Thinking Christians" came to me. I need 
not explain the result. 

My friends who have received the teachings of "Food," &c, 
have had a similar experience. But those who are asleep in Zion 
have not an ear to hear, and look on us as fallen from the faith 
(?). But we count it as nothing if we may only gain the favor of 
Christ. 

Spiritism is gaining a good hold on the people of Blackburn (our 
market town.) They are building a large (shall I say) church, to 
hold meetings in. They have hired the Science and Art School 
nearly two years, but it is becoming too small. The nominal 
system has laid the foundation and they build thereon. 

The WATCH TOWER has scarcely been heard of in this part of 
Lancashire. I have no doubt many would gladly accept its 
teachings, if they only had them explained, and I can do but little 
in this matter. Pray for me and my brother in the faith here. 
Please send me eight copies of WATCH TOWER hereafter 
regularly, as I can use them to advantage, I think. I hope I shall 
soon be able to use twelve as the good news spreads. 

Yours, etc., 



Ambia, Ind., Jan. 28, 1885. 

DEAR BROTHER: I sent you fifty cents about the first inst. 
intending it as a contribution, but I find that my subscription to 
the TOWER expired about that time, so here is twenty-five cents 
more, as I want to do something in the good work of 
disseminating truth. Wish I could make it as many dollars, but 
"Silver and gold have I none." Such as I have I will give. If I 
lack in contributions I will try to make it up in service. 

I will no longer spend my money for that which is not bread by 
giving it to the Nominal Church to be used for worldly display 
and rivalry in the mission work, pretending to desire the spread 
of the gospel, when in reality they only care to increase the 
power and influence of their own particular denomination. 
Hereafter, what I may be able to give will be given for the 
spreading of the "glad tidings, which shall be of great joy to all 
people." At present I know of no other way to do this other than 
to help support the TOWER in its good work of "breaking the 
loaves" for the disciples, who then receive of the broken, 
prepared bread and distribute to the fifties 



page 2 

(and the ones and twos) that the multitudes may be fed. I know a 
few good people who are not satisfied with the husks of 
orthodox preaching who I think would gladly receive the "true 
bread" if presented to them. There are a good many Swedes 
here, among whom I know two or three families that are 
religious; indeed, exemplary Christians. In order that these may 
be fed, I would like two or three copies of the TOWER in 
Swedish, and I would like a few copies in English. 

I will just state that since my withdrawal (January 1) the Sabbath 
School has been reorganized, and my successor to the 
superintendency is a non-professor, and an admirer of Ingersoll, 
and the owner of a Skating Rink and Dance Hall, a society man, 
"popular." "To the work; to the work," is a favorite song, but the 
kind of work: getting up entertainments and benefits ostensibly 
to pay the bills, but really to gratify worldly pride! Deplorable 
indeed! 

Although "straightway commended" by the head of the council 
(the presiding elder) "not to teach" my doctrine, I was chosen by 
the worthy (?) superintendent to teach the Bible class in the 
U.B.S.S. I accept, feeling that "the angel has opened the prison 
doors and bids me, Go, stand and speak in the temple all the 
words of this life." This I will do, the Lord helping me, until 
"Jerusalem shall be filled with this doctrine," or until the 
"council be called together and I am sent for." Pray for me that I 
may be "counted worthy to suffer shame for his name." (Acts 5.) 
Yours in Christ, 



Mead, Saunders Co., Neb., Jan. 30th, '85. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I am highly interested in the teachings set 
forth in ZION'S WATCH TOWER, and I am studying the Bible 
as much as my time allows me to see if these things are so, and I 
must confess that the truth of God is growing more and more 
simple, plain, effective, harmonious and estimable with me in the 
light of the REDEMPTIVE PLAN of God, which seems to be 
the corner-stone of your teaching. I thank God that he brought 
light to me on these subjects. I am a Swede, and regret very 
much that the publication of the Swede's Tower had to be 
discontinued, but I hope that God will in the near future provide 
for its continuance. These truths, considered new, have caused a 
sensation among the Swede congregation at this place, and 
persecution in the form of ridicule and slander have already 
fallen on me from the more reverenced among them. 

Your brother in Christ. . 

Thank God for the privilege, my brother, and that you are 
counted worthy. See Acts 5:41. -EDITOR. 



London, W. England, Jan. 1885. 

DEAR SIR AND BROTHER:-I have much pleasure in ordering 
the "TOWER" for another year (1885). I continue to enjoy it 
much, am very grateful to you, and all those whom the Lord is 
pleased to use for the blessing of others through ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER. 

I thought the past year was going to be unfruitful with me, and it 
seemed to be so till August. Then I had the pleasure of finding a 
man preaching in the Park, who had been a member of a chapel 8 
years, and had left it and despaired of finding a church what it 
ought to be. He was preaching against the hypocrisy of the 
Church of England, and the oppression of the poor. Two or three 
views from the WATCH TOWER was what he wanted and he 
was so delighted after about two hours conversation, you would 
think he had had a fortune left him. He preached TOWER views 
the following Sunday, read parts of Food for thinking Christians 
to them, showed them the plan of the ages, and quite interested 
the people generally. "The Christian Evidence Society," sent out 
to oppose him, but they had no good news for the people, and as 
he had, they were anxious to hear it. He was about emigrating to 
Australia, so we did not have his company more than three 
weeks. He told the people how he would spread the "glad 
tidings" in Australia and borrow a barn or shed to keep the rays 
of the sun off himself and his hearers. As soon as he is settled 
there he will write to you and order the WATCH TOWER. 
Unfortunately I cannot preach so as to attract out of doors, nor 
assume sufficient authority against noisy opposition. We have 
interested another in the TOWER, who is now in Liverpool. He 
has ordered and received it. We have some profitable times, 
about a dozen of us, but have not yet begun to preach or lecture 
to the public, although our hall will hold about three hundred. 

As I am out of employment for the second time since this time 
last year, I am sorry I cannot send a donation for the "Tract 
Fund." 

With Christian love ever yours, 



R720 : page 2 



Liberia, Africa, Dec. 23d, 1884. 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL:-Dear Sir:-- About twenty-eight years ago 
I became a Bible reader, and preached for twelve years, but I 
never understood it so clearly and plainly as I now do, when 
reading it with "Food for Thinking Christians," etc. I would be 
under many obligations to you if you would be kind enough to 
send me half a dozen copies of the following: "Zion's Watch 



Tower," "Food for Thinking Christians," "The Tabernacle and Its 
Teachings," or any of your periodicals that may have been 
recently published. 

Very truly yours, 



We are glad to hear that the "Food" has gone far off to Africa's 
sunny land. May the Lord enable you to let the light so shine 
there as to honor His name by making known His glorious plans. 

page 2 



Latrobe, Pa., Jan'y. 20th, 1885. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Some of my experience recently 
reminds me of Brother Paul's anxiety and astonishment as 
indicated by his earnest words to the Galatians, Corinthians and 
others. 

I think I am beginning to realize, at least to some extent, the 
patience which not only Paul, but all saints, have had and still 
have need to exercise toward others of the household of faith, 
who are just beginning to throw off their yokes of bondage. 

We also have reason sometimes to feel both anxiety and 
astonishment at those who, after having received with joy, the 
truth through Christ, become dull of hearing and turn away, 
some even perverting the Scriptures, and accepting some other 
gospel (which is not another) than that taught the Apostles, 
through a revelation from Jesus Christ and preached by them. 
Says Paul, "though we or an angel from heaven, preach any other 
gospel unto you let him be accursed. Gal. 1 . 

Most assuredly those who accept any other set of doctrines than 
that delivered to the Apostles, are being deceived. Sad indeed 
when those whom the truth has made free, turn back, becoming 
again entangled with the yoke of bondage; becoming followers 
of false teachers by reason of whom the way of truth is evil 
spoken of. (2 Pet. 2.) 

But how very easy it is for any of us to become overcharged with 
the cares of this life; (Luke 21:34) and how very easy to become 
unskilled in using the "two edged Sword" if we do not 
continually exercise our senses in the daily use of it. 

It is useless for us to pray "Give us this day our daily bread," 
whether for natural or spiritual bread, if we do not use our 
senses, and make effort to obtain that for which we are hungry. 
Then we need daily to partake, not alone of the natural, but also 
of the spiritual bread, that we may be able to walk according to 
the Spirit; that we may be able to overcome "through him who 
loved us" and bought us, keeping ourselves in subjection to his 
will, not stumbling at affliction or persecution on account of the 



word, nor letting anything separate us from that love of God 
which is in the anointed Jesus our Lord. 

Since writing the above I have received, and have been reading 
the January number of the TOWER. You therein mentioned 
what seems to you an unvarying rule, viz.: "that light and 
opportunity afforded by the truth must be used, or these talents 
for service will be taken away. We must let our lights so shine 
as to glorify our Father in heaven, else it will become darkness." 

Yes, Brother, this also has been a part of my experience. Truly 
we all need to heed the warnings given, that we may not be 
found "asleep" nor "drunken" (intoxicated with the spirit of the 
world). Therefore, let us watch and be sober. 

Your brother in Christ, . 



R721 : page 2 



CHRIST OUR PASSOVER. 

"For even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us: therefore let 
us keep the feast." 1 Cor. 5:7,8. 

The Passover feast lasts seven days with the Jews, 
commencing this year March 31 and ending April 7, and typifies 
perfect and everlasting purity and joy to all who partake of the 
Lamb slain. Paul teaches that as Christ our passover [lamb] is 
slain, so many of us as have by faith partaken of his imputed 
merit should henceforth continually rejoice before God and feast 
upon the truth, putting away completely all leaven of sin; malice, 
hypocrisy, etc. 

The death and eating of the Passover lamb was with Israel the 
cause or basis for the "Passover Feast" which lasts a week. The 
lamb was slain the day preceding the feast week, and was the 
type of Jesus' death. Hence the anniversary of the crucifixion 
this year [Jewish time] will be March 30, between noon and 3 
o'clock P.M.; and the evening before, viz., the Sunday evening 
March 29 (the same day by Jewish time, their day beginning at 6 
o'clock in the evening) between 6 o'clock and 10 o'clock, was the 
time spent in killing, preparing and eating the Passover supper, 
and after it the supper of bread and wine, representing our Lord's 
body and blood broken and shed for us, which he here 
introduced to his disciples as thereafter taking the place of the 
literal lamb; these emblems being representative of himself the 
antitype "The Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the 
world." 

When the Lord, after giving the disciples the bread and wine as 
emblems of his body and blood, and telling them to partake of 
them, said, "This do in remembrance of me," (Luke 22:19,) we 



understood him to teach that henceforth the Passover anniversary 
should be commemorated not by eating the typical lamb, but by 
partaking of these emblems of the anti-typical lamb. Not in 
remembrance of the deliverance from Egyptian bondage, but in 
remembrance of our deliverance from the bondage of sin and 
death. The anti-type should be recognized as begun in every 
sense. 

And when the Apostle says, "As often as ye do this ye do show 
the Lord's death till he come," we understand him to teach, that 
as often as this anniversary is observed [at its yearly recurrence] 
we should thus show the Lord's death as the basis of all our joy, 
purity and hope. Nor do we understand the words "till he come" 
to limit us and make its present observance improper, since the 
evident meaning is until the Lord's kingdom shall have come, 
and he shall have called you to share with him the new wine (the 
joys, rights and privileges of the divine nature), in that kingdom. 
See Mark 14:25, Luke 22:16. 

For the sake of our many new readers, we mention that it has for 
some years been our custom to "do this" "as often" as its 
anniversary recurs; preserving so far as possible the simplicity of 
the early church and of the first occasion as instituted by our 
Lord. The Church in this city will meet at our usual place, the 
"Upper Room" of No. 101 Federal street, Allegheny City. We 
shall, as heretofore, welcome all who are the Lord's disciples all 
who appreciate the broken body and shed blood, to meet with us, 
that we may together commemorate our ransom. 

We cannot all meet here, but we can all meet with our Lord, and 
in the communion of heart we shall have fellowship one with 
another and with our Head and with our Father, while realizing 
that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin. Where 
two or three are met in Jesus name, the Head will be present and 
a blessing ensue. 

As we break the bread which represents our Lord's body, let us 
not forget that by his appointment we are now members of His 
body, and as such are to be broken also. As we drink of the 
emblem of his sacrificed life by which we are justified, let us not 
forget that we are called to share the cup with him, thus 
partaking in symbol of his death. By his grace we shall indeed 
drink of his cup and then share his glory. Matt. 20:22,23. 

It is to this, the Apostle refers in 1 Cor. 10:16-18. Those priests 
who ate of the sacrifice, were the ones which did the sacrificing 
and whom the sacrifices represented. "The cup of blessing which 
we bless is it not the communion [sharing] of the blood of 
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion 
[sharing] of the body of Christ? For we being many, are one 
bread [loaf] and one body: for we are all partakers of that one 
bread [loaf]." Let none partake thoughtlessly of the emblems but 
with attentive, earnest hearts let each endeavor to realize not 



only his share in the benefits resulting from Jesus sacrifice, but 
also as a result, his share afterward with Jesus in sacrifice. 

Our meeting will be at 8 o'clock at the location mentioned above, 
Sunday evening March, 29. 



R721 : page 2 

"GOD gives you the best nourishment, although not always the 
sweetest to the taste." 



COMPARE Rev. 17:5, with 1 Cor. 6:15,16, and decide 
whether you are joined to one of the daughters: Then judge of 
the Lord's will concerning the matter. 



R721 : page 3 



OUR MASTER. 

WHITTIER. 

No fable old, nor mythic lore, 
Nor dream of bards and seers, 
No dead fact stranded on the shore 
Of the oblivious years: 

But warm, sweet, tender, even yet, 
A present help is He, 
And faith has still its Olivet, 
And love its Galilee. 

The healing of His seamless dress 
Is by our beds of pain; 
We touch Him in life's throng and press, 
And we are whole again. 

O Lord and Master of us all! 
Whate'er our name or sign, 
We own Thy sway, we hear Thy call, 
We test our lives by Thine. 

Thou judgest us. Thy purity 
Doth all our lusts condemn. 
The love that draws us nearer Thee 
Is hot with wrath to them. 

We faintly hear, we dimly see, 
In different phrase we pray; 
But, dim or clear, we own in Thee 
The Light, the Truth, the Way. 



Our Friend, our Brother, and our Lord, 
What may Thy service be? 
Not name, nor form, nor ritual word, 
But simply following Thee." 



R721 : page 3 



FUTURE RETRIBUTION. 

While from past study of the Scriptures we have found that not 
the present age, but the age to come, is the world's judgment or 
trial day, the questions have doubtless occurred to many: To 
what extent are men of the world now accountable for their 
actions? and will their present actions be considered in their 
future trial? Will those of the world's children who are moral, 
honest, honorable, and even benevolent and charitable (for there 
are such) receive no reward in the future? and will those who are 
immoral, dishonest, selfish, and even criminal, receive no 
punishment for their evil deeds? 

These are important questions, especially to the world, and well 
would it be for them if they could realize their importance and 
profit thereby. They are important also to the Church, because 
of our interest in the world, and because of our desire to 
understand and teach correctly our Father's plans. 

We have learned that the sacrifice of Christ secures for all 
mankind, however vile, an awakening from death, and the 
privilege of thereafter coming to perfection and living forever if 
they will: "There shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the 
just and of the unjust" (Acts 24: 15). The object of their being 
again brought into existence will be to give them a favorable 
opportunity to secure everlasting life on the conditions which 
God requires obedience to his righteous will. We have no 
intimation whatever in the Scriptures that in the awakening there 
will be any change in the moral condition of men; but we have 
much, both in reason and in revelation, to show, that as they 
went into death, so they shall come out of it. As there is "no 
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave" 
(Eccl. 9:10), they will have learned nothing. The Millennial Age 
is the time allotted for the world's awakening, discipline and trial 
under the reign of Christ. 

R722 : page 3 

While strictly speaking, the world is not now on trial: that is, 
the present is not the time for their full and complete trial, yet 
men are not now, nor ever have been, entirely without light and 
ability, for which they are accountable. In the darkest days of 
the world's history, and in the deepest degradation of savage life, 



there has always been at least a measure of the light of 
conscience pointing more or less directly to righteousness and 
virtue. 

At the advent of Jesus an increased measure of light came to men 
which increased to that extent their responsibility, as Jesus said: 
"This is the condemnation, That light is come into the world, and 
men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were 
evil" (John 3:19). And for those evil deeds which men have 
committed against what light they had, or which it was their 
privilege to have, whether of conscience or of revelation, they 
will have to give an account, and receive a just recompense of 
reward in their day of judgment. And likewise to the extent of 
their effort to live righteously, they will receive their reward in 
the day of trial (Matt. 10:42). 

The age of Christ's reign will be a time of just judgment, and 
though it will be an age of golden opportunities, it will be a time 
of severe discipline, trial and punishment to many. The deeds of 
the present life will have much to do with the future. Paul taught 
this very clearly when, before Felix, he reasoned of justice and 
self-government in view of the judgment to come, so that Felix 
trembled (Acts 24:25. Dia.). 

If men would consider what even reason must teach them, that a 
time of reckoning, of judgment, is coming; that God will not 
forever permit evil to triumph, but that in some way he will 
punish evil-doers, it would undoubtedly save them many sorrows 
and chastisements in the age to come. "Woe," saith the Prophet, 
"unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, 
and their works are in the dark, and they say, Who seeth us? and 
who knoweth us?" (Isaiah 29:15.) Behold, "The eyes of the Lord 
are in every place, beholding the evil and the good" (Prov. 15:3); 
and "God shall bring every work into judgment, with every 
secret thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil." Eccl. 
12:14. He "will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and 
make manifest the counsels of the hearts." 1 Cor. 4:5. 

That the judgment will be fair and impartial, and with due 
consideration for the opportunities of each, is also vouchsafed by 
the character of the Judge (The Christ- John 5:22; 1 Cor. 6:2), by 
his perfect knowledge, by his unwavering justice and goodness, 
by his divine power, and by his great love as shown in his 
sacrifice to redeem men from death, that they might enjoy the 
privilege of a favorable individual trial. 

The varied circumstances and opportunities of men in this and 
past ages, indicate that a just judgment will recognize differences 
in the degree of individual responsibility, which will also 
necessitate differences in the Lord's future dealings with them. 
And this reasonable deduction we find clearly confirmed by the 
Scriptures. The Judge has been, and still is, taking minute 
cognizance of men's actions and words, although they have been 



entirely unaware of it (Prov. 5:21), and he declares that "Every 
idle ["pernicious," injurious or malicious] word that men shall 
speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment" 
(Matt. 12:36); and that even a cup of cold water given to one of 
his little ones, shall in no wise lose its reward (10:42). The 
context shows that the pernicious words to which Jesus referred 
were words of willful and malicious opposition spoken against 
manifest light. Vs. 24,31,32. 

Jesus also affirmed that it would be more tolerable for Tyre, 
Sidon and Sodom in the day of judgment than for Chorazin, 
Bethsaida and Capernaum, which had misimproved greater 
advantages of light and opportunity. Matt. 11:20-24. 

In the very nature of things, we can see that the future 
punishments will be in proportion to past guilt. Every sin 
indulged, and every evil propensity cultivated, hardens the heart 
and makes the way back to purity and virtue more difficult, and 
consequently sins willfully indulged now will require 
punishment and discipline in the age to come; and the more 
deeply the soul is dyed in willing sin, the more severe will be the 
measures required to correct it. As a wise parent would punish a 
wayward child, so Christ will punish the wicked for their good. 

His punishments will always be administered in justice, 
tempered with mercy, and relieved by his approval and reward to 
those who are rightly exercised thereby. And it will only be 
when punishments, instructions and encouragements fail; in 
short, when love and mercy have done all that wisdom can 
approve (which is all that could be asked), that any will meet the 
final punishment which their case demands- the second death. 

None of the world will meet that penalty until they have first had 
all the blessed opportunities of the age to come. And while this is 
true of the world, the same principles applies now to the 
consecrated children of God in this OUR judgment [trial] day. 
We now receive God's favors (through faith) while the world 
will receive them in the next age, viz.: instruction, assistance, 
encouragement, discipline and punishments. "For, what son is 
he whom the Father chasteneth not? But if ye be without 
chastening, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards and 
not sons." 

Therefore, we when we receive grievous chastisement, should 
accept it as from a loving Father for our correction, not 
forgetting "the exhortation which speaketh unto us as unto 
children, My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, 
nor faint when thou art rebuked of him; for whom the Lord 
loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he 
receiveth" (Read Heb. 12:4-13.) 

How just and equal are God's ways ! Read carefully the rules of 
the coming age-Jer. 31:29-34 and Ezek. 18:20-32. They prove 
to us, beyond the possibility of a doubt, the sincerity and reality 



of all his professions of love to men: "As I live, saith the Lord 
God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the 
wicked turn from his way and live: Turn ye, turn ye from your 
evil ways, for why will ye die?" Ezek. 33:11. 

If men in this life repent of sin, and as the term repentance 
implies, begin and continue the work of reformation to the best 
of their ability, they will reap the benefit of so doing in the age to 
come; they will in the resurrection age be to that extent advanced 
towards perfection, and their progress will be more rapid and 
easy, while with others it will be more slow, tedious and 
difficult. This is implied in the words of Jesus (John 5:29,30 - 
Diaglott), "The hour is coming in the which all that are in their 
graves shall hear his voice and shall come forth; they that have 
done good unto the resurrection of life" [those whose trial is past 
and who were judged worthy of life will be raised perfect the 
faithful of past ages to perfect human life, the overcomers of the 
gospel age to perfect life as divine beings], and "they that have 
done evil, unto the resurrection of judgment." [These are 
awakened to receive a course of discipline and correction- 
judgment as the necessary means for their perfecting.] 

The man who in this life, by fraud and injustice, accumulated 
and hoarded great wealth, which was scattered to the winds 
when he was laid in the dust, will doubtless awake to lament his 
loss, and bewail his poverty, and his utter inability under the new 
order of things to repeat unlawful measures to accumulate a 
fortune. It will be a severe chastisement and bitter experience 
with many to overcome the propensities to avarice, selfishness, 
pride, ambition and idleness, fostered and pampered for years in 
the present life. Occasionally we see an illustration of this form 
of punishment now, when a man of great wealth suddenly loses 
all, and the haughty spirit of himself and family must fall. 

We are told (Dan. 12:2) that some shall awake to shame and age 
lasting contempt. And who can doubt that when every secret 
thing is brought into judgment (Eccl. 12:14), and the dark side of 
many a character that now stands measurably approved among 
men is then made known, many a face will blush and hide itself 
in confusion from others. When the man that stole is required to 
earn and refund the stolen property to its rightful owner, with the 
addition of twenty per cent, interest, and the man that lied, 
deceived, falsely accused, and otherwise wronged his neighbor, 
is required to acknowledge his crimes and so far as possible 
repair damages, on peril of an eternal loss of life, will not this be 
retributive justice? See the clear statement of this in God's 
typical dealings with Israel whom he made to represent the 
world. (1 Cor. 10:11 and Lev. 6:1-7; also "Tab. Teachings," page 
52.) 

"But they that be wise"-the little flock who are wise enough to 
accept the present favor of God which permits us now to be 
joint-sacrificers, and by and by joint-heirs with Christ, these 



"shall shine as the brightness of the firmament" -the Sun. These 
shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father." Dan. 
12:2, and Matt. 13:43.) 

And there will also be some others who have endeavored to live 
in this life according to the light and opportunity granted them, 
and who tried to turn others to righteousness. Of this class were 
the prophets and other justified faithful ones of past ages, and 
some others, such as Socrates, Plato, Aristotle and Confucius, 
who enjoyed only the waning light of nature, but were faithful to 
that little light: These shall shine as the stars forever and ever. 
They will be notable, honorable and advanced because of 
faithfulness. These will always 

R723 : page 3 

be bright ones men and women of special honor because of 
their noble efforts to stem the tide of evil when the full force of 
the tide was against them. 

As we are thus permitted to look into the perfect plan of God, 
how forcibly we are reminded of his word through the prophet 
Isaiah, "Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to 
the plummet (Isaiah 28:17.) We may also see the wholesome 
influence of such discipline. Parents in disciplining their 
children realize the imperative necessity of making their 
punishments in proportion to the character of offenses; and so in 
God's government, great punishments following great offenses 
are not 

R723 : page 4 

greater than is necessary to establish justice and to effect so great 
a moral reform. 

Seeing that the Lord will thus equitably adjust human affairs in 
his own due time, and knowing the outcome of his plan, we can 
well afford to endure hardness for the present, and resist evil 
with good, even at the cost of present disadvantage. Therefore 
"Recompense to no man evil for evil." (Rom. 12:17-19.) "Let 
this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus our Lord." 

The present order of things will not always continue; a time of 
reckoning is coming, and the just Judge of all the earth says, 
"Vengeance is mine, I will repay"; and Peter adds, "The Lord 
knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to 
reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished." And 
as we have seen, those punishments will be adapted to the nature 
of the offences, and the benevolent object in view,-man's 
permanent establishment in righteousness. 

Other Scriptures corroborative of this view of future rewards and 
punishments are as follows: 2 Sam. 3:39; Matt. 16:27; 1 Pet. 
3:12; Psa. 19:11; 91:8; Prov. 11:18; Isa. 40:10; 49:4; Matt. 5:12; 
10:41,42; Luke 6:35; Rev. 22:12; Rom. 14:11,12. 



R723 : page 4 

FORGIVABLE AND UNPARDONABLE SINS. 

In view of the foregoing review of Future Retribution, some 
may inquire, If for every pernicious word and every willful 
misdeed, an account must be rendered and a punishment 
inflicted, wherein consists the forgiveness of sins, of which so 
much is said in Scripture? Does Scripture teach a difference 
between sins that some are forgivable and others unpardonable? 

We answer, that under the provisions of God's law of life, no sin 
is excusable; perfect obedience righteousness, is the only 
condition of perfect life and happiness. Under this law the entire 
race was judged representatively in Adam, and through his 
willful disobedience, condemned to death destruction as 
unworthy of life, and the penalty-death- passed upon all. (Rom. 
5:12.) They cannot be excused nor pardoned. The penalty is the 
just expression of the will and the law of God toward man-"The 
wages of sin is death." 

But to give exercise to His love without varying or impairing his 
justice or his righteous and wise law, God arranged the plan by 
which Jesus as His agent became the Redeemer or Purchaser of 
the race, by becoming a man and tasting death FOR every man 
and thus gaining the right to set at liberty all the prisoners, in his 
own time and way, without opposition to or hindrance from 
Justice and its requirements. 

Having obtained control and right to be master, owner, and Lord 
of all, Jesus will exonerate or grant forgiveness and remission of 
sins to all the race. He will however, require each individual to 
apply for the exoneration for himself, in order that each may 
fully realize his necessity and dependence, as well as the Lord's 
bounty in this free gift of justification, which he purchased for 
them with his own blood. He did all the purchasing; to them it is 
free for the asking and accepting. 

This then is the forgiveness presented in the Bible-the free gift 
of God THROUGH Jesus Christ our Lord. Jehovah does not set 
aside his law to forgive: He could not: to revoke or set aside his 
laws, would be to unsettle his kingdom by the King antagonizing 
its laws himself. But his great gift to sinners, was Jesus, whose 
sacrificial death bought or ransomed man from death. 

But for what did Jesus die? Not to grant sanction and license to 
sin and sinners. Not to permit men to continue to sin, but to 
release them from the injuries and penalties of their 
representative's failure; and in hope that the experience thus 
gained, might help each individual in the new trial, which by 
virtue of the ransom given, he wills, and has the right to give 
them-an individual trial. 



If this be true, the sacrifice of Jesus while covering "many 
offences" (Rom. 5:16) covers and is the basis of forgiveness to 
only such offences as come more or less directly as a result of 
Adam's disobedience and fall. Hence it does not cover such sins 
as are not the results of Adamic weakness. It does not cover 
WILLFUL SINS, against light and ability. 

While, therefore, we recognize this clear distinction between the 
two classes of sin, we must not forget that the depravity resulting 
from the "fall" and impairment of the moral as well as physical 
qualities of human nature, furnishes a tendency toward willful 
sin, even when the surrounding circumstances do not entirely 
mislead the judgment. Not being able to fully appreciate the 
weight and influence of circumstances, and depravity, is one 
reason why we may not decide against some whose professions 
and actions widely differ; we must, therefore, "judge nothing 
before the time." 

Nevertheless Scripture lays down certain marks by which we 
must judge those whose professions and actions are at 
agreement. "Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee." The 
Lord in Matt. 12:31, and the apostles in Heb. 6:4,6, and 10:26-29 
and 1 John 5:16 point out unforgivable sins, and in the light of 
our foregoing remarks we trust all may be able to see to why 
these sins can not be forgiven, and do not come under the class 
for which a ransom was given by Jesus. 

Our Lord addressed the Pharisees; in their presence he had 
healed the sick, cured the blind and lame, cast out devils, and 
even raised the dead; and though depravity through the "fall" 
might have so blinded them that they could not accept of Jesus as 
the promised Messiah, they were certainly inexcusable for 
saying as a last resort when they could find no fault- "We know 
that this man hath a devil" and casts out devils by the power of 
Beelzebub the prince of devils, v. 24. Such a manifestation of 
hatred, malice and opposition to light came not through the "fall" 
and cannot be forgiven as such, and so Jesus informs them: "All 
manner of sin and blasphemy [malicious words of opposition v. 
36] shall be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy against the 
holy spirit shall not be forgiven unto men." They might reject 
Jesus and speak evil of him, misunderstanding him and his 
mission; but when a demonstration of the power [spirit] of God 
in doing a good work was manifested, though they might not 
have received it as a proof of Jesus' claims, they were 
inexcusable for attributing it to Satanic power. 

If then, that blasphemy shall not be forgiven them, neither in this 
world [age Jesus miracles and preaching were the 
commencement of the Gospel age as he is the head of the Gospel 
church] neither in the future, [age occurs but once in this text], 
what shall we say of those Pharisees, have they no hope for 
future life? We answer, they are not without hope; the blood of 
Christ was still applicable to cleanse from all Adamic sin, and 



though they shall never be forgiven for this willful opposition to, 
and blasphemy of God's holy power they may expiate that sin. 
That is to say they shall receive "stripes" or punishment in 
proportion to the willfulness of each of them. 

A prisoner condemned to one year's imprisonment applies to the 
Governor for a pardon; it is refused; nevertheless when the limit 
of his condemnation has expired he will be released, having 
expiated his offense. This serves as an illustration of how a sin 
might be expiated and the sinner survive. It should be noted 
however that if the penalty were death there could be no 
survival. 

Next comes the question can all unforgivable sins be thus 
expiated and the sinner survive? We answer, No. The penalty 
for the Pharisees' willful sin was stripes and not (second) death, 
because, though sinning against light, it was not against full and 
perfect light and knowledge. To have acted and spoken as they 
did under full appreciation would have been punishable only 
with the full "wages of sin-death." 

To some it may occur that they were "blinded" by sin and Satan, 
and hence not at all responsible for their course. To this we 
reply, that while it is freely admitted by all, and the Scriptures 
plainly declare, that blindness in part is upon all the children of 
Adam through the fall, yet from Jesus' words we must conclude 
that these Pharisees were not totally blind. None except idiots 
and maniacs are totally blind. It was to these same Pharisees that 
Jesus said "If I had not done among you the works which none 
other man did ye had not had sin." "This is the condemnation - 
that light is come into the world and men love darkness rather 
than light." (Jno. 15:24, and 3:19.) If you were blind totally you 
would not have been responsible but now you admit that you see 
some, therefore you have sin. Jno. 9:41. 

The sacrifice of Christ will be applicable to cleanse from and 
forgive, all sin and results of sinful influences which are the 
results of Adam's fall. A ransom was provided because Adam 
and his race 

R724 : page 4 

had not fully appreciated the results of sin "in hope" (Rom. 8:20) 
that many after having experienced would appreciate and shun 
sin and its wages. But these Pharisees and the entire race have 
by experience obtained that knowledge. That they were blinded 
by their own willful prejudice beyond that prejudice engendered 
by the fall, is evident, because while they ascribed Jesus' works 
to Satan, others no less depraved, asked, "Can a devil open the 
eyes of the blind?" "For no man can do these miracles... unless 
God be with him." Jno. 10:21, 3:2. 

Their sin was incomplete-not unto death because, first, they had 
not yet come in contact with all the light, truth and evidence 



which God considers necessary to a trial for LIFE; and secondly, 
because of a measure of blindness, they had not fully 
appreciated, the light against which they sinned. Hence, we 
repeat, the sin of each of them was proportioned to his wilfulness 
in opposing what he did discern, and this is unforgivable in any 
age. 

Others may suggest, that if the Pharisees shall and may expiate 
or suffer the penalty of their measure of willful sin so may 
others. Just so, we respond, and it is because the world will be 
thus punished that Scripture informs of the many and few stripes 
(Luke 12:47,48), in the age to come; and that "God knoweth how 
to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished." 
What we need constantly to have in mind however, is, that the 
punishment will be a "just recompense of reward" upon every 
soul that doeth evil. 

But if such sins against only a measure of responsibility and light 
may be expiated, why might not such a course have been 
adopted with Adam? why might not he and others have expiated 
sin by sufferings and thus no ransom price have been needed? 
Has God changed? Does he now say sin may be expiated by the 
sinner and did he then say, Sin cannot be expiated, the very 
EXISTENCE of the sinner is the penalty? 

No God has not changed-neither his laws which represent him- 
"I am the same and change not." (Mai. 3:6.) The difference is 
this: Adam was perfect, not fallen, not blinded in the least 
degree, and in his purity, innocency and holiness had no 
sectarian system to uphold and no proud theory to maintain: the 
Pharisees were greatly fallen, very imperfect, and much blinded. 
Adam had full intercourse and communion with Jehovah, 
witnessed his power in his own perfect talents, and had the law 
of God inwrought in his very nature was a moral image of God 
in flesh. The Pharisees had in common with all others of the 
fallen race lost the intercourse and communion: The moral image 
was well-nigh effaced, the heart of flesh had turned to stone and 
the law of God written thereon had been almost obliterated. 

Hence, for the perfect Adam to sin wilfully against perfect and 
unquestioned evidences was in the fullest sense sin, and justly 
received the fullest penalty-not stripes, but death-extinction. 
He has been under that penalty ever since condemned to it. The 
penalty commenced with the process of dying, and for over five 
thousand years he has been subjected to the full penalty of his 
transgression, death. He would have so continued, dead to all 
eternity, had not a substitute given himself a ransom, and taken 
his place in death. And this is true of all the race whom Adam 
represented in the first trial. 

Just so with the second death. It is the penalty of full, complete 
and willful transgression against full, complete knowledge and 
ability. It is evident, then, that the Pharisees did not commit sin 



unto death because of lack of light and ability, and just as 
evident that any one through the acceptance of the ransom fully 
recovered out of the degradation and imperfections resulting 
from Adam's transgression and brought to a full, realizing sense 
of his relationship to God, etc., COULD commit the sin unto 
death-the second death, by willful sin against light and ability, 
or by a willful rejection of the ransom-sacrifice, through faith in 
which, they had once been released from Adamic guilt and 
penalty. 

In view of the foregoing the question arises, could anyone 
commit the willful sin and come under the penalty of the second 
death until they had first been entirely freed from every result of 
the Adamic death? Could such willful sin against full 
knowledge, ability and light be committed in the Gospel age- 
must it not belong exclusively to the Millennial age? 

It would seem so, at first thought. But the Scriptures point out a 
small very small class, which could commit this sin now. That 
it is a very small class in the church, is evident from the apostles 
description of the advantages and knowledge they must first 
have enjoyed, as recorded in Heb. 6:4-6. Those who 

R724 : page 5 

have been once enlightened [whose eyes have been opened]; 
who have tasted of the heavenly gift [realized and enjoyed 
forgiveness of sins through the redemption in Jesus, whom God 
gave to be a propitiation for our sins]; who have been made 
partakers of the holy spirit [and thus come to appreciate God's 
holy will and have full fellowship and communion with him as 
Adam had before the fall]; who have tasted the good word of 
God [appreciating the richness and sweetness of its promises- 
which but few yet do]; who have tasted also the powers of the 
age to come [come to realize the powers which will in the next 
age hold sway and restore and bless the dead race both in and 
out of the tomb]; If such shall fall away, it is impossible to renew 
them again unto repentance. 

They have fully enjoyed all the blessings and privileges secured 
to any by the ransom, and have made no use of them. Such 
would really be making the redemption provided through Jesus 
sacrifice of no value to themselves by failure to make use of the 
privileges and blessings offered. Thus in act they put Christ to 
an open shame, as though they said: You died and redeemed us 
but we spurn and reject the privileges and opportunity thus 
afforded. Such do wilfully what the Roman soldiers did 
ignorantly viz., reject and crucify him who laid down his life on 
their behalf. 

Is it asked, How could these described by the apostle be said to 
have enjoyed fully all the blessings resultant from Jesus ransom, 
during this age? We reply that here comes in the province of 
faith. By faith they grasped the heavenly gift and realized that 



they were redeemed by his precious blood. By faith they tasted 
and appreciated the goodness of the promises of God's Word, 
realized the powers of the coming age and partook of the mind or 
spirit of God. All the imperfections resultant from the Adamic 
fall were reckoned covered, with the perfection of their 
Redeemer who gave himself for all; and every good endeavor, 
ever so imperfect in itself was reckoned as a perfect work when 
presented covered with the righteousness of the Redeemer. His 
righteousness imputed to our sanctified efforts makes them 
acceptable as perfect before our heavenly Father. Without his 
merit attached our efforts and sacrifices would be unacceptable 
as shown in the argument of the same apostle, Heb. 10:26,29. 

He here shows another class liable to the second-death. He 
addresses still the saints and speaks specially of those who have 
fully received by faith the privileges accruing through the 
ransom. He assures them that any who reject the blood of Christ- 
-the price of their redemption -counting the blood of the 
covenant wherewith they had been sanctified common and 
ordinary and not specially sacred and precious, attempting to 
stand in their own righteousness ignoring Christ's ransom, have 
no longer any interest in the sacrifice for sins. If the rejection of 
the typical mediator, Moses, was worthy of death, of how much 
sorer [greater] punishment will such as despise the sacrifice 
offered by the great antitypical Mediator be thought worthy? is 
the apostles query. 

The despisers of Moses' arrangements [see Lev. 10:1-3] who 
attempted to present themselves before the Lord with 
unauthorized incense of their own instead of that authorized, 
which represented Christ's righteousness, perished- died. But 
this was merely a hastening to completion of the Adamic death 
penalty already in force against them, hence not so serious as the 
matter which it typified-the rejection of the real incense or merit 
of the better sacrifice and its penalty the second-death from 
which there is no hope of a resurrection. 

In view of this argument which he presents, no wonder the 
Apostle concludes that, "It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands 
of the living God." (v. 31.) God has expressed to us his 
abhorrence of sin and his intention to utterly root it out, at the 
same time providing a ransom, a way of escape by which we 
may be freely justified: but, if we after coming to a full 
knowledge and appreciation of His gracious provision wilfully 
ignore and reject the sin-offering which God provided for us, we 
dishonor God and the Lamb and go out from the protection 
provided, into the fiery indignation which devours [destroys] 
God's adversaries. 

Nor can the reasonableness of this, God's plan, be questioned. 
Such as are once fully enlightened, as described Heb. 6:4-6, and 
then wilfully reject God's favors whether by open sin or by a 
denial of the value of the "blood of the covenant," could not 



evidently be benefitted by a continuance of God's favor, seeing 
they have had, full and abundant opportunity. Besides this, the 
Apostle declares: "It is impossible to renew them again unto 
repentance." What is impossible could not be accomplished in a 
million ages, and would not be attempted by our God of infinite 
wisdom. 

Now, casting our minds backward and keeping in mind the 
DIVERSIFIED WISDOM OF GOD (See Dec'r. issue.), let us 
notice that God could have dealt otherwise than as he did with 
man, but not according to his wisdom. 

R725 : page 5 

We cannot but suppose that "Those angels which kept not their 
first estate" sinned wilfully against light and knowledge, and 
therefore, that they, as well as the Adamic race, had both been 
put under the same law, would have been punished also with 
death. This must not lead us to suppose God's laws variable or 
unequal, for as shown in our Dec. issue, it has always been God's 
mind that willful sin shall be punished with death, but thus far 
this law has only been placed over mankind they being made a 
"spectacle" or example to angels, who, meantime, have not been 
placed under the full and final penalty of the law. But they shall 
eventually be under the same law after they have witnessed the 
full outworkings of good and evil, obedience and disobedience, 
as illustrated in mankind. 

We also saw in that issue, that the favor of God granted to "those 
angels," in giving them experience with sin and an illustration of 
its final results, before placing them under the full law and its 
penalty, was amply compensated for or balanced by his favor to 
man in granting him a redemption and recovery from his first 
offense, through Christ Jesus a ransom. 

In conclusion, the sin unto death is not one act of one moment. 
None could happen to commit it. It is not a "slip" or a "stumble" 
which constitutes the sin unto death. The slips, happenings and 
stumblings are evidently occasioned by our inherited 
imperfection; they are among the injuries occasioned by the 
Adamic "fall," and are all fully covered and fully forgivable, and 
cleansable by the application of the precious blood of "the Lamb 
of God which taketh away THE sin of the world. " Every evil, 
whether in act, word or thought, or every propensity toward evil 
inherited by us, is fully atoned for by Jesus already. (Rom. 5:19.) 
And all that remains is for us to acknowledge his ransom work 
and apply for our share in its results. 

The sin which is unto death is a complete rejection of God's 
favors, against full light and understanding; and only the very 
few, the saints, could possibly do this at present, because only 
they have the light and appreciation necessary. In due time all 
shall come to this full knowledge, and then whosoever will, may 
obey and live forever. 



R725 : page 5 



WILLFUL SINS. 



It may be asked, What if in business or on any other account, 
one should tell that which he knows to be untrue and not from 
Adamic weakness, etc., but wilfully and deliberately, to 
misrepresent- Is such a sin unforgivable? 

We answer No. To our understanding such a sin is not covered 
by the ransom. But we doubt if there be such sins as this often 
committed, if ever. It is usually in the heat of discussion, or in 
the anxiety to make a trade, that for the moment the more 
depraved elements of the being carry away as by storm the better 
qualities which in the fallen condition are the weaker. 

Notice the reasonableness of this. If the man should sin wilfully, 
and premediatedly, and should thus gain five dollars and should 
apply to God for forgiveness and remission of his sin because of 
Jesus' sacrifice, and if it should be thus forgiven, and if he 
continue so to do, it would be making Jehovah and Jesus parties 
to and abettors of his evil deeds-an evident absurdity. 

On the contrary, no man or woman can wilfully commit sin 
while under the control of the Spirit of Christ. And should such 
be overtaken in a fault; it would certainly be the result of the 
weakness of the flesh. When such would discover the error of 
their way, they would not only apply for remission through the 
precious blood of cleansing, but would under the exercise of true 
repentance confess and repair the wrong to the extent of their 
ability. Wrong doing under such circumstances would be too 
expensive to be willingly indulged. 



R725 : page 5 



SATAN'S OUTLOOK. 



Some are inquiring: If there is hope for "those angels who kept 
not their first estate" may there not be hope for Satan that he may 
yet be reclaimed? If not, why not? 

We reply that it is for any who so think to produce the passage of 
Scripture which holds out one ray of hope for Satan. It is not 
incumbent on us to prove that he will not be saved, for this may 
reasonably be assumed if no hope is held out for him in 
Scripture. Nevertheless we believe our position so strong, that 
we will take the offensive and say that it can be demonstrated 
from Scripture that Satan will not be permitted to exist beyond 
the Millennial age. 



Does some one suggest that as we once thought there was no 
hope for "those angels," yet were mistaken, so we may be 
mistaken about Satan? We reply that it was the very positive 
declarations of Scripture about the utter destruction of Satan, that 
we applied ignorantly once to "those angels," not rightly dividing 
the word of truth." Those Scriptures still stand unchallenged, 
against Satan. We must not throw away Scripture because once 
too widely applied. So too we once too widely applied Rev. 20:8, 
and supposed that Satan's host, of finally impenitent ones at the 
close of the Millennium would be a great multitude "as the sand 
of the sea," but a closer examination and better division of the 
word of truth convinces us-not that Satan will have no followers 
or "goats," (Matt. 25:33) nor that this Scripture is at fault, but 
that the words "the number of whom is as the sand of the sea" 
refers not to those whom Satan will lead into sin and destruction, 
but to the whole population of the earth at that time, all of whom, 
Satan shall attempt to mislead. He shall be successful only with 
the goat class, which will thus be manifested and separated for 
the destruction mentioned in the succeeding verse. 

Regarding Satan: From the curse on the Serpent his agent and 
representative in nature, down to the vivid pen-pictures of the 
apocalypse, every statement regarding his destiny, either 
pointedly or plainly as in Heb. 2:14, and Rom. 16:20, or 
symbolically, as in Rev. 20:10,15; and Matt. 25:41,46, all tell the 
one story, viz.: The proud, haughty prince of evil, whose 
rebellion and evil intent God has used and overruled to his 
service, is, in the end of the Millennial age, when good can no 
longer be served through his permitted existence, to be totally 
and forever destroyed. 

Nor can a judgment illuminated and guided by Scripture do 
otherwise than approve this sentence. 

The fact of Satan's opposition to good seems to some an 
evidence that he was either created a devil, or has undergone a 
moral change which should be corrected. But an examination 
will, we think, show the incorrectness of both suggestions. 

First, God in the very nature of things could not create a devil, 
for the same reason that a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit. 
Therefore Satan in his first estate must have left the Creator's 
hand perfect. We should remember that God's method in the 
creation of intelligent creatures, is to give full freedom of choice 
to do good or evil, that such may, like himself, do right because 
it is right. Thus the first and representative man had full freedom 
of choice to do good or evil. His rejection of what God told him 
was good and choice of the reverse, has proved to many of us the 
wisdom of God's judgment concerning good and evil. When 
restored to perfect manhood at the close of the Millennium, the 
restored race will again have the choice of good or evil before 
them and finally. (Rev. 20:7-15.) 



Secondly, Satan so far as we are informed has undergone no 
dying or deteriorating process, hence is as perfect as when 
created, and could not be restored to a perfection not lost. A 
perfect, intelligent being by the same perfection, can either love 
or hate, and can use his powers in harmony with either good or 
evil. Thus Christ, before he became a man, had the same liberty 
and ability that Satan possesses, to either do good or evil. This 
liberty is indicated by the Apostle in Phil. 2:6. Who, being in the 
form of God, [spiritual] did not meditate a usurpation [of 
Jehovah's power and authority] to be equal with God, but [on the 
contrary, and in direct opposition to such a self-exaltation, he] 
humbled himself [in obedience to the divine will], etc.-Diaglott. 

Nothing is clearer from this, than that he could have chosen the 
opposite course of self-exaltation, which Satan chose. The 
Apostle's language here suggests 

R725 : page 6 

the contrast between the courses of these two perfect spiritual 
beings. One sought to exalt self, saying: "I will be AS the Most 
High;" the other, willingly took a lower, a human plane of being, 
to accomplish obediently the will of the Most High. Pride was 
Satan's choice and course; humility was the course and choice of 
him who was the beginning of the creation of God. Both will 
find the fruit God foretold. "God resisteth the proud, but giveth 
grace unto the humble." (James 4:6.) Him (Jesus) hath God 
highly exalted. By a right use of his perfect powers, in harmony 
with Jehovah's will, Jesus has gained the very 

R726 : page 6 

thing-the high exaltation to be as [like] the Most High, which 
Satan coveted and endeavored to grasp, while he, God says, shall 
get the reward of his course Pride leadeth to destruction. 

Does some one suggest that Satan ought to have another trial? 
What advantage could he have that he does not possess? We 
ask, If none, what could be the object or benefit of such other 
trial? Man will be benefitted by being restored to a perfection 
lost, but so far as we can judge from Scripture, Satan has not lost 
any of his powers, hence could not have them restored and could 
not be thus advantaged. Man has learned valuable lessons of the 
sinfulness and injuriousness of sin and disobedience, and all the 
human race labors, groans, waits and hopes for the better day 
promised. Their experience with sin, counterbalanced by an 
experience in righteousness, will evidently convince the large 
majority that "righteousness exalteth a nation, but sin is a 
reproach to any people." (Prov. 14:34.) And when the Lord's 
standard is set up in that Millennial Day many shall go and say: 
"He will teach us of his ways and we will walk in his paths." 
But of Satan what shall we say? He has seen the evil which he 
brought upon man. He has witnessed the sin, depravity, 
suffering, wretchedness, and death working havoc for four 



thousand years, yet pitied and repented not, but the reverse. 
When, then, the Redeemer appeared, to give himself a ransom 
for all, he beset him and endeavored to dissuade him and tempt 
him and cause him to fall. 

Not only the head but the members of the body he has beset and 
opposed. He so completely controlled and used the Roman 
Empire that symbolically it is sometimes called by his name the 
devil and Satan; and thus and through its successor, Papacy, he 
wielded a terrible persecuting power against the saints of the 
most high God. He is the same still, opposing through all whom 
he can use in his service, (1 Pet. 5:8,) "the Lamb of God that 
taketh away the sin of the world." (John 1:29.) 

This is what we know of his course, past and present. It is one 
unbroken course of evil, in opposition to the blaze of light and 
knowledge. And what we might have surmised of his future, 
judging by his past course, the sure word of prophecy clearly 
foretells, viz.: that when restrained from evil-doing for the 
thousand years of Christ's glorious reign, and made to witness 
the grand benefits conferred upon men through their Lord and 
Redeemer, all this not only fails to lead Satan to repentance, but 
upon the first opportunity, immediately that the restraint is 
removed, he engages afresh in his former work of exalting 
himself and opposing God and his laws. Then shall the full 
penalty of God's law be let fall upon him who richly deserves it- 
destruction. (Rev. 20:15.) 

It should not be forgotten that the Apocalypse is a symbolic 
prophecy. It tells of things not as they may happen to come to 
pass, but accurately as they shall surely come to pass. Hence it 
is not its teaching that Satan might not change during the 
Millennial reign, but it absolutely shows that he will not repent 
or change. This prophecy of our risen Lord (Rev. 1:1) is no less 
sure of fulfillment than the statements of any other prophet. 
Hence we conclude, there is no doubt or question possible on 
this subject, except it be to question the divine record. 



R726 : page 6 



AGES TO COME. 



But questions some one, How do we know that there are not 
other, perhaps many ages of probation, beyond the Millennial 
age? Does not Paul mention it thus in the plural-"The ages to 
come"? 

Yes, Paul mentions ages in the plural, but neither Paul nor any 
Scripture writer, speaks of probation during ages to come. It is 
as grievous an error to be ignorant of what the Apostle says of 
those ages, as to be as so many are, ignorant of the fact that 
future ages are mentioned. 



Paul says that God In the ages to come will show the exceeding 
riches of his grace and loving kindness toward us in Christ Jesus. 
During this age God tells us of his love, but he has not yet 
"shown" or manifested it. He loves all, and will show his love 
for all, but The Church, head and body-all in Christ- are greatly 
beloved, and in and on and to these he will manifest the 
exceeding riches of his favor and loving-kindness exalting and 
honoring this anointed body. It will commence with the 
Millennial age, and when its work is complete, man and his earth 
home made perfect and the kingdom delivered up to God (1 Cor. 
15:27,28,) then, says the Apostle, there is yet more honor and 
glory to be revealed upon and through this glorious Christ, each 
step in God's plan, each age opening up a further development of 
God's unending programme, and furnishing fresh opportunity for 
the display of more and more of the exceeding riches of 
Jehovah's grace and loving-kindness toward us, in Christ Jesus. 

But nothing in those words mention probation, and nothing in 
Scripture even hints of it, beyond the "times of restitution" -the 
Millennial age. 

If God has appointed times (or years) of restitution and limited 
their number to one thousand, and declares that then Christ will 
deliver up the kingdom to the Father (1 Cor. 15:27,28,) who 
could not accept of anything imperfect, then on the reliable 
authority of these statements, we may assert most positively that 
there will be no probation beyond that time. 

We believe that none can produce a single passage of Scripture 
that will contradict these Scriptures, or by any reasonable 
interpretation set aside their plain significance. 

God's revelation closes with the symbolic presentation of the 
blessings of that age, and winds up by showing that during it, all 
who will to have life, shall have it, freely, and those who will not 
conform to God's law shall be utterly destroyed. And as though 
to make it doubly clear and to prove to us beyond question the 
end of evil and its train of pain and misery and death, it is 
written: There shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor 
crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former 
things are passed away. (Rev. 21:4,5.) 



R727 : page 6 



A METHODIST BISHOP'S OPINION. 

Brother MacMillen, in a private letter suggests the following 
points which are worthy of notice. He says: 

"What think you of Bishop Foster's sermon (about eleven 
columns long) delivered before the Centennial Conference. Is it 
not a little gold and much clay? He utters some facts which we 



who have no titles would be denounced for saying. He says, 'I 
have the most profound conviction that one of the most crying 
needs of the Church of God today, if not the greatest, is a revival 
of the spirit and fervor of religion in the pulpit, and sorry I am to 
say it, in no pulpit is it more needed than in our own. The people 
are hungry, and for bread they are fed on HUSKS-worse than 
that often, mere wind and sound.' 

Well do I remember when I was severely criticised for uttering 
almost the same words. After speaking of the spiritually half- 
dead pastors and churches, the Bishop exclaims-'Oh for the 
awakening of the pulpits of Christendom!' 

In speaking of the creeds he says: 'We are safe in saying that up 
to date there is no perfect creed we even doubt if there ever will 
be.' Then a little farther on we are surprised to hear him say, 
'The Church has no treasure which it must so carefully guard as 
its creed. It is its Sheet-anchor, its foundation, its life blood, its 
very soul.' 

This to my mind is nothing less than an acknowledgement that 
the creed or foundation, or life blood, or soul of the nominal 
church is imperfect and impure. 

I would like to suggest to the Bishop that the true Church has a 
perfect creed, viz.-the Bible that it has no treasure that can be 
compared to God's Word. 

The Bishop is beginning to see (using his words) 'Signs that our 
Protestant Christianity is losing hold of what are called the 
masses, drifting away from humanity' that it 'can no more be 
disputed that it has a tendency to separate poor and rich at the 
altars of God'-that it  'is the religion of the respectable.' 

This sermon is a wonderful mixture of clay and gold. 

There are points both good and bad to which I would like to call 
attention, but time and space forbid." 



R726 : page 6 

THE LORDSHIP OF CHRIST. 

Lord signifies master, ruler, governor. Lordship signifies 
dominion, power, authority.. .."For to this end Christ both died 
and rose and revived, that he might be Lord, both of the dead and 
living." Rom. 14:7-9. 

1. The fact is stated "Christ is Lord of both living and 
dead." 

2. How he became Lord: By death and resurrection. 

3. Our responsibility: Being his we ought to obey him. 



The reference in this text is to Christians, Christ DIED FOR 
ALL, and therefore has a claim upon the obedience of all. A 
Christian is one that recognizes the claims, and yields 
obedience.... His power over mankind is secured by the Ransom. 
Definition:- 

Ransom (verb), to recover by paying the price. 

Ransom (noun), the price paid for recovery. 

The ransom has relation to the thing bought as its equivalent. 
Note the value of Christ's death. "There is one God, and one 
Mediator between God and men, the MAN Christ Jesus, who 
gave himself a ransom for all to be testified in due time. " 1 Tim. 
2:5,6. Human for human is the legal ransom. He became a man 
that he might "give his life (Gr., psuchee-the natural life), a 
ransom for many." Matt. 20:28. It was the human life. "We see 
Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels, for the 
suffering of death;... that he by the grace of God might taste 
death for every man. Heb. 2:9. 

"He took not the nature of angels, but he took on him the seed of 
Abraham." Ver. 16. 

This enabled him both to sympathize with and to redeem. 
"Forasmuch as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he 
also himself took part of the same (not that he might die for 
himself, as one of us, but) that through death he might 
destroy... the devil and deliver" from death those who, while they 
lived, were afraid to die. (See verses 14,15.) 

It was not the pre-existent life; but, "A body hast thou prepared 
me.... Lo, I come to do thy will, O God.... By the which will we 
are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ 
once for all. Heb. 10:5-10. "Since by man (Adam) came death, 
by man (Christ) came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in 
Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made "alive." 1 Cor. 
15:21,22. The making "alive" of the 22d is clearly the raising 
"of the dead" of the 21st... He hath "abolished death (by the 
ransom) and brought LIFE AND IMMORTALITY to light." 2 
Tim. 1:10. He gives life to all, "And became the author of 
ETERNAL salvation unto all them that obey him." Heb. 5:9. 

Truly, Christ is Lord of all angels, men, conditions and things. 
God in Christ is our Redeemer and Saviour. Our dependence is 
well established by the Word. 

R727 : page 6 

He has the highest claims on our hearts and lives, on account 
of the RANSOM PAID and the glorious expression of his love in 
this and all else he does for US. 

May a "patient continuance in well-doing" secure for US the 
"glory and honor and immortality" which he has promised. Rom. 

2:7. 



J. H. PATON. 

[The above is a reprint from our issue of December, 1 879. It 
gives evidence that the teaching of the TOWER on this 
fundamental doctrine of the Ransom is now the same that it was 
then. It should be remembered also, while contrasting the 
statement above with some quoted in our last from "An 
Inconsistent Contemporary," that the definitions given above, 
once true, cannot change with the changing theories of men. We 
hope the above extract will have a second careful reading, as it 
treats an important subject truthfully and forcibly. -EDITOR.] 



R730 : page 6 

DR. NEWTON says: If there were no enemy, there could be no 
conflict; were there no trouble, there could be no faith; were 
there no trial, there could be no love; were there no fear, there 
could be no hope. Hope, faith and love are weapons, and 
weapons imply foes and encounters, and relying on my weapons 
I will glory in my sufferings. 



THE river of life is pure and clear as crystal. Is the doctrine 
offered to thee so, or is it muddy and mixed with the doctrines of 
men? What water is fouled, is not water of life. Wherefore, if 
thou findest it not right, go up higher toward the spring ahead, 
for the nearer the spring the more pure and clear is the water.- 
Bunyan. 



R727 : page 7 



THE DRIFT. 



The pastor of ALL SAINTS MEMORIAL CHURCH, New 
York City, is reported by the public press to have preached as 
follows on Sunday, Jan. 18th, 1885:- 

"It is a remarkable phenomenon, which our country has 
witnessed during the last few days, the brilliant and eloquent 
lecturer going through the length and breadth of the land 
lecturing in your churches and halls on Sunday evenings to 
crowded audiences, with a sweeping attack upon all that is 
understood to constitute the Christian religion. No one questions 
his rare ability. All confess that whatever destructive work he 
does he is constructive in this at least-that he would build up 
happy homes, and plant within them men and women living 
sanely and nobly. Let us be thankful for this. I count it a signal 
illustration of the advance which has been made in the so-called 
infidelity, that the spirit is clean and pure. 



"Further than this, let me frankly own to you that I believe Mr. 
Ingersoll in his rough attacks on religion is doing a real service 
to the cause of enlightened religion. It does not look so to the 
devout believer; but he who knows the extent and depth of the 
obscurantism which prevails within the churches will be forced 
to admit that even such coarse attacks upon the faith of 
Christendom, have their part in forcing forward the growth of 
reasonable religion. One may long for a wiser, calmer and more 
reverential mode of doing this needful work, as I, for one, do 
most deeply, but none the less must one, who sees the fact of our 
situation to-day, admit that there is a work for even such an 
audacious iconoclast. Nature is not even nice in picking her 
instruments when she sees a great job of demolition before her. 
Out of such stinging attacks there must come a deeper conviction 
on the part of the Church that there is that in the body of its 
beliefs which lays it open to such trenchant blows. Consider 
what is meant by such a system of thought as Calvinism. 
Consider what awful blasphemy the doctrine of hell really is. 
Consider what a fetich men have made out of the Bible. Having 
admitted all this in simple justice to the man and in simple truth 
to the facts of our situation, I may speak more frankly of the bad 
side of Mr. Ingersoll's work. The essential defect of his work is, 
that while doing a very needful work of destruction, he is 
decidedly overdoing it. That which more than anything else 
shocks me in the work of our eloquent lecturer is, that he seems 
to leave no feeling of reverence unsmirched by the hand of 
coarse humor. The brilliant lecturer gives the Christian Church 
and Christianity itself hard thrusts. Let us admit that in the 
Church are manifold and serious defects; grave and shameful 
faults. Let us be glad that so doughty a foe as this great Goliath 
of the Philistines walks up and down before the armies of 
Jehovah, ridiculing their feebleness, for we may thus be aroused 
to make civilization the Christian society which it is in name, but 
which it is not in fact. Before we cast away rashly our 
Christianity let us consider well what it has done for humanity." 

The above is not unreasonably expressed. It illustrates what we 
have frequently claimed, that the world in general is beginning to 
think. The great danger with all who will use reason at all, on 
religious subjects, seems to be that they speedily incline not only 
to throw away the falsities and absurdities of the faith of 
Christendom, but supposing that these falsities of the Church are 
correctly based on Scripture, the general tendency is to discard 
everything in the Bible which does not square with their 
reasoning ability. The effect of this is to leave such reasoners 
without Chart or Compass. Their reasoning ability gauges their 
faith and will soon destroy it, for as soon as the Inspiration of the 
Bible is denied, the reasoner is an Infidel whatever he may call 
himself. 

This is perhaps the chief curse of all "Church creeds and 
confessions"; they draw attention from the Bible to themselves 



as the sense and teaching of the Bible, hence when a church 
creed is convicted of errors and inconsistency all of the worldly 
and nearly all of the church-members are led to suppose that the 
Bible is the authority for the errors and inconsistencies. And the 
Bible like a telescope is not so constructed as to be looked into 
from the wrong end. Its beauties and value cannot be 
appreciated by any other than the guided and trained eye of faith. 

As a result of seeing the inconsistency of Creeds supposed to 
represent the Bible, and then looking at the Bible from the 
skeptical standpoint, some of the brightest intellects in the 
Nominal Church are being lead into what is called "Rational 
Christianity," and leads the gentleman quoted above, to remark, 
"Consider what a fetich [object of adoration and reverence] men 
have made out of the Bible. " Doubtless the celebrated M.E. 
minister of the same city who recently characterized the Old 
Testament as a batch of "Old wive's fables" reached his 
conclusions by a similar process of reasoning. 

But a true reasoner looking from the standpoint of faith, will own 
that the entire book is so hinged and bound together that it stands 
or falls together. Either Christianity and the Bible, its basis, is a 
great fraud and deception, or else it is what it claims to be, a 
Revelation from God to man of some of his plans and purposes 
relating to him. Jesus was either a great teacher and the Son of 
God as he claimed, or he was a false teacher, deceiver and 
blasphemer as the Jews who crucified him claimed; hence we 
must reject all or none of his teachings. 

So with Jesus' disciples, they were either good men who declared 
the truth when they recorded the ministry, death, and 
resurrection of Jesus and taught under the direction and by 
special revelations from the Lord, or else they were deceivers 
who foolishly wasted life and talents to teach untruths; and few 
who can appreciate the logical reasoning of the apostle to the 
Gentiles, could reasonably consider him, who was more 
abundant in revelations and stripes and imprisonments, and who 
witnessed his reasonable faith by a reasonable service, could 
either doubt his sincerity or suppose him a fool. 

R728 : page 7 

To those whose eyes are anointed with eyesalve, to see the 
truth of Scriptures and to realize the intricate, but harmonious 
and sublime plan therein traced, in its past, present and future 
accomplishment, it would be as impossible to deny the Bible as 
to deny the Sun at noonday because clouds were visible. 

There are features such as Isaac on the Altar, Isaac and Rebecca, 
Noah and the Ark, Jonah and the great fish, Moses and Aaron 
with the Magicians of Egypt, Elijah, Samson, etc., which to the 
masses seem devoid of teaching and much like fables. Such let 
us guard against a hasty rejection of these, by reminding them 
that all of the above are vouched for by Jesus and the apostles in 



the New Testament repeatedly. Hence to hold the one is to hold 
the other, to reject the one is to deny the other. Already, we are 
seeing from the TOWER with the Telescope of faith great and 
important lessons in these things, which while actual occurrences 
were specially valuable as lessons and types of doctrines to the 
Gospel Church, and in the Age to follow, when the knowledge of 
the Lord and an appreciation of His plans shall fill the whole 
earth and none need say unto his neighbor, know thou the Lord, 
for all shall know Him. 



R728 : page 7 



A WIDE DIFFERENCE. 



Seeing that the Scriptures teach that all who shall be of the 
"body" of Christ must follow the example of the Head, and 
sacrifice even unto death; all who think at all, must form some 
idea of what is meant by the command. And those who fail to 
get the Scriptural view of it, get an unscriptural one which must 
more or less becloud their views of the entire plan of God. 

The Scriptural view of our sacrifice must harmonize fully with 
the Scriptural teaching regarding the nature and value of Jesus' 
sacrifice. And therefore any view of our sacrifice which does 
not thus harmonize must be unscriptural. 

The most common of these unscriptural views is set forth about 
as follows in an item which has been going the rounds of the 
religious press: 

"Not the death of the cross, but our death to sin reconciles us to 
God.-Key to the Scriptures." 

A more deceptive and hurtful little paragraph could scarcely be 
constructed. It certainly is not of God, and was not indicted by 
any one under the control of the holy spirit, for it is in direct 
conflict with the Scriptures. Its claim to be a "Key to the 
Scriptures" is the bate upon Satan's hook, to make it attractive 
and easily swallowed. To the vast majority the Scripture is a 
sealed book (Isa. 29: 11,) and that in great measure because of 
unwillingness to sacrifice needful time and effort in its careful 
study; yet to such, the thought of finding condensed into one 
sentence a "key" by which the whole Bible would at once and 
without labor and study become plain to them, is a temptation 
somewhat similar to the one with which the same adversary 
beguiled Eve. And "I fear lest by any means, as the Serpent 
beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be 
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ"-to "another 
gospel." (?) 2 Cor. 11:3, and Gal. 1:6-9. 

The temptation put before Eve, was an easy acquirement of 
knowledge, and to all intelligent people this must ever remain 



one of Satan's most successful temptations, until he is bound. 
One of our duties is to resist this temptation and to try and prove 
every doctrine by the Word of God. And this remark applies as 
much to popular Creeds and Catechisms which claim to be keys 
to the Scriptures, as to the little clip referred to. The only God- 
given key to Scripture, is within itself. The harmonizing of its 
various statements open to us its treasures. It has a "Combination 
Time Lock," and cannot be opened by any other key. 

But let us examine the clipping in question. Dividing its 
statement and critically examining its parts, we may all see what 
it means, viz.: Jesus' death on the cross did not reconcile us to 
God; but when we put away sin and become dead in the sense of 
having no desires for sin, we thereby commend ourselves to 
God, and He receives us into fellowship, communion, etc. Ah 
yes, such a doctrine quickly commends itself to all the morally 
disposed people of the world. In a word, though false, it is the 
WORLD'S HOPE, and is the basis of the achings of all the great 
heathen philosophers and the core and centre of the most 
prominent religions of the world.-Brahminism and Buddhism. 

The substance of this theory is away with the cross of Calvary, 
away with ideas of a ransom, of a Redeemer, on whose account 
men are made at one with God. Let in the more modern light* of 
reason and let us wash ourselves from sin-filthiness, and then 
come thus to God in our own righteousness. Alas! they lose 
sight of the fact that they are so tainted with sin that they cannot 
put it away. But their theory causes them to lose sight of real 
righteousness and absolute perfection of thought, word and deed, 
so that thus self-deluded, some in every age, have attempted to 
come before God in what He declares are the "filthy rags" of 
their own righteousness. 

But let us compare this suggested "key" with the Scripture which 
it pretends to unlock. We read, Rom. 5:8-11. "We were 
reconciled to God by the death of His Son." That "key" don't fit 
this lock-it is not the true key; it is a false one. The foregoing 
statement of the apostle is the centre shaft of the true key, and 
nothing short of the recognition of "The death of His Son" as the 
centre and handle can possibly turn the combination and open 
the Scriptures. 

Let us compare carefully: not only does Paul not say we were 
reconciled to God by our death to sin, but he asserts that the 
reconciliation he refers to was accomplished "while we were 
enemies" -"while we were YET SINNERS"; hence the 
reconciliation is not the result of our "slaying the enmity in us," 
but as here stated the enmity or condemnation resting upon 
mankind through sin was destroyed, and the condemned ones 
while "enemies", "reconciled to God by the death of His Son"- 
"justified by His blood." 



But is not deadness to sin, or a ceasing to live any longer therein 
enjoined in Scripture? 

It assuredly is enjoined, but not as the ground of "forgiveness of 
sins that are past" : not as the basis for restored communion with 
God, at-one-ment: Not as the reconciling act which gives the 
sinner access to God: Not as taking the place of Christ's sacrifice 
for sins when he offered up himself without spot unto God. 

When enjoining deadness to sin the apostle Paul addresses those 
who already believe in the ransom, and through it accept the 
forgiveness of sins; he addresses those, who, while they "were 
enemies were reconciled to God by the death of His Son"-"by 
whom we have now received the atonement." His argument is, 
we were enemies, "but where sin abounded, grace did much 
more abound." He then asks, "Shall we [toward whom, as 
sinners, God's grace abounded through Jesus] continue in sin?" 
Not only so, but we, who have now received the atonement 
through Christ, have received with it the call or invitation to join 
our justified selves with Christ, and by becoming joint- 
sacrificers to become joint-heirs of divine nature and glory, with 
Him. What does our joint-sacrifice imply? It implies that as His 
was a sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, our sacrifice 
being joined to his must be reckoned as for the sin of the world 
and not in any sense for our own sins. (See Tabernacle 
Teachings, pages 37-39.) And now the apostle's inquiry is: If we 
were honest in our consecration when we professed to be so 
much opposed to sin, and so sorry for its baneful results that we 
would join with Jesus to redeem the world and to wipe out sin if 
we really meant all this: "How shall we, that are dead 
[consecrated to death] to sin [by, or on account of sin see 
Diaglott] live any longer therein?" (Rom. 5:10-20; and 6:2.) 
Knowing this: that our old man [human nature] is crucified with 
[Christ] that the body of sin [or of the sin-offering] might be 
destroyed." Hence, we should no longer be enslaved by the sin 



*Really as old as Cain, who brought the sacrifice of his own 
labor as a ground of acceptance and communion with God, 
instead of the typical, slain lamb. Gen. 4:3-5. 

R728 : page 8 

we died [consecrated] to abolish. "For he who died has been 
justified from sin." -Diaglott. That is to say, any who thus died 
or consecrated themselves to death with Christ, must first have 
been justified freely from all things by the redemption which is 
in Christ Jesus. "Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that 
we shall also live with him." "In that he died, he died BY sin [or 
on account of sin, see Diaglott] once: but in that he liveth, he 
liveth by God"-because of God's promise and resurrection 
power. Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed 



BY sin [or on account of sin, as sacrifices; see Diaglott,] but 
alive unto God, through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Rom. 6:6-1 1. 

Hence, the statement that, Not the death of the Cross, but our 
death to sin, reconciles us to God, is the very opposite of the 
truth. The truth, as stated by the apostle is: Not our death to sin 
nor any works of the Law which we can do, could reconcile to 
God, but being reconciled by the death of His Son, while we 
were yet sinners and enemies, we love Him who first loved us, 
so that we detest and put away sin, and so far as possible cease to 
live any longer therein, but the rather now present our members 
as servants of righteousness unto sacrifice with Jesus, the 
Redeemer. 



R729 : page 8 

EXCEPT A CORN OF WHEAT DIE. 

"Verily, verily I say unto you, except a corn of wheat fall into 
the ground and die, it abideth alone: But if it die it bringeth forth 
much fruit." John 12:24. 

Thus beautifully and forcibly does Jesus teach the necessity for 
his death, and the results which shall follow. The grain of wheat 
was himself "the man Christ Jesus." He was alone. All other 
men were either dead or dying under condemnation to death 
and reckoned of God as dead already. Rom. 5:15. These were all 
imperfect decaying grains of wheat. Jesus alone, had life. He 
might have continued to live, there being no cause for death in 
him; he was holy, harmless, undefiled. But if he should carry 
out his original purpose, on account of which he had left the 
glory which he had with the Father and been made flesh" he 
would now die, as a grain of wheat in order that his life might be 
imparted to many-the first Adam and all his race. 

It was while considering his death, and when he knew that the 
time or hour was about at hand, that Jesus used these words to 
his disciples to explain to them the necessity for his death-in 
order that the human race should be justified to life "If it die it 
bringeth forth much fruit. " Then realizing as no imperfect man 
could do, the greatness of the sacrifice which death (extinction), 
meant, he cried to God in agony saying (John 12:27) "Now is my 
soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father save [spare] me from 
this hour" [from death] ! Then remembering the Father's infinite 
Power, Wisdom, Love, Justice and exceeding great and precious 
promises made to him of a resurrection to a nature much higher 
than the one he was sacrificing, his FAITH in God triumphs and 
he adds: "But for this cause [or purpose] came I unto this hour: 
Father glorify thy name." 

To Jesus, undeluded by Satan's sophistries, death was a bitter 
cup, he did not think of death as some of his deceived followers 



to-day think of it-as "the angel God hath sent." No, Jesus knew 
of DEATH as the great enemy of the race, which had laid low 
Adam and all his posterity, because permitted on account of sin. 
He knew that none thus far had ever gotten free entirely from 
death who ever passed under its dominion. Now he was here, a 
man to die for men, to give his life a ransom price for all who 
died through Adam's sin. The question then in Jesus' mind was, 
Can I become man's substitute and ransom price and then be 
given existence on a higher plane of being than that I surrender 
for men? Is God indeed able to do this greatest of all things? Is 
He able to do this which has never yet been done and bring back 
the same conscious existence which became extinct in death? 

Faith questioned but for a moment, when his knowledge and past 
experience triumphed and he answers, Father, do as seemeth to 
Thee best. I will drink the cup. I will be obedient to thy will and 
plan, even unto death- "Father, glorify thy name" and carry out 
thy great plan I am ready to do the part assigned to me. For 
Jesus to have gone so far as he had gone and then to draw back 
and refuse to complete the covenant of sacrifice symbolized in 
his immersion, would have been sin and would have been 
forfeiting every right and promise. Jesus so expresses the matter 
in the succeeding verse (25). "He that loveth his life [that loves 
to keep it after having consecrated it to sacrifice] shall lose it; 
and he that hateth [is willing to sacrifice] his life in this world 
shall keep [have] it unto life eternal." And is not this doctrine as 
applicable to all the members of the consecrated priesthood as to 
the chief priest? The covenant of sacrifice must be actually 
fulfilled or all is lost. 

The grain of wheat dies; it is no longer a grain of wheat. The 
other grains which partaking of its life become perfect grains, are 
none of them the grain which died. It is gone gone forever as a 
grain of wheat. So Jesus was made FLESH in order that by 
God's favor he might taste death for mankind-that through or by 
means of His death the Adamic race might live. This teaches 
two things clearly and forcibly. First: as the grain that will grow 
up will be of the same kind as that which is planted and dies, so 
the being or existence secured to mankind by Jesus' sacrifice 
must be of the same kind as that which Jesus GAVE UP. He 
gave up himself a man; all his previous work had been 
preparatory to this, "For this cause [or purpose sacrifice] came I 
unto this hour." Not only so, but as he was a PERFECT MAN 
the seeds which come as a result of his death, will, if they reach 
maturity be PERFECT also. 

Secondly: as the grain which dies becomes forever extinct and 
never again has an existence as a grain, having wholly given 
itself to produce others of the same kind, so with Jesus whom the 
grain of wheat is used to illustrate: The man Christ Jesus having 
become flesh for that very purpose, gave himself wholly "gave 
all that he had" (Matt. 13:44) in order to produce others-in order 



to re-produce the human race lost in death through Adam. Thus 
he becomes the Father [life-giver] of humanity, as it is written; 
"He shall be called the everlasting Father." But he becomes 
FATHER at a great cost He died that they might live as is 
taught by many Scriptures and here illustrated by the grain of 
wheat which gives itself wholly to produce others. 

Here a little and there a little, is God's method of teaching. So 
Jesus would not only lead his disciples to study and search for 
truth, but he would thus hide for the present from the careless 
and worldly reader the riches of his favor and the beauty of his 
plan. So this statement relative to the grain of wheat touches 
only one side of the question the necessity of Jesus' death in 
order that he might become the source of life to others, that as by 
a man came death by a man also came the resurrection of the 
dead, (1 Cor. 15:21.) The Lord does not indicate in this 
statement his hope of a resurrection as a new creature; that is all 
omitted here though plainly taught elsewhere. 

How clear and plain this is; how it shows just what was given 
and how completely given and the results to be expected. Great 
was the Teacher and wonderful the simplicity of His doctrine. 

Now suppose there were but one sound perfect grain of wheat in 
the world, and we plant it. It dies, it is gone forever, but it bears 
a hundred fold of the same kind. Now we plant these one 
hundred grains, and suppose they also yield a hundred fold, then 
though they are gone, gone forever, and could never be found, 
yet their product-the result of that death, is ten thousand grains, 
of the same kind and we may truly say that the original one grain 
yielded ten thousand. 

Let this illustrate God's dealings through Jesus. Jesus was the 
only perfect grain-the only perfect man; He gave himself-He 
died, giving up human rights and privileges, all that perfect 
human existence includes that thereby he might impart these 
rights to men. 

During the Gospel age, the fruit of Jesus sacrifice has been, those 
who believed, who accepted of the life provided through his 
death. These have not actually partaken of his human perfection 
sacrificed on their behalf; they have not become actually perfect 
men and women, but they have become perfect human beings 
reckonedly. God reckons them as though they were perfect 
beings (and they should so reckon themselves), the perfection of 
the "grain of wheat" being counted to or imputed to all those 
who by faith accept and appropriate the rights and blessings 
which Jesus laid down for us. 

These "grains" (believers) reckoned perfect through Jesus 
sacrifice are invited by him to do as he did to follow his 
example to die as grains of wheat [as men reckoned perfect], to 
lay down or sacrifice all their human rights and privileges, to 
suffer now with him, to become joint-sacrificers, and thus 



become joint-heirs with Him. Like Jesus, these will be gone 
forever as human beings, but instead, they shall have the great 
prize held out during this Gospel age; for not only shall they be 
made conformable unto His death, but they shall have share also 
in His resurrection [a resurrection to spiritual being]. Phil. 
3:10,11. 

Jesus addressed this class (believers) and explains the conditions 
on which the high calling may be obtained, when after telling of 
himself as the grain (vs. 24,25) he adds: "If any man will serve 
me, let him follow me;" [let him sacrifice the human nature to 
which he is justified by my sacrifice] "and" [I promise such 
followers a share of all that the Father shall give me.] "where I 
am there shall also my servant be [who follows my example]: If 
any man serve me [share with me in this service] him will my 
Father honor" (John 12:26). 

These grains, (reckonedly perfect) following the example of the 
first grain are consecrated, and their death is reckoned as a 
PART of His death, and not of the Adamic death, (they having 
been justified out of and reckoned out of that.) And "if we be 
dead with Christ we believe that we shall also live with him" by 
a resurrection like his, to spiritual existence as "members of his 
body." 

What will the harvest be-what the result of this planting in death 
of the man Christ Jesus and then of those justified through him? 
Great will be the harvest, all springing from the one grain- the 
one perfect man who gave himself; for "since by man came 
death by man came also the resurrection of the dead." And "as 
[through] Adam [and Eve indirectly-God "called their name 
Adam] all die, even so, in [the] Christ shall all be made alive. 1 
Cor. 15:21-22. 

The same thought is expressed by Paul when he speaks of filling 
up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ. (Col. 1 :24). 
And as seen in the "TABERNACLE TYPES, "the sacrifices of 
the "Day of Atonement" teach the same lesson-the bullock for 
the Priests and Levites (typical of believers now) and 

R730 : page 8 

the goats representing the justified priests sacrificed for all "the 
people." Soon the day of Atonement (the Gospel Age) will be 
entirely past; the planting and dying will soon be at an end, and 
the glorious day of Millennial blessing, perfecting, ripening and 
harvesting of its fruits, will commence. 

To us the grandest feature of our Father's plan is this election or 
selection of the "Body of Christ" through obedience to sacrifice, 
now in progress. The grand benevolence which thus offers to 
some of the fallen race not only redemption from sin and 
deliverance from its curse-death, but in addition holds out 
divine nature and honor as a reward for obedience, stamps the 



plan as divine, for who could have thought of such honor and 
glory had God not proposed it. 

Thus seen the privileges of this Gospel Age-the privilege of 
sacrificing with Christ and thus becoming members of his body 
and sharers of his coming glory and work of restoring mankind 
to human perfection lost through Adam, is a wonderful privilege. 
Should we then shrink from it? Should we not with Jesus say: 
Amen, "Father glorify thy name"-Thy will be done. With Paul 
should we not count all these things but as loss and dross, IF BY 
ANY MEANS, we might win a place in the Anointed one? 



R730 : page 1 



VOL. VI. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., MARCH, 1885. 

NO. 7. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 40 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat yea, 



come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



page 1 

WALL CHARTS.-We still have a supply of the "Chart of the 
Ages," such as appears in FOOD FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS, 
page 105, only enlarged-33 inches long, mounted on rollers. These 
we will send free to our SUBSCRIBERS who are willing to pay 
expressage on the same. 



R747 : page 1 

The pamphlet entitled THE TABERNACLE AND ITS 
TEACHINGS is now out of print. Many requests for this pamphlet 
continually coming to hand we have arranged to publish it soon as a 
number of the TOWER. Thus all may have it and appreciate the 
beauty and force of those types which God caused Israel to perform 
year by year continually for our edification upon whom the ends of 
the ages are come. 



R730 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The National Baptist, commenting upon the report of the Baptist 
churches of Philadelphia says: 

"We have a total membership of 19,676. Of the additions by 
baptism, 300 came from three churches: Grace, 125; Shiloh, 111; 
Mantua, 64. Nine churches reported no baptisms. We have also 
nineteen missions, some of whose members are not members of 
city churches. Let us place our Baptist army at 20,000. Think of the 
vast expenditures for pastors, church buildings, Sunday school 
rooms, etc., and only a net gain of 450. It took over forty members 
to gather in one convert. And the figures over our State are equally 
startling, when 235 churches during the past year do not report a 
single baptism." 

Our Baptist friends are perhaps as near the truth, or more so, than 
any other sect of Babylon, which is not flattering them, we hope. 
The above statement affords an opportunity to suggest a criticism 
applicable to all the Babylonish sects. The rivalry among them is 
for numbers; for quantity rather than quality; for the praise of men 
rather than that which cometh from above only. 

Two or three centuries ago, when Baptists were only called such by 
their enemies, and when they called themselves simply Christians, 



their numbers were far less, but they occupied more nearly by far, a 
position in harmony with the days of the Apostles, both toward 
themselves and the world. 

With the creation of new sects and the general race for pre- 
eminence among them, which has been in progress for the past 
three centuries, the people now calling themselves Baptists were 
gradually drawn away from the primitive piety and simplicity for 
which in early times they were noted. Now, with all the rest, the 
chief aim is, not to build one another up in the most holy faith as 
members of the body of Christ; not to edify one another; not to 
grow in grace and in the knowledge and love of God; but to build 
themselves up as a sect; and to flatter the worldly to "get them into 
the church" that the pews and treasuries may be full; that they may 
have a great name, and that the name of Baptist should be a 
synonym for respectability and honor among men. 

The popularity with the world for which the sects so much seek, 
and in large measure have gained, is a bad and not a good omen to 
them, as well as to their prototype the nominal Jewish Church at 
our Lord's first advent. He still declares, "Woe unto you when all 
men speak well of you." Luke 6:26. 

In order to gain in numbers, honor and influence, every other thing 
has been sacrificed in great measure-not only by Baptists but by 
every sect. In order to attract the world, the DOCTRINES of the 
Bible have been more and more neglected. The repulsions of 
Christianity the self-denials, besetments, reproaches, sacrifices, 
and the sneer and "hate" of the world always attendant upon the 
true Christianity, have all been put out of sight, because these 
would repel the worldly, and the sect would not be so rapidly built 
up. Hence, not only the preaching of taking up the cross and 
following Christ's example, passed away, but the lower plane 
assumed, brought the world's honor and respect instead of its 
"hate. " The Lord was not mistaken when he said, Whosoever will 
live godly shall suffer persecution, but godliness has passed away, 
and therefore there is no persecution. 

Now, as a matter of fact, the various sects have degenerated into 
merely social clubs. The condition of membership in them is not 
FAITH in God's Word. Though an endorsement of their respective 
creeds is required, they are not generally understood; and even the 
moral standard is so low, that it implies no change on the part of the 
average worldling who joins. 

The result of this course, which has been in progress specially for 
the past fifty years, is that these sects are full of worldly moralists, 
who enjoy these systems because they are fashionable; because 
they are the best and quickest passport into "society"; because it is 
advantageous to them from a business standpoint; and finally 
because man is a religiously inclined being anyway, and traces of 
that inclination still linger despite the "fall." Even true children of 
God still fettered in the sects, so far as the doctrines of the Bible are 



concerned, are the merest "babes," always fed on skimmed "milk" 
and never on "strong meat." (Heb. 5:12-14.) They are both 
unskillful in the use of God's Word and ignorant of his doctrines. 
There are no more, nor as many saints as if the true Christian 
standard had been lifted; and those saints in the sects are starved 
and sickly, not strong and valiant soldiers of the cross having on the 
whole armor of God. 

Now we are reaching an epoch in which thought is being awakened 
and these starved and sickly saints in Babylon, together with the 
children of the world labeled Christians, are being forced to think 
by the startling utterances of popular preachers, infidels, and 
scientists. What the result must be no reasonable mind can doubt. 
Unskilled in the Word of God, ignorant of everything called 
religion except the raising of funds for and increasing the numbers 
of their sect, the vast majority must fall a prey to the specious errors 
termed liberal Christianity, now like a dense miasma spreading 
gradually over the world. Beginning with the cities, and among the 
"influential," it will spread over all the so-called "Christian world." 

The membership of the sects, composed mainly of the worldly, the 
carnally- minded, are already demanding "progress and liberality." 
Not, however, a progress toward clearer and fuller study of and 
obedience to the Bible; this would not be progress to the carnally 
minded; but by progress they mean the endorsement of the 
assertions of scientists regardless of the Bible. The minister who 
does not satisfy this craving is becoming unpopular, and those who 
will "preach to please the pews" (i.e. to suit the majority -the 
carnally-minded) are getting all the "best" pulpits and largest 
salaries. What the Apostle wrote prophetically, is being rapidly 
fulfilled before our eyes: The time will come when they will not 
endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts [desires or liking] 
shall they heap [accumulate] to themselves teachers having itching 
ears" ["tickling the ear" -Diaglott]. And they [the ear-pleasing 
teachers] shall turn away their ears from the truth, and [they] shall 
be turned unto fables. " How forcible then are the Apostle's words to 
every true saint and preacher in view of this: "I charge thee 
therefore before God.. .preach the WORD; be instant in season and 
out of season [whether convenient to you or 

R731 : page 1 

not]; REPROVE, REBUKE, EXHORT, with all longsuffering and 
DOCTRINE." See 2 Tim. 4:1-4. 

The honest and earnest saints who will follow this "charge," will 
soon find themselves as well as their names out of Babylon cast 
out as evil. But by that time the increase of grace, knowledge and 
love which shall come as a result of faithfulness, will lead them to 
rejoice and be exceeding glad to rejoice that they were counted 
worthy to suffer reproach for the name of Christ-for his doctrines. 

The result will ultimately be: Moralists will be called Christians; 
they will be too wise and scientific to use the Bible as their text- 



book. Every one will be called a Christian who abstains from a 
flagrant violation of the laws of civilization. Then the saints will 
again be called "fools," and the Bible will be termed "a relic of 
barbarism," "a bundle of old wives' fables," "a fetich." Is it not 
becoming so even now? 

It is too late to reform the sects the vast majority is against you. 
The only thing to do now is what God commands, "Come out of 
her, my people; that ye partake not of her sins and receive not of 
her plagues." She might have been healed once, (Jer. 8:18-22,) but 
now, like her prototype Israel, she is given up -left desolate. The 
ax is now at work at the very root of the tree and its complete fall is 
at hand. It is not now a pruning but a destroying process as with the 
first house of Israel when it was rejected, only it stumbled to rise 
again, while Babylon's destruction is to be complete and forever. 
(Matt. 3:7-10, and Rev. 18:21.) 



R731 : page 1 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING 
LETTERS. 

February 5, 1885. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Thank you very much for your 
quick and kind answer of my letter. The money I send, you may use 
for any purpose of spreading the grand news as you think best. How 
I long to have all the back numbers of the TOWER. Is there no way 
of procuring them? Any price ! I am preparing to work among my 
(German) countrymen, and would like to have them on that 
account. 

The glorious truth which since a year ago shone on my heart 
through the "Food," becomes brighter and brighter. I had the 
"Food" three years in my possession, but never found time nor 
opportunity to read it, but always saved it. Last winter I got poor 
and lean and all creeds and dogmas seemed to leave me. I searched 
and found "Food." No book ever took me like that. I forgot meals 
and all. I could not sleep for joy. O, the blessedness I have enjoyed 
since then. God is still revealing more and more to me by the 
TOWER and Scriptures. Diaglott and Young's Concordance are 
great helps to me. I would like 

R731 : page 2 

this glorious truth to be spread among my people. I find much 
opposition with some, but some take it readily. I am still in the 
Methodist Church (German), but preach and talk in private and 
openly of the glorious truth. What will become of me the Lord 
knows I expect to be thrown out. I would much like to see you 
personally and talk to you about plans which I have. If any way 
possible I will see you. 



Yours in Christ, 



Kirbeyville. 

BRETHREN:-There are three of us- ministers of the Gospel- 
laying ourselves out for the spread of the glorious truths set forth in 
your publications. I have just come in from a preaching tour and 
expect to start again as soon as I have filled my present 
appointments, which will take me three weeks. I ask you to send me 
what publications you think best for distribution, so that we may 
give these grand truths to the people in this section of country. 
Hoping you can and will comply with our request, I remain, 

Yours in Christ, 



page 2 



Palmyra, 111. 

MY DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST.- When I received the 
February WATCH TOWER with the article "Two Baptisms" 
marked, and found the answer to my question given so plainly in it, 
I felt sorry I had troubled you when I had it in the house; and what 
is more, had read that very article repeatedly. Do you think I must 
have been very stupid? I think so too; but my dear brother, don't 
you know that I have had a Bible in the house all my life and have 
read it ever since I could read, have read it by daylight and lamp 
light, and by moon light, have learned whole chapters by heart, and 
even prided myself because of my knowledge of the Bible, and 
after all it remained for the TOWER, in the providence of God, to 
show me that I knew nothing about it. The knowledge I prided 
myself on was such knowledge as a parrot has; I knew the words 
but that was all. It remained for the TOWER to point out to me the 
grand, glorious, hidden manna there is in that blessed old book. 
And how I love it, and how every feast makes me hungry for more. 

I thank God every day that he has permitted us to feast at his table. 
Were it not that the cares of a family press upon me I think I should 
do little but study the Word. With Paul I can say "I have not been 
disobedient to the heavenly vision. " When I first saw the light, I 
thought that all we had to do was to show these things to our 
neighbors and friends and they would grasp them eagerly as we had 
done, but I found an indifference that astonished me. 

You told us that though these things were sweet in our mouth, yet 
after we ate them they would become bitter. I was full of the sweet 
and I did not see where there was any bitterness for me. After 
awhile what I supposed a cord, that bound me to the nominal 
Church, proved to be a chain, and it increased in weight so rapidly 



that I tried to shake it off, but it only bound the tighter. I began to 
long for true baptism. I had been sprinkled long ago, but now I saw 
a new beauty in baptism. I resolved to break the chain and to be 
baptized if I could find some one to do it without taking me into 
another Church, and then I found the bitterness, but I need not give 
details. I have thought often of writing you something of my 
experience for publication for the encouragement of others, but it 
would fill up the paper and not edify as much as the articles you 
give us in explanation of Scripture, which are manna indeed to our 
hungry souls. 

I thank our Father that though we have the bitter trials, yet in him 
we have a never-failing source of joy. And I thank him that he gave 
me strength to burst the chains and furnished one to give my 
husband and I the symbolic baptism; now we rejoice in the love and 
freedom of Christ. He is leading us and we desire to do his will. We 
are all sitting around the Lord's table and the TOWER is helping us 
to our food. May its supply be continually increased that we may all 
be filled and come into the unity of the faith, all praising God with 
one voice. 

As ever, your sister in the Lord. 



Fayettesville, N.C. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-During the last two months I have been 
laboring for the Master as best I could according to my ability. 
Preaching in public, and in private houses as well as by the way 
side, and by distributing Z.W. TOWER and tracts. I do not intend to 
shun to declare the whole council of God so far as I know it and am 
competent to do it. I travelled 250 miles nearly all on foot; have had 
many good meetings, and have had many what most men would 
call troubles, fatigued, and wet with rain, etc. Some times hungry 
and sometimes athirst, sometimes in comfortable quarters and 
sometimes otherwise. Yet I feel that I am made stronger by these, 
and more able to carry out my covenant of sacrifice. It is a great 
pleasure to hear from the many dear brethren and sisters by the 
letter extracts in the TOWER. 

I leave home to-morrow again. I pray an interest in the prayers of 
all the saints. 

Your brother in the love of Christ, 



Ulcely, England. 

DEAR SIR: I was requested to give a reading, at what is called the 
Mutual Improvement Society composed of members from all sects 
in the town, the president knowing somewhat of my views asked 
that the title might be, Advanced Religious thought. I did not 
decline, and with the pamphlet, Food, and the various numbers of 
the TOWER which I have, I made quite a long essay. After the 



reading, a discussion was freely entered into and I was branded by 
all sorts of names, such as Materialist, Universalist, Calvinistic, 
Baptist, etc. Although the Wesleyan minister, who had the 
Scriptures in his hand, could not find any mis-quotations, he was 
surprised at the different light given to them to what they are used 
to give them. Others said I had given the best paper that had been 
given during all the sessions. I hope by God's help to speak at any 
time, the truths of the Scriptures as I have received light on them 
through the TOWER, so that I may be the means of turning some 
from errors of doctrine. 

I am, dear sir, yours teachable in Christ, 
R731 : page 2 



Newton Co., Texas. 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER: -I have just finished reading a 
pamphlet, published by you, entitled, "Food for Thinking 
Christians," and have become very much interested in the subjects 
treated of. I wish to know more and more of these precious truths. 
Though a minister, I have been made to realize often while studying 
these pages, how true it is that many of us are "ever learning, but 
never come to a knowledge of the truth." Having received so much 
light from this pamphlet, I gladly avail myself of your proposition, 
"Ask and ye shall receive," so please send to me such reading 
matter as you deem best. 

Is ZION'S WATCH TOWER a paper? if so, send me a specimen 
copy, or subscription price, I must have it. 

Yours in hope, 



page 2 
Oakland, Cal. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have not forgotten you nor the glorious 
cause you represent. The blessed gospel has so permeated my soul 
that it seems I have forgotten all other themes. Politics used to 
enthuse me some while I was in "Babylon," but now such a 
glorious landscape has burst upon my enraptured vision that I can 
see nothing else, and wherever I am and whoever I address, this 
song of the world's ransom is on my tongue. Persecution and the 
cold shoulder of former friends and associates is nothing to me, the 
Lord is my shield and hiding place, and the rock of my salvation. 
His fellowship and his approving smile is all I crave. 

Truly your brother. 



Taunton, Mass. 

DEAR BROTHER: -Please erase my name from the poor list. 
Although poor in this world's Treasures, made richer in faith 
through reading the TOWER, I feel I must pay for the paper this 
year. I love to read it more and more and shall continue to use my 
influence in getting others interested. 

Yours in Christian hope, . 

R731 : page 2 



England, Feb. 14, 1885. 

DEAR SIR: Having lately come into possession of a copy of your 
valuable "Food for Thinking Christians" and finding that it is taken 
from the bread of life, I have a strong desire that others should read 
it as well as myself. As a Missionary to the Seamen and Fishermen 
on the coast of England I apply to you for a few slices i.e. copies of 
your Food for free distribution among them, and any other crumbs 
from the Master's table will be most gratefully received, and 
willingly distributed among the hungry souls with whom I labor. 

I have about twelve miles of sea coast and three seaports, and 
seeing that by asking I might receive, it put me so much in mind of 
the grace and favor from the great Captain of our salvation, that I 
felt constrained to apply, and I believe I shall receive, and will be 
thankful for anything you may send. 

Yours in Christ Jesus. 



page 2 



Palestine, 111. Feb. 22, 1885. 

BRO. C. T. RUSSELL:-I am now thoroughly satisfied as to the 
Ransom, the Church, the Bride, the Little Flock, the Presence of 
Christ, the Coming Troubles upon the Nominal Church systems and 
world, and the deliverance of the Bride, the Restitution during the 
coming age in which "all men shall be saved and brought to a 
knowledge of the Truth" for its acceptance or rejection, when all 
that was lost in or by Adam will be restored in or by Christ- 
indeed, much more than that; for Christ's Bride shall be just like 
him, glorious, more brilliant than the sun, and immortal; and the 
balance of the race given an opportunity for a life grander than 
Adam's-everlasting; or a worse death than his-"the second"- 
"everlasting destruction." 

Light is looming up on these subjects plainer and plainer, and I now 
glory in the Cross of Christ in a way in which I never could before. 
I can now rejoice to know that "the Word" was changed to a perfect 
manhood, "made flesh" in order to die for man. 



I can rejoice that I now have opportunity to consecrate my life and 
being to God- to aid in filling up "the remainder of Christ's 
sufferings"-rendering my life "a living sacrifice to God, which is 
my reasonable service" so that I might "reign with him." 

I do not glory in self-righteousness; I have none. "I have no 
confidence in the flesh," but all in my Ransom, the Sacrifice, the 
Atonement; but, to receive their glorious effects, I must die to sin 
and live to holiness. 

I am, too, satisfied that there are no churches, nor have been, since 
the apostacy, through which those consecrating can act; for, in all 
these, thus far shalt thou go, and no further-all are hindrances 
instead of aids, because attention is called to their church and 
teaching instead of the Christ and the infallible Word! 

That there are good and pious in all I do not doubt; hence the call, 
Come out of her my people, so that you may have no fellowship 
with her SINS, and that you receive not of her PLAGUES." 

I, as I wrote you before, was raised by Baptists, then was a 
"Campbellite" for over a quarter of a century, and preached the 
doctrine acceptably a good part of the time, then a member of "the 
Church of the Abrahamic Faith" for over fifteen years, preaching its 
doctrines acceptably. I was honest and sincere in both and had "a 
good conscience" in both, until it was better educated. As I never 
preached for money, neither would I now, and as I have a family to 
support and a business to sustain, I cannot do much; still that little I 
intend to do at all times and places practicable. 

Yours, in the blessed hope, . 



R732 : page 2 

YOUR HEAVENLY FATHER KNOWETH. 

"Be not anxious, saying, What shall we eat? or, what shall we 
drink? or, with what shall we be clothed? for after all these things 
do the Gentiles seek; and your Heavenly Father knoweth that ye 
have need of all these things."- Matt. 6:31,32. 

How happy and free from anxious care are the hours of childhood. 
Perfect trust in parental wisdom and love casts out all fear. In the 
absence of pride and the worldly and selfish ambitions which 
develop in later years, childhood makes the best of whatever 
circumstances it may be placed in, and meets every circumstance 
with a determination to find some good and some enjoyment in it. 
How many need to turn back to the simplicity of their earlier years. 

Why should we be anxious about anything when our Heavenly 
Father knoweth our need? To be anxious about our temporal affairs, 
is to be overcharged, and Jesus warns us, saying, "Be not 
overcharged with the cares of this life." But while he would not 
have us anxious or over-charged, he would not have us disregard 



the responsibilities of our maturer years. Our first, principal object 
in life should be to seek the kingdom of heaven, to seek to make 
our calling and election sure by following in our Leader's footsteps. 
This implies the taking of necessary time to search the Scriptures 
and to digest the instruction given. 

In these times, and especially in this country, where business 
competition pushes all to the extent of their physical strength and 
the occupation of every hour, it requires considerable determination 
to draw the line and say to business and the various responsibilities 
pressing upon us, Thus far shalt thou go and no farther. But having 
determined the line of duty, in childlike faith and simplicity we may 
dismiss all anxiety, remembering that our Heavenly Father knoweth 
our needs. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R731 : page 3 



A LITTLE WHILE. 



"He which testifieth these things saith, Surely I come quickly: 
Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus." Rev. 22:20. 

Quickly," beloved! I know thine heart is beating 
With deep emotions to behold my face, 
But for "a little while" wilt thou not spread the tidings 
Of the sweet message of my love and grace? 

Fear not, beloved! mine eye is ever watching: 
Thy tears are numbered in my deep, deep love; 
Thy weary sighs, and all thine heart's deep yearnings 
Are registered by me in heaven above. 

Trust, trust, beloved! I know the world frowns coldly, 
But this should only drive thee nearer me. 
Earth's broken links make heaven's affection stronger, 
The cross will only make the crown more bright for thee. 

Look up, beloved! tread firmly on the billows, 

Thou canst not sink beneath life's troubled sea. 

Look up! then shalt thou learn the needful lesson meekly, 

How my own hand hath planned thy path for thee. 

Rest, rest, beloved! thine head upon my bosom; 
Lean on my arm, and tell thy griefs to me. 
My heart is thine in all the full perfection 
Of sympathy none else could give to thee. 

Weep not, beloved! because thou yet must tarry; 
Wilt thou not serve me heart and hand meawhile? 
Some hearts around thee pine in lonely sorrow; 
Couldst thou not give one kindly look or tender smile? 



Go forth, beloved! life's ministry is earnest, 
Crushed hearts throng round thee, in thy path below; 
Fond hopes once cherished, now by death are blighted; 
Knowest thou not a balm to soothe their woe? 

Yes, Yes, beloved! I read thine heart's glad answer; 
Yes, thou wilt do this work of love for me. 
Only "a little while," and earth's sad scenes of sorrow 
Shall change to glory bright-prepared by me. 

Then, then, beloved! heaven's songs of joy awaking, 
Triumphant "hallelujah" thou shalt raise, 
Then shalt thou gaze upon my face, and ever, 
"Knowing as known," pour forth thine endless praise. 



-Titbury. 



R732 : page 3 

IF THE WHOLE BODY WERE AN EYE. 

1COR. 12:12-27. 

A more apt illustration of the oneness of the true Church [whose 
names are written in heaven] can not be conceived of, than this 
which the Scriptures so frequently present-the human body made 
up of various and dissimilar members, yet unitedly constituting one 
body and each member dependent largely, upon each other 
member. 

What a loss to the human body is even one member. Though its loss 
does not cause the destruction of the body, it does impair its 
usefulness. And so with the body of Christ, the church: each 
member is necessary, and has a duty to perform toward other 
members, as well as blessings to receive by its fellowship with 
them: Hence the Apostle urges that there be "no schism in the 
body"- that is that there be no sectarian division of those who are 
the Lord's body. 

The body when complete and perfected, united with its Head and 
glorified, will be perfect, lacking no member; there will be no sect 
or division among the members. Only such as are fully under 
control of the one spirit, of the Head, will be members then. But not 
so now: Now some of the members are not fully submissive to the 
Head, and mislead by the blinding delusions of Satan, are 
separated, and in that proportion deprived of the blessings and 
privileges of the body, and the body is also deprived of their 
assistance and influence. And as in the human body, if certain 
members are absent, or refuse to fill their office, other members 
will endeavor to compensate to the body for the deficiency, so in 
the body of Christ, those who realize the necessities of the body 
should rejoice in the privilege of over-work for the benefit of all. 
There is danger to those members of the body who are failing to fill 



their office, of their being finally cut off from the body, and others 
more worthy being appointed in their place. Take heed, let no man 
take thy crown. (Rev. 3:11). "Every branch in me that beareth not 
fruit he taketh away." John 15:2. 

In the human body the eye, ear, hand, and foot represent the 
principal serving members. These are all needful and should work 
in harmony, under the control of the one will. The Eye discerns, 
and by it, we mostly judge; yet it frequently benefits by the hand's 
assistance in deciding of heat and cold, hardness and softness, 
roughness and smoothness; though the eye has ability to discern 
those things of itself, it is greatly assisted by the hand. 

The hand is very valuable. It can execute what the eye could not do, 
but what it points out as expedient or necessary, yet without the 
intelligence and guidance of the eye, how slow would be its work, 
and how much of it useless. 

The ear is useful to the body advising it of the harmony or discord 
of the immediate present; yet without the assistance of the Eye, how 
frequently it would mislead and deceive the body; every strange 
sound would fill it with dread when perhaps a blessing was in it, 
while every accustomed sound would pass unheeded though danger 
might be in it. 

The foot is an important member of great value in the service of the 
body. It aids the Eye and Hand and Ear in their service; it carries 
forward and in a measure "runs" the body. True the body could see 
and hear without the feet, and it could make progress slowly, but 
without feet the progress would be much retarded. Yet without the 
eye to guide, the feet would stumble and get the body entire into 
confusion and distress. 

Thus seen, every member is needful aye necessary to the body, yet 
perhaps the eye is the greatest servant, yet by no means independent 
of the other members. Without them its service would be of little 
value. The Eye represents the body; hence, when we address 
another, we do not look toward and address the hand, foot or ear, 
but we look to the Eye as the representative of the whole body. In 
Scripture the Eye is used as the representative of understanding or 
knowledge; and in all the world it is the symbol of intelligence. 

Using these members of the human body and their various degrees 
of usefulness as servants of the body, as an illustration, the Apostle 
urges each member of the Body of Christ, which is the Church, to 
find his true position of usefulness in the body and fill it: that each 
be not jealous or envious of other members, but endeavor to fill 
well whatever position he is best qualified for-that there be no 
schism in the body, but that its various members, each doing the 
part designed by our Lord and Head, shall thus accomplish His 
will-the edifying and building up of the body. 

Evidence is given to every member of this Body that the Body is 
being led and taught of God; and though the special "gifts" are not 



bestowed upon every member, they do benefit every member i.e., 
"a manifestation of the spirit is given to every man [member] to 
profit withal" [thereby], v. 7. The early church was in danger of 
getting out of the Lord's order-all aspired to be teachers and 
prophets, etc., hence the Apostle reproves them saying: "You 
earnestly desire [covet] the more eminent gifts, and yet a more 
excellent way I point out to you" chap. 12:31-Diaglott. Then the 
more excellent way is described in Chap. 13. This method is, to 
cultivate deep broad Love for each member and for the Head, and 
to wait patiently for the Lord to exalt you to some position in which 
you can best serve the body in love. 

We should bear in mind that no one can constitute himself a gifted 
member any more than by taking thought he can add one cubit to 
his stature, though he may and should stir up and cultivate the gift 
that is in him. All must remember that the position of "greatest" in 
the kingdom, either now, or in glory, is of God's and not our 
appointment. He that would be greatest, let him become the willing 
loving servant of all the other members; willing to lay down his life 
for the sheep. Thus let us seek and "desire spiritual gifts" for the 
greater service and blessing to the body. 

In the true body, God attends to the arrangement of the gifts. He 
places the various servants, and we note the placement and bow to 
his wisdom. "God hath SET [placed or appointed] SOME in the 
church; first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after 
that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities 
of tongues." 1 Cor. 12:28. 

Of Apostles, there are but twelve (Paul being God's appointment to 
Judas' place) the ones specially appointed on and in the foundation. 
(Rev. 21:14.) The Prophets or expounders (see definition in 
Young's An. Concordance) are those who are used of the Lord in 
bringing forth (from the Scriptures) things new and old to the 
Church. This seems to be the EYE quality. Luther appears to have 
represented this eye quality for a short time. Through him as an 
instrumentality the body saw the doctrine of justification by faith. 
He was the expounder of that doctrine in modern times. An 
expounder is a special teacher, or a teacher of teachers a see-er 
through whom hidden things may be manifested. Dr. Adam Clark is 
considered and treated as an EXPOUNDER by the M.E. Body, a 
prophet, seer, or discerner. Of the prophets of the nominal Church 
see what is written in Isaiah 29:10-14. 

Teachers, as referred to by the Apostle are the instructors, or what 
might be termed the HANDS of the body who carry the bread and 
water and feed the flock the sheep and the lambs. They may be 
either public or private teachers or instructors of the body and 
others. 

Some of these gifts, such as speaking in unknown tongues, have 
measurably 

R733 : page 3 



passed away because the necessity for them has passed away. The 
Apostle foretold that these gifts will all pass away in time, for when 
the church complete is perfected, and when each member shall 
know even as he is known perfectly there will no longer be use 
for these gifts, as a means for edifying the body. 

The foot member of the body may not unreasonably represent some 
who have neither the Eye quality of discerning truth, nor the Hand 
quality of helping cleansing and feeding the church; but who can 
and DO, bear much of the weight and carry the body forward over 
obstacles. May not the foot then be the member possessed of money 
talent which uses it thus? 

If the entire Body could but recognize its oneness and each use the 
gift or gifts possessed, remembering that the gifts bestowed are not 
for itself, but for the BODY, how great would be the strength and 
vigor and present power of the Body. 

It is astonishing how many members desire to be EYES, and how 
few care to be FEET. Some will spend days and years to force 
eyesight: Determined that they must discover some new truth  
some "new light." Many succeed in forcing something, but is it not 
more likely to be human darkness than divine light obtained in such 
a manner? If you are an EYE member you will see what is due to 
be seen without forcing, though not without studious care. And 
what you see will be so clearly seen, as to enable other members of 
the BODY to test and prove your exposition as harmonious with all 
other parts of God's Word. 

Besides do not those who attempt to exercise some other gift than 
the one they possess, usually neglect the gift they have and thus 
deprive the body of their assistance? Thus it was in Paul's day; he 
"labored," working with his hands, as well as in preaching and 
expounding the Scriptures. Because the other members were not 
exercising their gifts, Paul's love for the body and the truth, led him 
to attempt still greater service to make up for the deficiency of 
others. But who will say that some missed a grand opportunity for 
the exercise of the FOOT member's office or gift, when Paul 
needed to make tents to support himself. And who will say that the 
BODY was not injuriously affected to the extent that those 
members were derelict and unfaithful in the use of their talents? 
How many valuable suggestions and how many expositions of truth 
that church failed to get, because the member for that office was 
otherwise necessarily engaged, who can know? See Acts 18:3; 1 
Thes. 2:8,9; and 1 Cor. 4:12. 

The Apostle shows not only that it is not God's order that every 
member should be an EYE, but he shows the logical inconsistency 
of such a thing in the words at the head of this article-"If the whole 
body were an eye," where would be the other needful qualities? 
Where would be the mutual dependence of one member upon 
another which when properly recognized, cements and unifies all 



the members as one body, in which every member is needful and 
appreciated. 

The question arises: How shall we know the different members? 
We answer, In the same manner that you can decide whether you 
are right-handed or left-handed viz. by the adaptation to the work, 
by the relative ability to perform any particular service. Thus a 
teacher must be "apt to teach," i.e. have the gift or ability of making 
the truth plain, either in public or private; a "prophet," i.e. a 
discerner and EXPOUNDER of truth will be manifested by the 
clearness and force with which he will be enabled to bring forth 
from the Lord's store-house (the Bible) "things new and old," meat 
in due season for the household; and a Foot member will know of 
his talent or gift by the money talent he possesses-the "ability" 
which God giveth. 

In writing to the Romans (Rom. 12:3-8) of these gifts, the same 
apostle urges them also to remember, that "all members have not 
the same office," and that therefore having "gifts differing 
according to the grace that is given unto us," 

R733 : page 4 

each should fill his own appointment in the church, remembering 
that these gifts are of God who hath "set" [appointed] the various 
members in the body. 

In endeavoring to decide what gifts we possess, the Apostle 
suggests modesty saying: "I say.. .to every man that is among you, 
not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think; but to 
think soberly, according as God hath DEALT to every man the 
measure of faith" [literally, capacity for faithfulness]. Ver. 3. 

This sober examination of our abilities (which if we are consecrated 
are all the Lord's) to ascertain how we may be acceptable to the 
Lord and best serve the Body, will affect some who under-value 
their talents, as well as those who think of themselves more highly 
than they ought. Some fear that they have no talents useful and 
needful to the service of the body; and some possessing several 
talents, use and seek to cultivate the lowest of these rather than the 
highest. 

To such, after showing that our ambition and pursuit should be 
love, and that if love for the Head and body is cultivated, such 
seekers will be honored and used because of love and service; the 
Apostle says, "Ardently pursue Love and be emulous of spiritual 
gifts-but rather that you may prophecy." 1 Cor. 14:1. 

In substance then, the duty and privilege of every member of the 
body of Christ is, to soberly, and honestly judge of his abilities; 
neither in pride overrating them, nor in false humility underrating 
them; that he may diligently and faithfully use them, earnestly 
hoping for his own increased efficiency in the service; not from 
self-love and vain glory, but from love of the body and of the Head. 



These thoughts were suggested by two discouraged ones who wrote 
that they were fearful of not being members of the body, because, 
though they could study out and prove by Scripture, the truths 
presented through various writers in the TOWER, they were unable 
to SEE or discern these truths from the Scriptures themselves, 
without having them pointed out. Such should conclude that they 
are not EYE members, but the fact that they are able to discern by 
the aid of the eye, should be considered a proof that such are fellow 
members and of the same body. Let such remember the Apostle's 
suggestion: "If the whole body were an eye" where would be its 
perfection and completeness; and how could the body edify itself in 
love? 

In the early days of the church the connection between the various 
members scattered abroad, was far less complete than now since the 
printing press and mails make it possible for all members to come 
into intimate communication with fellow members of the same 
body. Thus while we keep up our intercourse and communion with 
those members with whom we come personally in contact, giving 
and receiving edification. The whole body, though separated by 
oceans, is now by God's providence enabled to meet at one table, 
and feast together upon the rich promises and blessed hopes which 
our Father's Word supplies; and which, new and old, are meat in 
due season to the entire household. Thus not only do all feed and 
grow in grace and knowledge and love, but many are encouraged 
and strengthened also by the extracts from letters from all parts of 
the world; and each member is bound to each other member in that 
sympathy, oneness and love which is part of the spirit of our Head. 

In this manner the Lord our head has made it profitable and 
expedient for every member to fellowship every other member, and 
to assist in maintaining and perfecting the ONE BODY, because 
each is dependent on the other in some measure. None can sever the 
connection and be separated from it, and neglect its opportunities, 
without serious loss to himself. It has pleased God to edify, and 
instruct, and upbuild the BODY through the instrumentality of each 
other, and the one who thinks to draw supplies of grace otherwise, 
is, whether knowingly or ignorantly opposing God's arrangement, 
for God hath "SET" the members in "the body as it hath pleased 
him," FOR THE EDIFYING of the body of Christ-that thus the 
Bride may make herself ready for the marriage. Rev. 19:7. 

But let us take heed: these gifts are not inalienable. By neglect to 
use them, or by their abuse, they may be lost. If any member fails to 
use his gift, or using it, fails to use it to the Lord's glory and for the 
good of the body, but in pride attempts to use it for self-glory, his 
place can readily be filled by another, by him who places the 
members, exalting another to his place and taking from him that 
which he had failed to properly use. Matt. 25:14-30. 

"If the whole body were an eye"-"If they were all one member, 
where were the body?" 1 Cor. 12:17-19. 



R733 : page 4 

DEVELOPMENT IN THE MILLENNIUM. 

Says a brother in a recent letter: "Your views in regard to the Little 
Flock are plain and readily enough understood. I find, however, 
much difficulty in my researches relative to that other great 
company of mankind those who may attain to everlasting life and 
perfect manhood. 

1st. Among this class, what will be the status and mode of 
development, if any, of those who have died in babyhood? 

2d. How can they be benefitted by evil, never having tasted evil? 
How can evil have taught them? If God designed that man should 
fall into evil that thereby man might be benefitted, infants and very 
young children who die in infancy and childhood would seem to be 
excluded from this course of schooling. 

3d. Again, will they marry and be given in marriage in this state of 
perfect 

R734 : page 4 

manhood and everlasting life? If so, where will the offspring of 
these perfect men and women find their school of evil and where 
will there be room for the ever increasing population in the 
multiplied centuries to come? Increase would not be diminished by 
death. These and kindred questions perplex me, and I earnestly 
desire light thereon." 

These questions are worthy of consideration and we suggest 
answers to them through the TOWER, because they may have 
presented themselves to other minds. We presume our Brother's 
difficulty is not so much that by his research he cannot find human 
restitution clearly taught in the Bible, but that he finds it difficult to 
harmonize what is clearly taught, with surrounding facts and his 
reasonings therefrom as to the future. 

In dealing with such questions, upon which God's revelation 
contains no direct communication of His plan, it becomes us to 
tread carefully and to avoid dogmatism. Things revealed belong to 
us, but things not revealed to God. Our Father tells us the great 
outlines of his plan, and evidently expects and demands confidence 
and trust on our part that His wisdom is sufficient for every detail. 
He declares to us His intention that all in their graves shall "come 
forth," and he gave us proof of His power to do this greatest of all 
wonders, though he does not explain to us the process or method by 
which being can be restored after dissolution. So also, He declares 
to us His purpose to restore all things to save that which was lost, 
etc., and leaves a margin of mystery as to the process by which it 
shall all be accomplished. 



Hence without attempting to teach it for doctrine, or in any way 
enforce any particular ideas of how these things shall be, we may 
and do as below, attempt to lay what we know not positively, along 
side of and in harmony with what we do know. Therefore the 
answers below must be considered merely as suggestions. We 
number the answers to correspond with the questions. 

First: The manner of the resuscitation in the case of Jairus' daughter 
(Mark 5:43), may furnish us some idea of the future work which 
Jesus' miracles illustrated or showed forth. This case and that of 
Lazarus (John 11:44), indicate that the revived ones will require 
clothing, nourishment and assistance, and will acquire strength 
gradually. We infer the same of babes. We may not unreasonably 
infer that none of the worldly class will be called from their graves, 
until after the living generations shall have reached a measure of 
elevation morally and physically, and until the earth shall have 
begun to "yield her increase." 

The climate will probably gradually undergo a change also, such as 
will not only be favorable to man's comfort, but favorable as well to 
the usefulness of large tracts of country at present almost or quite 
uninhabitable. How this will be accomplished, we cannot at present 
say. But of one thing we are satisfied He who is at the helm and 
has thus far ordered matters, is abundantly able to furnish mankind 
a fit and perfect home an Eden, when the curse is removed. 

Of another thing we are satisfied, viz: That what scientists term the 
"laws of nature" are by no means as regular and fixed as they 
seemed at one time to imagine. As an illustration of this we note the 
fact that the telegraph brought word of severe cold and thousands of 
cattle destroyed in Texas while we at the North were having quite 
moderate weather. And we have known times in summer when the 
thermometer rose higher in Pittsburgh than in New Orleans. These 
things in addition to our trust in the Omnipotent, set at rest fears in 
regard to climate. As regards the helplessness and necessities of 
infants, we should bear in mind that every infant had a mother, and 
the mother as well as the babe will awake. 

Second: We must not forget that there will be evil in the Millennial 
Age. But instead of being active and in control, it will be under 
restraints like its prime mover Satan; it will not be totally blotted 
out, until the end of the Millennium. 

When we read of "the world to come wherein dwelleth 
righteousness", we must no more conclude that there is no evil 
there, than we should deny all righteousness now because this is 
called "the present evil world." As evil now reigns and rules and 
opposes good, so then righteousness will reign and rule and oppose 
all evil. And "He [Christ] must reign till he hath put all enemies 
[evil and every form of opposition] under his feet." (1 Cor. 15:25). 

Mankind is morally and physically impaired, or evil now, and the 
awakening will find them the same, and the object of Jesus in the 
coming age, is to help to life, liberty, and happiness everlasting, 



those whose right to release from death he purchased once for all. 
"The times [years] of restitution" in which evil will gradually be 
yielding, will furnish abundant opportunity to all for contrasting 
evil and imperfection with good and perfection. 

When we say that evil will continue during the Millennium, we 
need to guard the statement by remarking that not active evil, not 
stealing, lying, etc., but evil in the sense of imperfections with 
possibly unholy and imperfect desires which cannot be gratified 
because the penalty would be severe, as well as sure. These desires 
will give place to a proper recognition of holiness and desires in 
harmony therewith, as the being progresses in restitution towards 
perfection. Those in whom holiness of desire shall not rule by the 
close of the Millennium, are doomed with Satan as incorrigible and 
as his messengers, will be destroyed their second death. 

Third: -They that attain to the spiritual condition and have part in 
the first or chief resurrection, will not marry, as saith the Lord. 
Matt. 22:30. But your question does not relate to these. If Adam 
and Eve were twain yet one before evil and the fall, is it not 
reasonable to suppose that they will be similarly paired when the 
perfect restitution has taken place? 

The command to "be fruitful and multiply" is limited-until the 
earth is "replenished," (literally "filled"-Leeser's Trans, of Gen. 
1:28.); consequently when the earth has been filled, the multiplying 
and fruitfulness should cease according to God's arrangement. If so, 
there would be no perfect children of perfect parentage born at a 
time when there will be no evil wherewith to prove them. 

It is probable that the fruitfulness will decrease as the race 
approaches perfection. It is a noticeable fact that an old, dying tree 
will sometimes put forth more blossoms and attempt more fruit 
which it is unable to bring to maturity, than when it was in its 
prime: So with the human family, early maturity and prolific 
offspring, weak, sickly and dying from the moment of birth, are 
marks of weakness and imperfection which will soon be reversed as 
the restitution work begins and the curse is being removed. See 
Gen. 3:16. 



R735 : page 4 



IT WAS TRUE. 



In October, 1883, the question was asked through the TOWER; 
"Are there any other papers than the TOWER which teach, as it 
does, that Jesus is now present?" And the answer was given: "We 
know of none other which teaches the personal presence of Christ 
Jesus," etc. 

If any reader knows of any journal which up to and at that date 
taught the presence of our Lord, they will confer a favor by sending 



us a copy of such paper with the article containing such teaching 
marked. We feel sure, that the above answer was correct. 



page 4 

Z.W.T. TRACT SOCIETY'S FLORIDA LAND. 

Of the forty plots of land of ten acres each, on Pinellas Peninsula, 
Hillsboro Co., Florida, donated to this Society's funds and offered 
for sale at ten dollars per acre cash; or two years' time to settlers; 
and described in our November Supplement; only the following 
numbers remain undisposed of, viz.: Plots numbered 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 9, 
10, 11,23, 24, 33 and 36. 



R734 : page 5 

THEORIES, TRUE AND FALSE. 

In our January issue we criticized the peculiar and contradictory 
endeavors of an Inconsistent Contemporary Journal to hold on to 
Scriptural words and phrases, while denying the fact that we were 
bought with a price, even the precious blood of Christ. 

Its reply, is not a clear, bold, honest, advocacy of either side of the 
contradictory arguments which we criticised, but after an attempt at 
witticism in suggesting that the TOWER endeavors to fall on it, but 
that the fall of the TOWER would destroy itself, it proceeds to treat 
the criticism as a personal matter. We dealt not with a man, but 
with an inconsistent contemporary journal. Nor did we deal with its 
private affairs, but only with its utterances as a teacher. In this its 
course is childish. Every public teacher is open to public criticism 
and expects it. If this contemporary believed that its theory would 
stand criticism in the light of common sense and Scripture, it should 
have endeavored to show it. If its theory was manifestly 
incongruous and unsupportable, and its reasonings contradictory, it 
should abandon them. It is not manly, not Christ-like, but babyish, 
to seek to hide the justness of criticism by treating the matter as a 
personality. It is the error that we would overthrow, and not a man. 
We wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with the darkness of error. 
It is the false theory of our contemporary that we would and do 
oppose. Truth invites criticism; the Author of truth says, "Come let 
us reason together." Fairness, candor, and reason, are the very life 
of truth the spirit of it. Hence, our contemporary has either missed 
the truth, or the spirit of it, or, as we think, both. 

Our contemporary attempts to draw attention away from its 
inconsistent statements, by suggesting that it is not very particular, 
nor very important which view or theory is correct, saying:- 

"The truth that 'God was in Christ reconciling (atoning) the world 
unto himself,' is not dependent on, but superior to every theory as to 



how the work is done." And, it asks: "If a theory does not reconcile 
or save men, why plead for one?" 

This is an easy and a popular method of disposing of statements 
which will not bear investigation. Our subtle adversary, Satan, is 
ever anxious to delude, and to make use of those once engaged in 
disseminating truth, and is always anxious to be let alone, that he 
might weave his web of sophistry to ensnare the saints, without 
interruption, and without having any one point out its snares. 
Faithfulness to the Master, and to the flock, demands that these 
errors be exposed by those who realize them. 

R735 : page 5 

So error of every kind wants to be let alone. The Scribes and 
Pharisees and devils of Jesus' day, all wanted to be let alone; but 
Jesus and the Apostles would not let them alone. They exposed 
them, and declared it to be part of their mission to bear witness to 
the truth and let the light shine which reproved the darkness of 
error. Every member of the body of Christ should be controlled by 
the same spirit of opposition to error from love of truth and of those 
who are made to stumble by the errors. 

The term theory, as defined by Webster is: (1st def.) "A doctrine 
or scheme which terminates in speculation." (2d def.) "An 
exposition of the general principles of any science: as, the theory of 
music." 

If by the term theory, the first definition is meant, we fully agree 
with the statement of our contemporary. The fact, the doctrine of 
the atonement, is superior to any mere speculation concerning it. 
But will our contemporary claim that its theory as to how the work 
is done, which is constantly endeavors to elaborate and emphasize, 
and to wrest the Scriptures to prove, is after all merely its 
"speculation"? Speculation is dangerous work on such important 
questions, and would be much better let alone. But we apprehend 
that it regards its theory as of rather more weight than the 
definition- speculation- would imply. 

If the second definition be taken- viz.: "an exposition of the general 
principles," then the statement that, "God was in Christ (or was 
working through Christ) reconciling the world unto himself," is not 
independent of, or superior to the theory. On the contrary it is a part 
of the theory, a part of the "exposition of the general principles" of 
God's plan- that his purposes are all to be wrought out in or 
through Christ; that He is the Alpha and Omega of it, the agent 
through whom Jehovah accomplishes all his will. The works of 
creation, redemption, and reconciliation-restitution, are all 
accomplished by Jehovah working in or through Christ. 

But this is not the whole of the theory, or exposition of God's plan 
which the inspired Word presents. No, the Lord himself states it; 
prophets foretell it; types foreshadow it; eye-witnesses confirm it; 
and inspired Apostles cover every point of objection which reason 



can bring against it. Since then, the Bible theory is an exposition of 
the general principles of God's plan, and since it requires the entire 
Bible testimony to complete this exposition or theory, it follows 
that no fragmentary statement of Scripture, could be, either 
independent of, or superior to the entire exposition-the Bible. And 
the mission of the faithful servant of God is to stand as an index 
finger, helping the household of faith to trace for themselves on the 
sacred page, the great principles as well as the minor details of that 
Divine exposition or theory. 

The idea that it matters not what we believe, if we only live right, 
is, alas, too popular to-day. Yet it is as absurd as to say, It matters 
not whether the Sun rises to-morrow, if we only have sunlight. It is 
as impossible to live up to the light, and opportunities, and 
privileges of our day without a correct understanding of the truth, as 
to have clear sunlight without the Sun. Truly the time has come 
when men will not endure sound doctrine -the Bible doctrine or 
theory-and if reproved and rebuked with patience and doctrine, and 
their theories shown to be absurd and contradictory, in their pride 
they regard the effort as a personal thrust, aimed by ill-will. 

"If a theory does not reconcile or save men," says our contemporary 
(assuming that it does not) "why plead for one?" We answer, 
Because we believe the true Bible theory does reconcile. It pleased 
God by the simple process of preaching the true theory of 
reconciliation through the death of His Son to reconcile and save 
them which believe. 1 Cor. 1:21. What should be preached but the 
truth the true theory revealed in God's Word? What should be 
believed but the truth-the true theory? What will sanctify wholly, 
but a knowledge of the truth-the true theory? "Sanctify them 
through thy truth; thy word is truth," was Jesus' prayer. 

Our contemporary requests us to answer some questions. Certainly 
and with pleasure we will answer any questions bearing upon our 
faith in the teachings of God's Word, remembering and heeding the 
Apostle's injunction: "Be ready to give an answer to every man that 
asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and 
fear." 1 Pet. 3:15. 

It asks, "If he [Jesus] were only a man when he gave himself a 
ransom, how could it be the Lord that bought us?" For an answer 
we refer it to an article in our last issue-"The Lordship of Christ"- 
written by J.H. Paton. 

Its query, relative to "A corn of wheat," is also answered in our last 
issue in an article under that caption. 

It inquires why we did not refer to and refute its "reference to Acts 
20:28 and John 3:16, which show that God laid down his life for us 
and purchased us with his own blood." 

Ah! now we see what we failed to notice before: It is upon these 
two proof texts that it attempts to hang its new theory 
(speculation?) that the atoning blood was not the blood or life 



which was given for us by the man Christ Jesus, but the blood of 
God! Well, our dullness of comprehension is our only apology. The 
idea seems so absurd and far-fetched that it did not occur to us. We 
failed to get our contemporary's meaning before, but now it speaks 
plainly-the blood of God. We answer with Paul, "To us there is but 
one God -the Father, of whom are all things... and one Lord, Jesus 
Christ, by whom are all things" (1 Cor. 8:6); hence if our 
contemporary's theory is correct- if as it says, "God laid down his 
life for us and purchased us with his own blood," then truly we 
have been much in the dark, for we neither knew that spiritual 
beings have blood, nor did we know that God died ["laid down his 
life"]. If this be true light, we have been kept in ignorance and 
darkness by giving heed to the teachings of the Apostles, who said 
that God hath immortality, hence could not die; who also said that 
flesh and blood could not inherit the spiritual kingdom, and who 
plainly declared that Jesus became a man that he might redeem 
men, that we were "reconciled to God by the death of his Son," who 
"bought us with his own precious blood." And further, If this theory 
(speculation?) be correct, all the saints have hitherto been in 
darkness on this first principle of the doctrine, which our 
contemporary has just discovered (?) at this late hour-the harvest 
of the age. 

But is it possible that these two texts cited by our contemporary can 
overturn the numberless statements and types of Scripture which 
show Jesus as the Lamb slain? Let us examine these proof texts. 
We turn to 1 Jno. 3:16, and all is plain, for since childhood's days 
we have known that italicized words in the Bible indicate that such 
words are not in the original Greek, but have been supplied by the 
translators. As in this text the word God is in italics, it must be 
evident to the merest child, that this one of the mighty proof texts is 
harmless so far as overthrowing the remainder of the Scripture is 
concerned. 

We turn now to the other proof- text Acts 20:28 and find it in 
harmony with all other Scripture-God's theory still stands, 
harmoniously supported by the united testimony of the Bible. Our 
contemporary should possess and use a copy of the EMPHATIC 
DIAGLOTT and it would not fall into such an error as it has here 
done. Not in this text only, but in several others, the translators of 
the common version have been careless, and misled by their 
Trinitarian views, have given an imperfect translation. The Diaglott 
renders this-"To feed the church of God which he acquired by the 
blood of His own:" i.e. His own Son. 

Seeing that these are its proofs and claimed strong supports, will 
our inconsistent Contemporary give up a baseless theory? Will it 
believe that "the man Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom 
[corresponding price] for all"? Or will it seek for new props for its 
theory, and cling to it while time and money and readers continue, 
and while there are fresh untried Scriptures to be wrested and 
misapplied? We fear that as in the past, its theory will still struggle 



for existence though every proof-text advanced be taken from under 
it. 

Yes, if answering our contemporary's questions will do good and 
help discover to it the baselessness of any theory that does not 
recognize in the death of Jesus, the ransom-the corresponding price 
for the sins of the Adamic race we will be very truly glad to 
answer all that it may propound. We have no theory which we fear 
to have overthrown by Scripture. The Bible theory can never 
contradict or deny itself, nor can any overthrow it. 

While we have only love and good will toward all men, we cannot, 
dare not, from loyalty to our King, fellowship or bid God speed to, 
or in any way encourage or approve, any person or journal which 
denies that we were "reconciled to God by the death of His Son," 
"who gave himself a corresponding price [ransom] for all." See 2 
John 10,11. 



R736 : page 5 

THE CAUSE AND RESULT. 

We long since pointed out that when men would begin to think 
critically upon the dogmas of so-called Orthodoxy, they would not 
only throw away the errors, but the truths as well. As an illustration 
take the following extract from the sermon of the Rev. R. H. 
Newton of New York, preached Sunday, Jan. 25th, 1885: 

"What an utterly baffling arithmetical puzzle is the conventional 
dogma of the trinity; what a moral monstrosity is the God of 
Calvinism; how fiendishly wicked the decrees which predestinate a 
mass of men to unescapable damnation; how thoroughly 
commercial is the traditional doctrine of the atonement; how 
frightfully beyond the dream of insanity is the vision of the 
orthodox hell; how thoroughly unethical is the ordinary statement 
of justification by faith. These are the dogmas against which the 
sharp arrows of a merciless wit are leveled fair and straight. They 
deserve every blow they receive. As formulas of faith their best 
service now to mankind, is to gently die, and so leave room for a 
noble growth of thought around the heart of those old and sacred 
faiths." 

Here, as usual, doctrines unsupported by Scripture, are spread side 
by side with those which are so supported, and the bad odor and 
inconsistency of the false, attaches itself to the true, so that the 
whole becomes nauseous and is rejected together. For instance, the 
doctrine of the TRINITY is supported by only one text (part of 1 
John 5:7,8) which, as is known by all intelligent teachers, is an 
interpolation found in no manuscript written before the tenth 
century, and evidently thrust in there, because that doctrine had no 
Scriptural basis. 



"The vision of the orthodox hell" cannot be found in the Bible at 
all, and is only found in catechisms and hymn-books; and the only 
statements of the Bible which might be construed as favoring such 
a theory, are either found in the symbolisms not generally 
understood, or else are occasioned by the erroneous construction 
placed upon the Greek words hades and gehenna, by popular 
theology self-styled "Orthodoxy." On 

R736 : page 6 

the other hand, the doctrine of the atonement by and as a result of 
the sacrifice of Jesus, in which he "bought us with his own precious 
blood," is taught either directly, typically, or symbolically by every 
book in the Bible. And all that could possibly be repulsive in the 
Bible teaching of a ransom for sin, is the result of a failure to 
apprehend the real penalty of sin and what Jesus gave on our 
behalf. On these subjects the Scriptures wisely appeal only to 
believers. The philosophy of the plan, and its wisdom and 
reasonableness, is not such as will be appreciated by the worldly 
wise the reasons as yet are made clear only to the consecrated 
children of God. 

The teacher above quoted, wisely [from his standpoint] throws out 
the doctrine of "justification by faith." Though this like the 
atonement is interwoven with every part of Scripture, it would be 
absurd to believe in justification by faith if the ransom is denied. 
The two doctrines are really one, because there could be no 
justification by faith in a ransom if there were no ransom; there 
could be no righteousness of Christ imputed to us, if our sins could 
not be and were not imputed to him. We could not bear and be 
clothed in his righteousness, if he could not bear our sins in his own 
body on the tree. 

The same speaker further said in the same discourse: 

"Let us look at another dogma of the Churches-original sin. This is 
a very charming subject to consider. Through the eating of the 
forbidden fruit our first parents became dead in sin and wholly 
defiled in all the faculties and parts of soul and body. They being 
the root of all mankind, the guilt of this sin was imputed and that 
same death in sin conveyed to all their posterity. This all looks like 
a nightmare dream to us in the light of our day. It lacks any 
historical ground. The vista of history through which our fathers 
looked back to an original Adam, who, 6,000 years ago, in his 
lovely eastern garden, ate an apple which not only disagreed with 
him so seriously, but continued to disagree fatally with all his 
innumerable posterity, has forever faded out in a vastly larger and 
grander vision of the past. We see now quite clearly, that in this 
traditional vision we were mistaking a poem for a fact. The God 
whose grandeur SCIENCE REVEALS to us, surely never thus 
started the human race on its career." 



Here the lecturer wanders still further, and tells us in so many 
words that he does not believe in the God which the Bible reveals, 
but in, "The God whose grandeur SCIENCE REVEALS TO US." 

We will not pause to see or inquire just what grandeur Mr. 
Newton's new scientific God has; but we cannot forget the wide 
differences in the teachings of so-called scientists on the subject; 
some of the most advanced claiming that Nature is the intelligent 
God which has been and is, by a system of "evolution" and "a 
survival of the fittest," creating all things. 

This teacher tells of a "nightmare dream" of a fall through Adam. 
Here, too, let us note the cause which turns the clear and emphatic 
statement of God's Word, repeated over and over by prophets and 
apostles as well as by Jesus, (Jer. 31:29; Ezek. 18:2; Rom. 5:17-19; 
Acts 3:21; Mat. 19:11;) into "a nightmare dream" in the scientific 
"light of our day," in the minds of some thinkers whose only 
dishonesty seems to be in yet calling themselves Christians. Is the 
cause not found in the expression used above- "dead in sin"? The 
general teaching of so-called orthodoxy has long been, that the 
wages of sin is DEATH IN SIN, a theory advanced in support of 
the doctrine that man's nature is undying, hence that when God said 
to man "Dying thou shalt die," and "The wages of sin is death," he 
did not mean really extinction of being, or ceasing to live. Their 
theory of a never-ending torture in a place called hell, implied the 
never-ending existence of the wicked, hence to hold to the doctrine 
of everlasting torture, the meaning of the word hades [grave] must 
be misrepresented; and not only so, but the original penalty, 
DEATH the loss of existence ceasing to be was represented to 
mean, ceasing to be GOOD; endless existence in torture, "dead in 
sin," etc. 

Had the truth been held, viz., that man was a perfect being, put into 
a perfect garden on trial, in order that through his trial and fall not 
only God's Justice, Love, Power, and Wisdom should be 
manifested, but that mankind should ultimately be benefitted by the 
experience gained, and prepared the better to everlastingly choose 
good and shun evil, and to love and honor his Creator, then this 
Bible teaching of death (extinction) through one man's sin, and 
revival or restitution by one man's sacrifice, would not have 
appeared as "a nightmare dream"-in the light of truth. It is the false 
light which the Church has willingly received and cherished, that 
now blinds and staggers so many. Their judgment of Scripture is 
warped by the traditions of men which they have imbibed almost 
unconsciously, and held so long, because they neglected the true 
standard and tested themselves by their own standards each 
deciding on the truth of any matter according to the "Standards" of 
his own sect, to the neglect of the only true standard of THE 
CHURCH-the Bible. 

Bear well in mind; "think it not strange"; the conclusions now 
reached by the above-quoted speaker, are but the legitimate fruit of 
the "traditions of the elders," when brought in contact with the light 



of to-day-reason unguided by the Divine Revelation. Only in two 
ways can general infidelity (such as the above) be obviated; either 
ignorance and bigotry must be cultivated and fostered, or the Bible 
must be studied in the light of itself, and the traditions of men 
rejected, totally. The last is the right way, but will not be followed. 
The former will not succeed, for knowledge is being increased and 
the masses will not long remain in ignorance; hence losing their 
bondage to tradition, and being without a true knowledge of the 
Bible, the mass of the nominal Church is hastening into infidelity, 
under the leading of false teachers who still cling to the name 
Christian, though they have rejected the doctrines of Christ. 



R736 : page 6 

EVOLUTION AND THE BRAIN AGE. 

An exchange giving a report of a recent lecture on Phrenology, 
says of it: "He showed how man had first been in a stage of 
existence in which his animal nature predominated, and the almost 
purely physical ruled him; then he slowly grew from one state to 
another until now, when the average man has attained to a condition 
in which it might be said, he is coming under the rule of the brain. 
Hence this age may be regarded and designated as the Brain Age. 
Brain pushes the great enterprises of the day. Brain takes the reigns 
of government; and the elements of the earth, air and water, are 
being brought under subjection. Man is putting his hand on all 
physical forces, and slowly but surely attaining such power over the 
domain of nature as gives evidence that ultimately he may exclaim, 
in the language of Alexander Selkirk, 'I am monarch of all I 
survey.'" 

The above is in perfect harmony with the latest discoveries of so- 
called scientific thought on the subject. Notably, within the past 
twenty years the theory of Evolution has been making rapid 
progress among all classes of thinking people, until now it is 
considered a mark of ignorance and "old fogyism" to think 
otherwise. 

Hence, were it not that we see a necessity for it we should not 
trouble to contradict or refute this, more than many other claims, 
"babblings and oppositions of science, falsely so called." 1 Tim. 
6:20. 

R737 : page 6 

The danger which we see is this: The suggestion seems to some 
minds reasonable and consistent, and in this day many seem 
inclined to reject the Bible, or place it on a level with heathen 
mythologies. The tendency is first to neglect and ignore its 
teachings on this subject; secondly, to claim a harmony between 
Scripture and the Evolution theory; and finally, either to so wrest 
and twist the Scriptures to make them conform to what is termed 



scientific knowledge, and thereby plant and water seeds of error, or 
else to the discarding of the whole or large portions of the Bible 
entirely as a parcel of "old wives' fables," as a New York Methodist 
minister of the gospel recently did. Perhaps now he should be 
known as a minister against the gospel; but the words "gospel," 
"minister," and "Christian," have become very popular, and even 
those who deny and belittle the Saviour, the ransom for sin which 
he gave, and the forgiveness of sin which in consequence he offers, 
would think it very unkind for any to say that they are not 
Christians, but ministers against the gospel of God's Word. 

The fact that at first glance a theory appears "reasonable" should 
not lead us hastily to accept it and attempt to twist the Bible into 
harmony with it. In a thousand ways we have proved the Bible, and 
know beyond peradventure that it contains a superhuman wisdom 
which makes its statements unerring. We should remember too, that 
while scientific research is to be commended, and its suggestions 
considered, yet its conclusions are by no means infallible. And what 
wonder that it has proven its own theories false a thousand times 
when we remember that the true scientist is a student attempting 
under many unfavorable circumstances and struggling against 
almost insurmountable difficulties to learn from the great book of 
Nature the history of man and his home. 

We would not then oppose or hinder scientific investigation, but in 
hearing the suggestions from these students of the book of nature, 
let us carefully compare their deductions, which so often have 
proved in part, or wholly erroneous, with our book of Divine 
Revelation the Bible. Let us prove or disprove the suggestions of 
scientists by "the law and the testimony; if they speak not according 
to this word, it is because there is no light in them" (Isa. 8:20). An 
accurate knowledge of the teachings of both books will be 
harmonious, but until then God's revelation must to his children 
take precedence to and be the standard by which the supposed 
findings of fallible fellow men shall be judged. 

But while holding to this principle, let us see whether there be not 
some other reasonable solution of the increased knowledge and 
skill and power of man than the theory of Evolution, that originally 
developed from a very low order of being man has now reached the 
Brain Age. 

Perhaps after all we shall find that the inventions, conveniences, the 
general education and wider diffusion and increase of knowledge is 
not attributable to a greater brain capacity, but to more favorable 
circumstances for its use. That the brain capacity to-day is greater 
than in bygone ages we deny, while we freely admit, that owing to 
favorable circumstances, the use of what brain capacity men have 
to-day is more general than at any former period, and hence makes 
a much larger showing. 

Let us see: In the study of painting and sculpture do not the students 
of this "Brain Age" go back to the great masters of the past? Do 



they not thereby acknowledge a brain power and originality of 
design as well as a skill in working out their clear designs? Does 
not the present "Brain Age" draw largely upon the original designs 
of past ages for its architecture? Do not the orators and logicians of 
this "Brain Age" study and copy the methods and syllogisms of 
Plato, Aristotle, Demosthenes and others of the past? Might not 
many of the public speakers of to-day well covet the tongue of a 
Mark Anthony or an Apollos, and much more the wonderful 
reasoning power of the Apostle Paul? 

To go still farther back, while we might well refer to the rhetorical 
powers of several of the prophets and to the sublime poetic 
paintings interspersed throughout the Psalms, we refer these "Brain- 
Age" philosophers to the wisdom and logic, no less than the fine 
moral sensibilities, of Job and his comforters. 

And what shall we say of Moses? "Learned in all the wisdom of the 
Egyptians" (Acts 7:22). The laws given through him have been the 
foundation for the laws of all civilized nations, and are still 
recognized. And it would be well for this "Brain Age" if the laws 
were more copied and observed to-day. Such, for instance, as the 
law of restitution in the Jubilee year. (See Lev. 25:23-41.) 

The exhuming of ancient buried cities shows a knowledge of the 
arts and sciences surprising to some of the philosophers of this so- 
called "Brain Age." And the ancient methods of embalming and of 
making elastic glass and Damascus steel are among the 
achievements of the remote past which the brain of the present age, 
with all its advantages is unable to comprehend and duplicate. 

Going back four thousand years to about Abraham's time, we find 
in the Great Pyramid of Egypt an object of wonder and amazement 
to the most learned scientists of to-day. Its construction is in exact 
accord with the most advanced attainments of this "Brain Age" in 
the sciences of mathematics and astronomy. It teaches positively 
what could only be approximated by the use of modern instruments. 
So striking and clear are its teachings that some of the foremost 
astronomers of the world have unhesitatingly pronounced it to be of 
Divine origin. 

And even if our Brain Age Evolutionists should admit that it is of 
Divine arrangement, and that its wisdom is superhuman, still they 
must admit that it is of human construction. And the fact that in that 
remote day any set of men had the mental capacity to work 

R737 : page 7 

out such a Divine arrangement as very few men to-day would be 
capable of doing with a model before them, and with all modern 
scientific appliances at hand, proves that our "Brain Age" develops 
more self-conceit than circumstances and facts warrant. 

If, then, we have proven that the mental capacity of to-day is not 
greater than in past ages, but probably less, how shall we account 
for the increase of general knowledge, modern inventions, etc.? We 



trust we shall be able to show this reasonably and in harmony with 
Scripture. 

The inventions and contrivances which are now proving so 
convenient and advantageous to mankind, and which the lecturer 
thought a proof that this is the Brain Age, are really very modern- 
nearly all within a century; and the most important are those of the 
last threescore years; among others the application of steam and 
electricity, in telegraphy, steam railroading, and the application of 
these principles to mechanics. If, then, these be evidences of 
increased brain power, the Brain Age must be only beginning, and 
the logical deduction would be that another century would witness 
every form of miracle as an every-day occurrence; and at the same 
ratio of increase where will it eventuate? 

But let us see: Are all men inventors? How few there are whose 
inventions are really useful and practical compared with the number 
who use an invention when put into their hand! Nor do we speak 
disparagingly of that very useful and highly-esteemed class of 
public servants, when we say that the smaller number of them are 
men of great brains. Some of the most brainy men in the world, and 
the deepest reasoners, are not mechanical inventors. And some 
inventors are so intellectually sluggish that you wonder how they 
ever stumbled into the discoveries they made. The great principles 
which many men in many years work out and improve upon time 
and again, were generally discovered by the merest accident, 
unsought. 

From a human standpoint we can account for modern inventions 
thus: The invention of printing, in A.D. 1440, may be considered 
the starting point. With the printing of books came records of the 
thoughts and discoveries of thinkers, which without this invention 
would never have been known to their successors on life's pathway. 
With books came a more general education, and finally common 
schools. Schools and colleges do not increase mental capacity, but 
they do make mental exercise more general. As knowledge became 
more general and books more common, the generation possessing 
these had a decided advantage over previous generations, not only 
in that there were now a thousand thinkers to one, but also in that 
this generation has, through books, the experience of yesterday and 
the past in addition to their own. 

Education and the laudable ambition which accompanies it, 
enterprise and a desire to achieve distinction and wealth, abetted by 
the record and descriptions of invention in the daily press, has 
stimulated and brightened man's perceptive qualities, and put each 
upon the alert to discover, if possible, some simple or useful 
method or agency for the convenience of society. Hence we suggest 
that modern inventions, looked at from a purely human standpoint, 
teaches not an increase of brain capacity, but a sharpened 
PERCEPTION from natural causes. 



But now we come to the Scriptures to see what they teach on the 
subject; for while we believe as suggested above, that invention and 
the increase of knowledge, etc., among men are the results of 
natural causes, yet we realize that these natural causes are all 
realized by Jehovah, and are permitted or hindered for a time, by 
the overruling providence of God, whereby he "worketh all things 
after the counsel of his own will." Eph. 1:11. 

According to God's plan, as revealed in his Word, he purposed to 
permit sin and misery to misrule and oppress the 

R738 : page 7 

world for six thousand years, and then in the seventh millennium to 
restore all things, and to extirpate, destroy, evil and its 
consequences by Jesus Christ, whom he hath afore ordained to do 
this work. Hence, as the six thousand years of the reign of evil 
began to draw to a close, God has permitted circumstances to favor 
discoveries, in the study both of his book of revelation and his book 
of nature, as well as in the preparation of mechanical and chemical 
appliances useful to the blessing and uplifting of mankind during 
the Millennial Age. That this was God's plan, approved as the 
counsel of his will, is clearly indicated by the prophetic statement: 
"O Daniel, shut up the words and seal the book, even to the time of 
the end: [then] many shall run to and fro, and knowledge [not 
capacity] shall be increased," "and none of the wicked shall 
understand [God's plan, etc.], but the wise shall understand," "and 
there shall be a time of trouble such as never was since there was a 
nation, even to that same time." Dan. 12:1,4,10. 

To some it may seem strange that God did not so arrange that the 
present inventions and blessings should sooner come to man to 
alleviate the curse. But God's plan has been to give mankind a full 
appreciation of the curse, that when the blessing shall come upon 
all, they may have forever decided upon the evil and 
unprofitableness of sin. Furthermore, God foresaw and has foretold 
what the world does not yet realize, viz., that God's choicest 
blessings would lead to and be productive of greater evils if 
bestowed upon those who are depraved, and whose hearts are not in 
accord with the righteous laws of the universe. Ultimately it shall 
be seen; that God's present permission of increased blessings is a 
practical lesson upon this subject, which may serve as an example 
of this principle for all eternity -to angels as well as restored man. 

How this can be we may suggest: First, So long as mankind is in his 
present fallen or depraved condition, without stringent laws and 
penalties and a government strong enough to enforce them, the 
selfish propensity must hold more or less sway over all. And with 
the varying capacities considered, it is impossible but that the result 
of the invention of labor-saving machinery must (after the first 
flurry occasioned by the manufacturing of machines) tend to make 
the rich richer and the poor poorer. The tendency is toward 
monopoly and self-aggrandizement, which places the advantage 



directly in the hands of those whose capacity and natural advantage 
is most favorable. 

Secondly: If it were possible to legislate so as to divide the present 
and daily increase of wealth evenly among all classes, which is not 
possible, still without human perfection or a supernatural 
government to regulate man's affairs, the results would be more 
injurious than the present condition. If the advantages of labor- 
saving machinery and all modern appliances were evenly divided, 
the result would, ere long, be a great decrease of the hours of labor 
and a great increase of leisure. Idleness is a most injurious thing to 
fallen beings. Had it not been for the necessity of labor and sweat of 
face, the deterioration of our race would have been much more 
rapid than it has been. Idleness is the mother of vice; and mental, 
moral, and physical degradation would ensue. 

Hence the wisdom and goodness of God in withholding these 
blessings until in his plan it was due time for their introduction as a 
preparation for the reign of blessing. Under the control of the 
supernatural government of the kingdom of God, not only shall the 
blessings be equitably divided among men, but when the leisure 
shall be so ordered and directed by the same supernatural 
government, that its results shall produce virtue and tend upward 
toward perfection, moral and physical. 

The present increase of inventions and other blessings of increasing 
knowledge, are permitted in this "day of preparation" to come about 
in so natural a way that men flatter themselves that it is because this 
is the "Brain Age;" but it will be permitted in great measure to work 
itself out, in a manner very much to the disappointment no doubt, of 
these wise philosophers. It is the very increase of these blessings 
that is already beginning to bring upon the world the time of 
trouble, which shall be such as never has been since there was a 
nation. 

The prophet Daniel, as quoted above, very properly links together 
the increase of knowledge and the time of trouble the knowledge 
causes the trouble, as shown above, because of the depravity of the 
race. 

The blessing of KNOWLEDGE INCREASED, has not only given 
the world wonderful labor-saving machinery and conveniences, but 
it has led also to an increase of medical skill whereby thousands of 
lives are prolonged, and it has so enlightened mankind that human 
butchery, War, is becoming less popular, and thus thousands of 
lives are prolonged to still further multiply the race which is 
increasing more rapidly to-day, perhaps, than at any other period of 
history. Thus, while mankind is multiplying rapidly, the necessities 
for his labor are not increasing correspondingly, but diminishing. 
And the "Brain Age" philosophers have a problem before them to 
provide for the employment and sustenance of so large a class 
whose services (under present arrangements) can be dispensed 



with, which ultimately they must admit is beyond their brain 
capacity. 

Selfishness will continue to control the wealthy who hold the power 
and advantage, and will blind them to common sense as well as to 
justice, while SELF-PRESERVATION and an increased 
knowledge of their rights, will nerve some men and inflame others, 
and the result of the BLESSINGS will, for a time, prove to be 
terrible a time of trouble such as was not since there was a nation. 
And this, because man in a depraved condition cannot properly use 
these blessings unguided. The "time of trouble" shall cease in due 
time, when he who spake to the raging Sea of Galilee shall likewise 
with authority command the raging sea of human passion, saying, 
"Peace be still!" The result shall be the same when this Prince of 
Peace shall "stand up" in authority- there shall be "a great calm." 
Then the raging and clashing elements shall recognize the authority 
of "Jehovah's Anointed," "the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, 
and all flesh shall see it together," and in him "shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed." 

Then men will see that what they attributed to Evolution, natural 
development and the smartness of the "Brain Age," was instead, the 
flashings of Jehovah's lightnings (Psa. 77:18) in "the day of his 
preparation" for the blessing of mankind, and shall praise him Lord 
of all, exclaiming, "O the depth of the riches both of the knowledge 
and wisdom of God. How unsearchable are his judgments, and his 
ways past finding out. But as yet only the saints can see, and only 
the wise in heavenly wisdom shall understand this, for "the secret 
of the Lord is with them that fear him." "He will show them his 
covenant." (Psa. 25:14.) Thanks be to God, that while general 
knowledge has been increased, he has also ordered that his children 
need "not be unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord" and in the 
appreciation of his plans. And by this appreciation of his word and 
plans we are enabled to discern and withstand the vain philosophy 
and science, falsely so called, which contradicts the Word of God. 



R738 : page 7 

THINK IT NOT STRANGE. 

"Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to 
try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you: But 
rejoice in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that 
when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with 
exceeding joy." 1 Pet. 4:12,13. 

Notwithstanding this exhortation very many of the beloved of the 
Lord do think it "strange" when the fiery trials strike them, 
doubtless because they do not appreciate the Lord's design. Let us 
look at it together. 



While we understand from Scripture that present evil in general, 
shall ultimately be over-ruled of God and made to minister good, 
yet we are far from thinking that "all's for the best," or that every 
thing which occurs in the world was foreordained of God and 
brought about by Him. No we must remember that since the "fall," 
the Eden paradise with its perfection and blessings suited to the 
perfect man have been done away, and the sin-cursed race has been 
condemned to the as yet unfinished and imperfect earth [The garden 
of Eden was a little spot finished beforehand, in order to provide a 
perfect trial to the perfect man Adam]. By the time man has been 
perfectly restored to manhood as represented in Adam, his home, 
the earth also shall have reached its perfection as represented in 
Eden. Meanwhile, the turbulence of nature, cyclones, earthquakes, 
etc., incident to the unfinished work, continue, and constitute part 
of the evil to which the entire race became subject through the sin 
of their representative Adam, and from which it has been redeemed 
and will shortly be released by their second representative, Jesus. 

But, in all this confusion of nature, Scripture teaches us that one 
class is under special supervision and to these nothing out of God's 
order could happen. This is the consecrated class, the members of 
the Anointed body-Christ. We know that all things work together 
for good to them that love God, who are the called according to His 
purpose." Rom. 8:28. 

R738 : page 8 

As it was with the nation of Israel in type, so it is with the Royal 
Priesthood, the holy nation of believers now, and so it shall be with 
the world in the coming age. Israel had as many captivities 

R739 : page 8 

and famines, etc., probably as other nations, but none of them were 
by accident; each was a chastisement, and they are so explained in 
Scripture. So now, many are the scourgings which the spiritual sons 
of God receive in order that they may not be condemned with the 
world. (1 Cor. 11:32.) And though no chastisement for the time 
seemeth joyous but grievous, nevertheless God knows and we are 
learning the peaceable FRUITS of righteousness which this pruning 
produces in those who are rightly exercised thereby. 

While it should be a cause of sorrow to us, that we need special 
chastisement to recall us to duty, yet we must remember that it is an 
evidence that we are still reckoned of God as among His sons, and 
such chastisements then are evidences of His love and his desire to 
have us make our calling and election sure, to the grand prize to run 
for which we consecrated. In view of this, if you receive such 
chastisements and correction, think it not STRANGE. 

But while such trials should not be thought strange the apostle Peter 
in the above statement evidently meant more than this, as expressed 
in the words "But rejoice inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's 
sufferings. " Christ did not suffer because of disloyalty or failure to 



keep his covenant. He did not suffer because of spiritual drowsiness 
and conformity to the world. He did not suffer because of self-will 
leading him to ignore the Father's will and word; nor because of a 
plan of his own which must needs be dashed to pieces. No, the 
sufferings of Christ were from no such causes. Hence to the extent 
that we share His sufferings, it must be not as chastisement for evil, 
nor in the renouncing of evil, but a suffering wrongfully- 
undeservedly. His was a suffering for well doing and for the truths' 
sake, and to be sharers or partakers of this suffering, on account of 
which we may rejoice and anticipate coming glory, we must take 
heed to the cause of the suffering. We only deceive ourselves if we 
count sufferings for sin as part of the sufferings for Christ, and on 
that account expect the glory to be revealed. 

We are well aware that this is "a hard saying", and that many will 
not let themselves believe it. The terms "sufferings of Christ" and 
"sacrifice" have long been misused. Many reckon themselves as 
sacrificers with Christ, because they have abandoned some practice 
which they considered evil, such as profanity, the use of stimulants 
or jewelry, or extravagant dressing, or dancing, etc., etc. If these 
things are wrong, you never had a right to them, hence it could not 
be a "sacrifice" with Christ to discontinue anything you believe to 
be wrong in and of itself. 

What then were the sufferings of Christ which we may endure that 
are of the same kind? 

The word Christ signifies anointed, and hence those sufferings 
could not have commenced with Jesus, before his anointing of the 
spirit after John had immersed him in the water, in emblem of his 
consecration to death. So too with us; none of us could share in the 
sufferings of the anointed, unless we had first consecrated and 
become members of the anointed (ecclesia) company. 

The sacrifice and sufferings of Christ Jesus, included every item of 
mental and physical pain and self-denial experienced as a RESULT 
of his consecration, until it was complete in death. It therefore 
included the denial of all laudable and proper human ambitions 
which Jesus as a perfect man must have experienced more than 
imperfect men, as well as the reproach which he bore from his 
fellow-men for the sake of truth, especially from the teachers of the 
nominal church of his day. It included also his weariness and 
exhaustion caused not only by preaching, but through giving off his 
own vital energy for the good of others in healing the sick, etc. See 
Mark 5:30. 

So too are the sufferings of Christ which we may well rejoice to 
have shared, when the time comes that "the glory shall be 
revealed." They start from the hour of consecration, and if faithful, 
end only in death. With us as with our Head and pattern, the 
sacrifice consists in denying ourselves things which are lawful and 
proper, in our endeavors to honor God, promote truth and do good 
in any way to any in need, especially to them of the household of 



faith. And apparently most of the "body like their 'Head'" will spend 
more of their sacrificed time and substance in supplying spiritual 
than physical wants of men, though the latter should not be 
neglected as we "have opportunity." 

You were ambitious in the exercise of legitimate business talent, 
but your consecration demanded time and thought for the careful 
study of God's word that you might know Him and His will 
concerning you, and that you might "communicate" the same to 
others. Your business ambition had to be curbed; your time and 
talent were no longer yours, but consecrated, hence though business 
was still needful it became secondary, and henceforth your 
"Father's business" was first and your former ambitions restricted to 
necessity and to the promotion of the "Father's business." 

You had taken great pleasure in making home elegant, in dressing 
self and family in elegance, and you said it was right because you 
had gotten the money righteously, and you felt sure that God loved 
beautiful things, and that His heavenly home and family are 
elegant; but now with time and money and all consecrated, you 
realize something of the pleasure of sacrificing with Christ by 
denying yourself such luxuries, and restricting your outlay of the 
Lord's time and money to the providing of things needful and 
decent. 

You were fond of company and passed many a pleasant, social hour 
in "Music," "Social chat," "Harmless dancing" and "Innocent 
amusements and games. " Now, while not condemning these 
innocent recreations in the world, your covenant of sacrifice with 
Christ demands that your time, money and influence formerly thus 
used, except so much as may come within the range of necessities 
or emergencies, shall be faithfully accounted for to God, your rights 
and privileges in these things sacrificed, and the time, money, and 
influence used according to your consecration, in God's service. 

You used to take a lively interest in "Politics," "The Temperance 
question," "The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Association," 
"The National Peace Congress Society," "The Prison Reform 
Association," "Labor Unions," etc., etc. Many an hour, many a 
dollar, and the full weight of your influence, you gave to such 
objects, and still, believe it well spent in an endeavor to do good. 
But now you find that your consecration compels a different course, 
and these which were your own will and plans for doing good must 
be sacrificed to God's plans, and you must follow the Leader. 

As you mark carefully His course, you perceive that he, though in 
sympathy with every moral reform, used his time and influence 
wholly in preaching the glad tidings. And as you came more fully 
to appreciate the Lord's plan, you realized that the moral reforms 
could and would be carried forward by the kind and benevolent of 
this world, just as well without you, but could never reach 
perfection until God's kingdom shall obtain control. Then you 
realized as you had not done at first, the necessity of the work 



which you should be engaged in: that the preaching of the "good- 
tidings of good" things coming, was God's method of developing 
you as well as others for a share in that great and successful Moral 
Reform which shall obtain throughout the world when the rightful 
King and his Bride are enthroned in glory and power. 

You not only used to love to do generously, "giving to everything" 
and "speaking favorably of all," but you also appreciated highly the 
good will and favor of all toward you. This showed a good spirit 
and a broad heart, and none can help admiring such. And such 
admiration is very sweet always. We may know that the perfect 
man Jesus would have enjoyed doing just so. But under his 
covenant of sacrifice he must and did deny himself this enjoyment. 
He must and did rebuke sin, error and hypocrisy and thus forfeited 
(sacrificed) the good opinion and admiration of the nominal Church 
of his day. Instead of quietly letting the Scribes and Pharisees 
alone, he must and did sacrifice his inclination for peace in order to 
advance the TRUTH, honor God, and bless the people. So you 
found it: You could no longer give to everything; by your covenant 
and sacrifice with Christ, you had already given ALL YOU HAD- 
to God, and now you are merely God's agent or steward and you 
can give nothing now, without consulting his directions, and 
ascertaining whether it will go to advance truth or error. You no 
longer have an option or choice, and of course some who once 
thought you "whole-hearted and generous" will now consider you 
"narrow-minded and bigoted." 

The same will apply to your treatment of doctrinal matters. Once 
you carelessly and ignorantly, though benevolently, supposed that 
all denominations of Christians believed alike, and took so many 
different routes to heaven appointed by God, so that each person 
might have a choice of form of worship, and your friends called 
you a broad-minded Christian. But after your consecration had led 
you to a study of God's plans in his Word you perceived your 
mistake. You had never in the full sense been a Christian before, 
and now you find that there are many doctrines of all 
denominations contrary to God's revealed purpose. You thus began 
to be what the world calls "narrow-minded," and were obliged to 
oppose certain systems as well as doctrines, and finally with a 
further search of your Father's plans you found that the systems 
calling themselves "Churches" and laying down rules and doctrines 
for faith and practice are ALL of them mere human arrangements 
and their doctrines self-arranged and self-binding, a mixture of truth 
and falsehood blinding and confusing both to saint and sinner. 
When you found that the Church mentioned by Jesus and his 
apostles was not one of these man-made systems nor 

R740 : page 8 

yet all of them together, but that the class who, having consecrated 
to God, were accepted through the Redeemer and had their names 
written in heaven, then came a fresh trial upon you. Would you or 



would you not, sacrifice your honor and standing and "good name" 
and "broad-minded" reputation, for the TRUTH? 

That was one of the severest of all your SUFFERINGS, yet you 
said with the Master: "Father, glorify thy name"; and as you saw 
the counterpart of this in the Lord's sacrifice, you heard him say: "It 
is sufficient that the servant should be as his Lord." It has occurred 
to you as I forewarned you: When they shall say all manner of evil 
against you falsely [and often ignorantly] for my sake, rejoice and 
be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven. In your 
rejoicing now you no longer think "strange" of the fiery trials that 
encompass you. Hereafter let us more and more rejoice in such 
sufferings-rejoicing that we are counted WORTHY to suffer for 
Christ's name. 



R740 : page 8 



THE SAME NIGHT." 



We again remind you that Sunday evening, March 29, will this 
year be the anniversary of the Lord's Supper-"The same night on 
which he was betrayed." (See last issue.) We anticipate a blessed 
season of communion on the part of all the dear members of the 
Body of Christ then. 

So many as can be present at the Allegheny meeting will be warmly 
welcomed and entertained as best we may be able. Come on the 
28th inst. to the TOWER office. Such as will require lodgings 
please send word beforehand that arrangements may be perfected. 



R740 : page 1 



VOL. VI. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., APRIL, 1885. 

NO. 8. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 40 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat yea, 



come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



R740 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

THE PASSOVER SUPPER. 

As per previous appointment, the Lord's Supper was celebrated on 
its anniversary on the evening of March 29. From letters and cards 
received before and since, we judge that the event was very 
generally celebrated by the deeply-interested of our readers in every 
quarter, and doubtless by many from whom we have not heard as 
yet. In some places there were about a dozen, in others two or three, 
and sometimes one commemorated alone. To all of these, so far as 
we have learned, it was as with us at Allegheny City, a very 
precious season. 

Here about one hundred met in our usual "upper room" and 
celebrated and commemorated our ransom, partaking of the 
emblems of our Redeemer's broken body and shed blood. Eight 
brethren and sisters from New York, West Virginia and various 
parts of Pennsylvania were present with us, and preceding the 
celebration, we had a pleasant social meeting, in which our hearts 
were refreshed by remembrances of our Father's goodness and care 
and love. Among other things, it was noted that one of the 
evidences of our relationship to God, our sonship, was, that he was 
more and more revealing to us his plans. In this connection, and as 
a proof of it, the words of Jesus came to mind: "I have not called 
you servants but friends, for the servant knoweth not what his lord 
doeth: but I have called you friends for all things that I have heard 
of my Father, I have made known unto you. John 15:15. 

When the hour of 8:30 o'clock arrived, which we judged would 
most closely correspond with the time at which the Supper was 
instituted by our Lord, we partook of the emblems: first briefly 
examining their significance. For the benefit of all we briefly 
review what we there saw. 

We remembered the Master's words concerning the bread: This is 
my body [representatively] which is broken for you. This is the 
bread which came down from heaven, of which a man may eat and 
not die. Except ye eat the flesh and drink the blood of the Son of 
Man, ye have no life in you. Looking from the symbolic bread to 
the body of Jesus, we realized that it was indeed the true bread. It 
came down from heaven in the sense that his being originated not 
on earth, but in heaven; in the sense that his being was not begotten 
of the will of the flesh, but that his was a transferred existence. That 



he who was rich became poor became of a lower nature was 
made flesh, for the special purpose of suffering death on our behalf, 
that we through his poverty [he gave "all that he had," even life] 
might be made rich; that we might have restored to us all those 
blessings which Adam, our representative once possessed and lost 
for himself and us. 

We considered afresh why it was needful for him to be broken-to 
be slain for us. We saw that it was because we had no life in us. 
Death was working in and devouring the whole race. All being of 
the same condemned race, none could secure his own life, nor was 
there one who could by any means redeem his brother, or give to 
God a ransom for him all were condemned and dying. But man's 
extremity was God's opportunity: he provided the one who, because 
of the same kind or nature, could give a ransom [corresponding 
price], and who, because not of the condemned Adamic stock [but 
from heaven], was an acceptable Redeemer. We saw that whereas 
the race, because of Adam's sin, was cut off from, separated from 
the trees of life in Eden, and hence could not live, yet now they had 
presented to them through Jesus a bread of life, a gift from heaven, 
the acceptance of which would restore the life and blessings lost. 

We saw that though Jesus was this bread of life, it was needful that 
he should be broken, sacrificed die for us, before any of our 
condemned race could partake of his merits. He being a perfect 
man, gave himself a corresponding price to cancel the curse of 
death upon all through the sin of the first representative. Now, all 
that remains is for each one blighted through Adam to come and 
partake [eat] of those perfections and rights which Jesus secured for 
us by his sacrifice on our behalf. We eat or appropriate Christ's 
perfections by faith, i.e., by faith we realize that Jesus was our 
ransom, and by faith we appropriate to ourselves those merits 
which, as a perfect man, he possessed, and which he broke or 
sacrificed for us. 

Here we saw the beauty of God's arrangement that though the 
sacrifice was sufficient for all, none could receive life through it 
except by accepting and acknowledging the sacrificed one as the 
Life-giver. Thus seen, not only is an acknowledgment of the 
ransom an essential to life now, but in the next age also, it will be 
necessary. Forever it will be true "Except ye eat of the flesh.. .ye 
have no life in you. " That the ransom given is the foundation of all 
blessing must ever be recognized. "No man cometh unto the 
Father"-no man has "oneness" with him, except by the broken 
body and shed blood of the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin 
of the world. Who "put away sin by the sacrifice of himself." 

We looked also at the blood shed for many for the remission OF 
SINS not for ours [the Church's] only, but also for the sins of the 
whole world, and we saw in the wine its symbol: "This is my blood 
of the new covenant, which is shed for many for the remission of 
sins." Matt. 26:28. We glanced at the three great covenants [see 
"FOOD," page 148]: we saw how the Law covenant under Moses 



had failed to prove a real blessing and to give life to the dying race, 
but how the New Covenant would be superior and would 
accomplish the blessing [restitution] of all the families of the earth, 
by reason of the Ransom. Thus we saw that his blood his 
sacrificed life or human existence was the ransom which redeemed 
all, and made their restitution possible, was most emphatically the 
Blood of the Covenant- the sealing, the ratifying, which makes the 
New Covenant operative. We rejoiced in the blood so freely shed 
which gave us access to the Father, and resolved that we should 
never be of those who lightly esteem the blood and count "the 
blood of the covenant" a common (ordinary) thing, and do despite 
to the spirit of God's favor manifest in that precious sacrifice. (See 
Heb. 10:16-21 and 26:31.) 

Having seen this, in the bread and wine as representative of Jesus, 
we looked further and saw through the Apostle's words (1 Cor. 
10:16,17) still another significance in the ordinance. He says: "The 
cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion [sharing] 
of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the 
communion [or sharing in the breaking or sacrifice] of the body of 
Christ"? His suggestion is: As the Lord blessed and broke and 
passed the emblems, and thus represented his sacrifice, do not we, 
while recognizing that, also represent the same thing? namely, that 
we as members of the body of Christ are consecrated and being 
broken in sacrifice with our head? "For we being many are ONE 
LOAF and ONE BODY; for we are all partakers of that one loaf." 

Regarded thus in its fullness, the eating of the emblems had a two- 
fold significance representing to us Jesus' sacrifice which 
redeemed us, and our sacrifice with him. We saw that it was by 
reason of our now sharing with Jesus in the sealing of the New 
Covenant, 

R741 : page 1 

that we shall in due time be permitted to share with him in bringing 
upon the world all the blessed provisions of that New Covenant in 
the "Times of Restitution of all things." The revival of memory on 
this subject seemed to strengthen in us all, the resolution to "fill up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ," that when his 
glory shall be revealed we may be glad also with exceeding joy. We 
remembered the two Apostles whose request was to sit in the throne 
with Jesus, and we recalled Jesus' words in reply: "Are ye able to 
drink of the cup?" We realized our own weakness and the many 
besetments and allurements of the flesh, the world and the devil, 
which would conspire to keep us back from sharing the cup of 
suffering and death symbolized before us in the wine, yet realizing 
that we could do all things through the strength of our Head we 
said, Yea, Lord, we will drink it, "we are able" in thy strength; and 
then we heard from His Word the Lord's answer to each of us, "Ye 
shall indeed drink of the cup" "My strength is made perfect in 
weakness." "Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name I will do it." 



When we had partaken of the emblems, we sang a hymn, and went 
to our homes meditating meanwhile upon the scenes of eighteen 
hundred and fifty- two years ago: The garden, the betrayal, Herod's 
soldiers, the crown of thorns, the scarlet kingly robe, Pilate's 
endeavor to secure his release from the chief priests and great 
religionists of his day, how they hated him without a cause, because 
he exposed their false theories and hypocrisies; we saw and 
remembered him on the cross saying, "It is finished," and dying. 
The eye of faith grasped the situation, and our hearts, while full of 
grateful love, cried in faith, "It is finished," we are redeemed, our 
ransom price has been paid. We have life, we feed upon him, we 
apply and appropriate to ourselves the life and rights which he 
surrendered on our behalf. Thank God, "The Lord hath laid upon 
him the iniquity of us 

R741 : page 2 

all; he bore [the penalty of] our sins in his own body on the tree. By 
his stripes has healing come to us. (Isa. 53:5.) We sang in 
conclusion our thanks to him as our Saviour as well as Lord: 

All hail the power of Jesus' name; 
Let angels prostrate fall: 
Bring forth the royal diadem, 
And crown Him Lord of all." 



R395 : page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Texas, March 26, 1885. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: I hope and believe I am one of the 
consecrated ones, but do not know what member of the body I am. 
As I have no special gift as yet developed, I must be one of the feet 
members. He who knoweth the heart sees that I am willing and 
desire to be one of the members, serving in love, knowing what 
great things God has done for me and how unworthy I am. You will 
find enclosed $3.00, to be used in "running the body." It is a small 
amount, but I hope to send more, as I am prospered. I have been 
very much enlightened by two pieces in the March number of the 
TOWER, viz., "Think it not strange," and "If the whole body were 
an eye," &c. May our Father reveal more of the truth to the eye 
members for the building up and unification of the whole body! I 
would love to meet with you March 29th; though absent in flesh 
can be with you in spirit. Please remember the isolated members. 

Yours in fellowship, 



Vinton County, Ohio. 



BROTHER RUSSELL: I received the papers and likewise the Food 
you sent me in due time, and am truly thankful for them. But I do 
not think you can understand how grateful I am unless you know 
how hungry I was. I have stood for nearly thirty years on the rock 
Christ Jesus, knowing that in him our Father would in due time 
bless all families of the earth. But sometimes I was almost 
discouraged because I could not see the plan. I have no human 
creed to bind me. In all those long years I have only belonged to 
Christ, and now, praise be to God, who has helped me to stand in 
the dark, as light now springs up and shines forth in due time, I am 
ready to walk. I will do all I can for the spread of truth. 

A sister in Christ, 



R400 : page 2 

Glasgow, Scotland, Feb. 16, 1885. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: I would take it as a favor if you 
would continue the TOWER to me. I had the hope of being able to 
send my subscription, but I see that I will not be able for some time. 
The monthly visits of the TOWER are so highly prized by me that I 
would feel the want of them very much. They are my only comfort 
now, being cut off from all the sects called churches. It gives me 
much pleasure to inform you that I met with four sisters and six 
brothers in this city twice within the last month, and we purpose 
celebrating the Passover. Hoping the Lord will bless his own work, 
I remain 

Your Brother in Christ, . 

R222 : page 2 

Bristol, England. 

MY DEAR SIR AND BROTHER: When I wrote asking you to 
correspond with me by letter, I had no idea that ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER was a paper, never having heard of it, else I should have 
known that your time would not permit you to answer every 
inquirer by letter. But as you so kindly acquainted me with that 
paper, I send you three dollars, being subscription for three copies 
of the TOWER, and the rest for postage of a few copies of "Food 
for Thinking Christians" and "Tabernacle Tract." 

I do not know how to express my thanks to God and you for those 
blessings I have received. Really I hardly know myself for joy. For 
some time past I have been dimly conscious that a blessing was 
hovering over me, because I have been going through the deep 
waters, and I could not account for it. I asked my fellow-believers if 
they were used to such wrestling as I was experiencing, and they 
knew nothing of it. I see now the fallow ground was being broken 
up to receive the good seed. O, how I praise Him for the truth He 
has given me, and in what a way, too. I joined the Church of 
England soon after I was converted, but a few months was enough 



there; then I joined the Wesleyans, but a little more than a year was 
enough: then I joined the "Brethren," of which I am still a member, 
but I do not think it likely to continue long, because when they 
know I deny the doctrine of the Trinity, as well as eternal torment, I 
think my connection must cease of necessity. I have been a member 
of a mission to preach the gospel to the poorest classes in the lowest 
parts of the city, but I was prevented from ill health from 
continuing doing so, which I now see was my Father's hand 
restraining. God has given me a talent (the gift of preaching), and 
although I quite expect all the halls and rooms will be closed 
against me, yet I will declare the truth in the streets and in the 
public places as soon as ever I am taught more clearly. I do need 
some Aquilla or Priscilla, but I can trust to Jesus who is made to me 
wisdom. I have spoken to several since I have read your papers, and 
they have had ears to hear in a measure. I feel a great desire to tell it 
out, and am intensely anxious for the Tabernacle Tract and Food 
again (I only had one on loan), for instead of the TOWER 
satisfying me it has set me craving for more. My Bible is no longer 
a book of a dead language; it is a mine of wealth. I was talking 
yesterday with a young friend about that article in last number, 
"Except a corn of wheat die," and while talking the Spirit took of 
the things of Christ and showed them unto me. 

Praying that our Father may still enable you to see many more 
precious views from the WATCH TOWER, and use you as the 
channel to convey it to his hungering and thinking children, 

I am yours sincerely, 



P.S. I am a cab-driver, and am lost in wonder and amazement as to 
why He has favored me thus, but 1 Cor. 1:21 is being made literally 
true in my experience. 

R395 : page 2 

Texas, January, 1885. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: I write this for information. We (a 
few brothers and sisters) have come out of the Church (so called), 
and are standing for, and searching for the truth. I have been 
preaching four years, and from the first was called peculiar in my 
opinions. About two years past I received a copy of ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER of a dear friend and brother, which I read and 
compared with the Bible, and have been at it since. I soon began to 
preach in harmony with the TOWER, because I believed it to be in 
harmony with the Bible. Therefore my preaching got worse instead 
of better, my church said, and the consequence was I soon left 
them, shook off the shackles, pulled out of the yoke, and bless God 
I am standing in the liberty. During this time I have circulated the 
TOWER and preached in harmony with its teachings. When I left 
the church some others about twenty and since then more have 
also come out. The greater portion of us were Methodists. Having, 



therefore, never been baptized (by immersion), the question has 
been considered by us. Some want to be baptized, and others are 
satisfied. They have come to me, and as I have not been immersed I 
hesitated about immersing others. If I could find a brother that 
would baptize me, and do, nor ask, any more, I would be glad to 
receive baptism. The Baptists here will not baptize unless we join 
their Church, and we do not want to become again entangled with a 
yoke of bondage. 

Now, what ought we to do? I do, and have for some years desired to 
do, God's will; and I do not want to leave one duty undone. I do 
pray and believe that you will find time to answer this letter. 



Your brother, 



IN REPLY. 

It does us good to learn of each others victories and achievements, 
as well as to sympathize in each other's burdens and difficulties; 
and we and all the members of the body who shall read the above 
will rejoice with you, realizing that it has fallen to you as it is 
written: "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you 
free." 

Your question too, is good, as indicating the right spirit: Like one of 
old you are evidently inquiring, "Lord, what wilt thou have me to 
do" you no longer seek the will of men or sects but of God, 
because you are free. Thank God for this. You have seen, as all 
must, who study the Bible and are thinking Christians, that Baptism 
is enjoined, both by precept and example by 

R396 : page 2 

Jesus and the Apostles. You realize that baptism must have a 
significance beyond the mere outward symbol, and yet you realize 
that the symbol which was important enough for Jesus and the 
Apostles to practice and teach, is important enough for you to 
practice and teach also. 

Possibly you have not noticed that the word Baptize is a Greek 
word, which, like the word Christ, is transferred into the English, 
but not translated. As the word Christ, if translated into English, 
would mean anointed, so the word Baptize translated would signify 
to dip, to plunge, to immerse. You have probably noticed also that 
Jesus and the Apostles taught nothing with reference to baptizing 
infants, and that nothing in the Bible gives the least ground for the 
theory so prevalent among many of the sects, especially the 
Lutherans and Roman Catholics, that the babe which has not been 
sprinkled should it die would be damned to eternal torture. On the 
contrary, you have no doubt noticed, that in every case it is the 
BELIEVER who is enjoined to be baptized, and we all know that if 



the believing could be done by proxy much more the baptizing 
could be done for another. 

This much we may know from a very limited use of reason in the 
study of the bare facts recorded, without seeing the true import of 
the ordinance. But when we come to see the significance of the 
ordinance, no room is left for conjecture. As already pointed out in 
these columns [see Oct., '84, issue], the baptism of Christ and that 
of John are of different import. The former indicates that all who 
perform the symbol have consecrated themselves to death, have 
delivered themselves over into the hands of Jesus, praying that He 
will work in us to will and to do of His good pleasure; that we may 
be buried as human beings -immersed into the BODY [the true 
Church*] of Christ by being immersed into death with him, (Rom. 
6:3,4,) and be also with Him and like our Head [spiritual beings] in 
the resurrection; sharing his death and also his resurrection. (Phil. 
3:10.) 

Those who do see the real meaning and significance of the water 
symbol, must see in it a beauty and force. The complete burial and 
the struggle which nature makes against it, are strikingly suggestive 
of the complete consecration against which our human will 
struggles hard. The helpless condition of the one buried, and the 
power yet ease by which the administrator can raise him up, 
represent strikingly our helplessness in death, and the power of God 
who raised up Jesus, to raise up us also by Jesus. Thus the raising 
up represents not only our future quickening and perfection, but 
also the fact that we even now are in the world as no longer human 
beings, but "new creatures" in Christ Jesus, walking in newness of 
life; in the world, but no longer of it. 

If any one sees clearly the real import of the ordinance, and 
DESIRES not to follow those footprints of Jesus as well as others, 
he should, in honesty to himself, make a thorough examination of 
the obstacle which hinders, lest peradventure it be pride which 
would prove that the real baptism, the real death, had not taken 
place. The wholly consecrated heart will be willing, if not anxious, 
to have it's Master's will done in every matter. 

We have never urged any one to perform the symbol. Jesus and the 
Apostles never did so. Like the reality, it must be a voluntary 
offering, to be an "offering" at all. The same is true of all the Lord's 
dealings with those whose selection is now in progress: they are 
called or invited, not forced or compelled. The Lord's Supper and 
Baptism, and the things symbolized by these, are held out as 
privileges, and are intended to draw or select those who thus 
appreciate them. Our obedience is the test of our love, and thus the 
Master puts it: "If ye love me, keep my commandments." 

Does some one inquire whether the obtaining of the CROWN might 
depend on so small a matter as obedience to a symbol? We answer, 
Yes, it might. If the propriety and significance of the ordinance 
never came to your notice, or if you could not obey it, then you are 



blameless of any disobedience; but to him that knew his Master's 
will and did it not, to him it is SIN- wilful sin. (James 4:17; Luke 
12:47.) Such are not overcomers. God tests powerfully sometimes 
with small things. In Eden the sin was in disobedience: the fruit was 
the test which showed it. So here various are the tests by which our 
Lord requires us to prove our full consecration. The form or symbol 
is nothing, except as it represents the real consecration. Is the 
consecration real and complete which is ashamed of the symbol? It 
is well that we make sure work of it by being conformed in all 
things to the pattern of our Lord. Let no man take thy crown. They 
will soon all be "laid up" for overcomers and the body complete; 
now is the acceptable time if you have any sacrifice to present to 
God, holy and acceptable by Jesus Christ. 

For our part we stand in constant fear (2 Cor. 11:3; Heb. 4:1.) for 
those who have failed to perform the symbol after having realized 
the true significance of Baptism. Nothing short of full, complete 
consecration will stand the test of the trials of this "Evil day" into 
which we have already entered: all others must fall under the 
delusive snares of the adversary. Only as we are wholly swallowed 
up in consecration shall we be "able to stand." Such being kept by 
the power of God are the Elect and the delusions and snares would 
deceive if it were possible, the very elect; but it is not possible, 
because they shall be holden. One fear is lest those referred to 
should be found short of full consecration. 

As to who shall baptize you in symbol, my Brother, it makes no 
difference. I should prefer one of the Brethren who appreciates the 
reality. You could then plant him and others in the likeness of 
Christ's death, and raise them in a figure or symbol of His 
resurrection. It matters not where, either-a regularly prepared 
Baptistry, which you might hire for the occasion, or the river, or 
any place where there is plenty of water. (John 3:23.) 



*The "Baptists" get a glimpse only of the significance of the 
ordinance: they see that Baptism is the only means of access to the 
body, the church, but fail to see the real Church-the one whose 
names are written in heaven; as they fail also to grasp the true 
import of the immersion into death, of which that into water is only 
the symbol. 



R396 : page 2 
"Let your moderation be known unto all men. "-Phil. 4:5. 

R741 : page 3 



CHRIST'S DISCIPLE. 

"If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up 
his cross daily, and follow me." (Luke 9:23.) 



Would ye be My disciple? Consider again; 
Can ye follow My footsteps through trial and pain? 
Can ye throw away pleasure, and glory, and fame, 
And live but to honor My cause and My name? 

Can ye turn from the glitter of fashion and mirth, 
And dwell like a pilgrim and stranger on earth, 
Despising earth's riches, and living to bless? 
Can you follow the feet of the shelterless? 

Can ye ask from your heart the forgiveness of men? 
Can ye list to reproaches, nor answer again? 
Can ye pray that repentance in life may be theirs 
Who've watched for your falling, who've set for you 
snares? 

When you hear I am come, then, can you arise, 
The joy of your heart springing up in your eyes? 
Can ye come out to meet Me where'er I may be, 
Though ye come on the waves of the storm-crested sea? 

When I call, can ye turn and in gladness "come out" 
From the heart of your childhood, the friends of your heart? 
With naught but My promise on which to rely, 
Afar from your loved can ye lie down and die? 

Can ye take up the cross that was heavy for Me, 
The scoffing and scorn, My disciple to be? 
Blest Saviour, Thou knowest the weakness of man; 
With strength that Thou givest, we answer, We can. 

-Sel. 



R741 : page 3 

THE TWO SALVATIONS. 

A failure to clearly discern the distinction between-first: the 
sacrifice which Jesus gave for our sins, on account of which we 
have been granted repentance and remission of sins, and second, the 
sacrifice we have been called to make with Christ as sharers of his 
sufferings and to fit us to share his glory, has been the source of 
much confusion of thought. In consequence, some preach: It is ALL 
grace, we can do nothing; God through Christ does all. These 
would quote in proof, "By grace are ye saved through faith and that 
[grace] not [because of any merit] of yourselves it is the gift of 
God,"-"not of works, lest any man should boast." (Eph. 2:9.) 
Others declare: It is grace truly, but unless you do works in 



harmony with it, you never will be saved. It is written, "Present 
your bodies a living sacrifice," and "WORK OUT your own 
salvation." (Rom. 12:1, and Phil. 2:12.) 

The party which mixes works and faith gradually comes to regard 
faith as of little value, and works as all important, and detracts from 
the value of the sacrifice which Jesus gave, while adding to the 
importance of the sacrifice of the sinner, or as they term it the 
sinner's death to sin, as the means or cost of his own salvation. 

The party which depends wholly on faith, generally inclines to an 
opposite extreme and ignores the possibility of any fallen being 
doing works acceptable to God. In their endeavor to show that Jesus 
fully and amply "paid it all," these frequently assert that the penalty 
of sin was eternal torture, and that Jesus endured as much 
SUFFERING in a few hours in Gethsemane's garden as all mankind 
would have suffered in an eternity of torture. 

Each of these parties is without argument when confronted with the 
Scriptures of the opposite party, and without denying or disproving 
the texts in opposition, each quotes the texts and teaches the view 
which seems most approved to itself; while the infidel sneers 
"Your Bible contradicts itself." 

There is a difficulty somewhere what is it? 

It is this: As we saw when examining the doctrines of Election and 
Free-grace, both are true; both are supported by Scripture, and the 
difficulty has been a failure to note the two ages to which the two 
doctrines apply-an election according to favor during the Gospel 
age, and Free and complete favor to all during the Millennial age. 
So also the doctrines of Faith and Works-Belief as a ground of 
salvation, and Sacrifice as a ground of salvation. Both are true: We 
must merely rightly divide the word of truth and its beauty and 
harmony will be manifested. As in the doctrine of Election, the 
harmony was seen by observing the two ages, so with this doctrine, 
the beauty and force can only be distinguished by recognizing two 
salvations. 

Does some one hastily say: I cannot believe that; the Scriptures 
teach of but one salvation? We reply: How do you know? Have you 
searched the Scriptures with that in view, to see? If you had said the 
catechism, etc., which I studied when a child, taught that there is 
but one kind of salvation, then we should have agreed with you. 
Perhaps that is what you meant: at all events we can show clearly 
that the Bible does teach two kinds of salvation and two totally 
different classes of saved. 

First, then: There is a general salvation common to all the Adamic 
race. Adam, the representative of the race, through sin lost the 
perfection of manhood with all its privileges; the result being death- 
-extinction-not only for himself but for all springing from him and 
represented by him-"and so death passed upon all men." Jesus 
came to seek and to SAVE that which was LOST. If his mission 



was successful it must result sooner or later in the recovery and 
restoration of that which was lost. 

Since Adam was not a spiritual but human image of God, he lost 
not a spiritual existence, but a human existence. He lost not a 
heavenly home, but an earthly paradise. He did not even lose 
heavenly promises, for none such were given him. Since we all 
sustained our loss through Adam, ours like his must have been a 
loss of human perfection, human existence, human likeness to God, 
an earthly Paradise, etc.; hence Jesus' mission was to redeem save- 
-recover restore "that which was lost." He commenced the work, 
by ransoming the race [giving a "corresponding price"]; and the 
Apostle assures us that he will complete the work of saving that 
which was lost- "When the times of refreshing [making new] shall 
come from the presence of the Lord; and he shall send Jesus 
Christ.. ..whom the heavens must receive [retain] until the times of 
RESTITUTION [or restoration] of all things which God hath 
spoken, by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world 
began." (Acts 3:19-21.) 

Thus seen, the ransom given by Jesus and the results to be obtained 
are the exact offset to the sin of Adam and the loss thus sustained. 

This salvation comes to all men just as freely through Jesus as the 
loss came unsought through Adam. As now death is upon all, so in 
the restitution, life shall pass upon all, and as a result, all will begin 
to improve and to come into full perfection of manhood, which 
condition when reached may be everlastingly theirs on condition of 
everlasting obedience to God. This then is the general salvation- 
"common salvation" in which all shall share, because Jesus Christ 
by the grace of God tasted death for every man; because "the man 
Christ Jesus" "gave himself a ransom [corresponding price] FOR 
ALL, to be testified in due time." This salvation is the saving of 
man from sin and death to holiness and life; but it in no sense 
changes his nature; he will still be man and while of the earth 
earthly, when saved or RESTORED, will again be an earthly image 
of God, and "very good" -the lord of earth restored to his dominion- 
-recovered from his "fall." 

Secondly, glance at the other salvation; the special one, called in 
Scripture, "THE salvation," "YOUR salvation," "OUR salvation," 
"so GREAT salvation," etc. Like the other, this salvation is also 
from sin and death, but it includes a change 

R742 : page 3 

of nature, so that the life enjoyed when this salvation is fully 
accomplished will be not a restoration of human nature, but a 
transforming to the "DIVINE nature," no longer earthly beings, but 
heavenly or spiritual beings. The Scriptural evidences on which a 
hope for this special salvation is based are familiar to our readers, 
and the call to this hope is mentioned as a "high calling," a 
"heavenly calling," etc. 



"This great salvation" must take place first, before the "common 
salvation" shall be accomplished, for those who experience the 
"great salvation" are to be God's instrumentalities through whom 
the "common salvation" shall be bestowed upon all the world of 
mankind. They without us shall not be made perfect. (Heb. 11:40.) 

These who share in "so great salvation" are but a "little flock" and 
in it are not many rich or great or noble according to the course of 
this world, for to this salvation God hath chosen the poor of this 
world rich in faith, heirs of the kingdom. "God hath chosen the 
foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and God has 
chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which 
are mighty; and base things of the world and things which are 
despised hath God chosen, yea and things which are naught, to 
bring to naught things that are." 1 Cor. 1:28. 

The Apostle speaks of these two salvations in the same sentence, 
when he says, "We trust in the living God who is the SAVIOUR 
OF ALL MEN, specially of those that believe." 1 Tim. 4:10. 

As these two salvations differ, so do the conditions differ. The only 
conditions for the common salvation are a recognition of Jesus who 
bought us with his own precious blood and an acceptance of the 
salvation provided coupled with their best endeavors to abstain 
from sin. No works must be here added to the work of the 
Redeemer to merit this recovery of that which was lost. 

"In our hands no price we bring, 
Simple to His cross we cling." 

Those who will share in the "great salvation" and be "especially" 
saved to heavenly conditions, must first share by faith in the 
common salvation. These during the Gospel Age have accepted 
Jesus and his atoning sacrifice as the ground and substance of 
restored rights and privileges as men, not getting that restoration to 
perfect manhood actually, as the world will during the Millennium, 
but accepting it now by faith it is to such, a reckoned perfection; an 
imputed justification, a reckoned recovery from all that was LOST 
to all that human perfection and blessing which Jesus' ransom 
[corresponding price] recovered for all. But if such would accept of 
the "heavenly calling," they must do more than thus believe and 
accept. They are believers and are already subjects of this common 
salvation from death and sin, before they are called to run for the 
heavenly prize. 

The Apostle forcibly impresses this when he says: "I beseech you 
brethren [already believers in Jesus as their Saviour, already 
reckoned, restored or justified through faith, hence called brethren] 
that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice unto God." 

This proves that sacrificing is not the condition of becoming 
brethren, for these were brethren but had not presented themselves 
as sacrifices. Thus all who are freed from sin are not only children 
of God, but are all brethren whether they are of the human nature, 



justified, or like the Apostle begotten to the divine nature. The 
earthly and the heavenly when complete and perfect will be all one 
family, as there is one God and Father of all. 

Then as though anticipating an objection from these brethren, that 
they were unworthy to be sacrifices since all sacrifices must be pure 
and holy else they could not be acceptable to God, the Apostle 
answers this objection by reminding them of their justification and 
reckoned purity on account of Jesus' sacrifice, and assures them that 
being thus justified their sacrifices would be "holy" and "acceptable 
to God" as well as a "reasonable service" for them. 

This "service" of "sacrifice" after having been justified from sin and 
death by Jesus' ransom alone, is the condition upon which any shall 
be "accounted worthy" of the heavenly prize, the great salvation. 
Only upon the condition of sacrificing WITH the Master, sharing in 
and filling up that sacrifice for the world, are any promised a part in 
that "little flock" which shall share Jesus' resurrection [the same 
sort] because they share his sacrifice. 

This is the salvation which can only be obtained by sacrifice-by 
"working out YOUR own salvation" and the dissimilarity of this, 
from the salvation which no man can work out for himself, but 
which was purchased by the precious blood of Jesus, and which 
must be accepted by all as the free gift of God through Jesus Christ 
our Lord, should be apparent to all critical readers. And when this 
distinction is recognized all those Scriptures which before seemed 
contradictory on the subject of salvation by faith and salvation by 
works, become beautifully harmonious and clear. 

But, some may inquire: Do you then claim and teach that those who 
gain heaven and become members of the little flock and share in 
divine nature and honors will gain them by their own works 
simply? that they will merit such high honors? Ah no! Do not 
misunderstand us thus. 

Grace first contrived the way 
To save rebellious man, 
In every step 'tis still displayed 
Throughout God's wondrous plan." 

The recovery of man from sin and death was God's favor through 
the sacrifice of his Son. Restitution to his "former estate" was not 
merited, hence was the manifestation of God's grace or favor. So 
the offering to some of the redeemed race of the infinite "prize" in 
exchange for the human rights and privileges which he himself had 
just presented to us freely through Jesus, is but a further 
manifestation of the grace of God. We do not by any works or 
sacrifices merit an exaltation to the divine nature and glory "far 
above angels and principalities and powers" as joint heirs with 
Jesus. And not only so, but we never could have dreamed of such 
an offer being made us! It is simply astounding to us; to many this 
"EXCEEDING 



R742 : page 4 

RICHES OF HIS grace in his loving kindness toward us IN 
CHRIST IESUS," is wholly inconceivable, and unbelieved. But 
those who believe the offer and give their little all, [justified saved 
through Christ] in exchange for a prize so great, can only say:- 

God moves in a mysterious way 

His wonders to perform. 

* * * 

Deep in unfathomable mines 
Of never failing skill, 
He treasures up his bright designs, 
And works His sovereign will." 

This "great salvation" is to be to all eternity the great monument of 
God's grace by which all his creatures angelic as well as human, 
shall have indubitable proof that God's grace is boundless, and his 
love and wisdom and power by which he is able to cause all things 
to work together for good to those who love and serve him are 
unfathomable. 



R742 : page 4 



THE FAVOR OF GOD. 



Let the conditions of the present Gospel Age, the besetments of 
Satan now permitted, the obstacles which now hinder faith, and the 
sacrifices which are now demanded of all who would now be 
overcomers as shown in the article- "Think it not strange" (See last 
issue) be CONTRASTED with the favorable opportunities of the 
incoming Millennium, when the obstacles to faith shall be quite 
removed, when all shall know the Lord, from the least to the 
greatest; when Satan's power shall be restrained, and when the 
requirements of God will be no longer the sacrifice of things right 
and lawful, but merely the rejection of evil, with full liberty to use 
and enjoy every blessing and privilege, then freely supplied to all. 
In view of the contrast some would exclaim: "How favorable a time 
the Millennial Age will be! How I wish that I could have lived then 
instead of now! Why will that age be so much more gracious or 
favorable than the Gospel Age, if God is no respecter of persons 
and loves us, as much as them?" 

Well, such is a very natural mistake. The fact is, however, that the 
Gospel Age is the one of special FAVOR. The greatest and 
grandest favor that ever has or ever will be offered to any of God's 
creatures is held forth during this Gospel Age, and closes with its 
close. While the advantages and opportunities of the next age are 
most favorable, the prize then obtainable is proportionately less 
valuable, though the prize offered for obedience during the 
Millennial Age will be great and grand also: It will be glorious 



indeed to have everlasting existence, in perfection and happiness 
under God's approval and blessing. But the fact is, that the prize 
offered during the Gospel Age to the sacrificing members of the 
body of Christ, is exceedingly great, exceedingly grand, infinitely 
sublime. So much so, that in the estimation of all who have truly 
realized its value, it is priceless, and would be cheap at any cost. It 
is no less than to be made of the Divine nature, and to share Divine 
honors and glories with our illustrious Head and forerunner. It was 
when contemplating the EXCEEDING great and precious promises, 
held out during the Gospel Age, and the EXCEEDING riches of 
God's grace [favor] in his loving-kindness toward US through 
Christ Jesus, that the Apostle to the Gentiles, looking at its cost, in 
trials, besetments, burdens, sacrifices and sufferings, said: I do 
count them but loss and dross, and shall rejoice if by any means [at 
any cost- any sacrifice] I may win CHRIST and be found in him- 
if I may be a member in that BODY OF CHRIST which is to be so 
highly exalted and honored in God's due time. Phil. 3:7-14. 

So then, in this as in the ordinary affairs of life, an article which 
costs far more may be a more favorable bargain than one costing 
less, though it be a favorable bargain also. Not only the cost, but the 
things obtained therefore, must be considered, when we decide as to 
which is the more favorable of any two things. 

Our conclusion that the Gospel Age is one of superior favor [grace] 
to any before or after it, is abundantly proven to be God's estimate 
by many Scriptures; a few of which we here quote: 

"I thank my God always on your behalf, for the GRACE of God 
which is given you through Jesus Christ" (1 Cor. 1:4). "By whom 
also we have access by faith into THIS GRACE wherein we stand 
and rejoice" (Rom. 5:2). God "hath saved us [from Adamic sin and 
its penalty through Jesus our propitiation] and called US with an 
holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own 
purpose and grace" (2 Tim. 1:9). "Of which salvation the prophets 
have enquired and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace 
[favor] that should come UNTO YOU." "Unto whom it was 
revealed, that not unto themselves, but UNTO US they did minister 
the things which are now reported unto you by them that have 
preached the Gospel unto you." 1 Pet. 1:10,12. 

Seen in its true light then, the fact is that Jesus' death was the 
equivalent or "corresponding price" for Adam's sin and penalty, and 
quite sufficient to legally effect the release of every member of the 
race. And the Millennium of blessing and the restoration of all 
mankind to that human perfection and being which they had lost 
through Adam, would have at once commenced after Jesus' 
resurrection, but for the Gospel Age of SPECIAL FAVOR offered 
to believers willing to follow in Jesus' footsteps of sacrifice. They 
are reckoned as members of the world's Redeemer and their 
sacrifice [made worthy and acceptable first by his] are accepted as 
parts of Jesus' sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, and are 



RECKONED as filling up that which is behind of the afflictions of 
Christ. 

This opportunity for sacrifice is a favor, because of the great reward 
and high honor promised to Jesus which we may share by reason of 
sharing in his sacrifice. 

Does some one suggest that the favor contained in the privilege of 
suffering and sacrificing with Christ may perhaps be continued, and 
thus all come to the same divine nature and honor? We answer, No. 
This would be unscriptural as well as unreasonable. Wherein would 
consist the special favor of the Gospel Age unless it be as we have 
shown, a call to and opportunity for gaining a "high calling," a 
"heavenly calling," not otherwise obtainable? 

Then, too, if the body of Christ "fills up" the measure of the 
afflictions of the anointed, how could there be any to fill up in a 
succeeding age? And if the sacrifice for sins is complete, and its 
measure filled up by the Gospel Church, what occasion and what 
opportunity could there be for sacrificing any in the Millennial 
Age? Further, we know that had there not been sin in the world, and 
had it not had liberty to flourish, it would have been impossible for 
either Jesus or his followers to have sacrificed, since there could 
have been no opportunity. Hence also, to have sacrifices for sins 
during any coming age, would imply that evil must then be in 
control, as well as that the sacrifices of Christ head and body were 
not a sufficient ransom. The fact everywhere expressed in Scripture 
is contrary to this; Christ shall reign and the wicked shall no longer 
have liberty to insult, buffet, malign and crucify the righteous. 
Satan shall be bound-restrained-have no power. Christ shall have 
all power, and in his day the righteous shall flourish instead of 
being sacrifices; and the wicked shall be cut off, instead of 
prospering in wickedness. Ah, yes! the sufferings of Christ will 
have ended, and the glory which was to follow [the end of his 
sufferings] shall have commenced. See 1 Pet. 1:11. 

Yes, though now the world esteem us as it did our Head, "stricken, 
smitten of God and afflicted," and not favored, yet the time is 
coming when of both head and body it shall be recognized as true, 
that the Christ was smitten for the world's iniquities, and that the 
price of the world's salvation was exacted of him, when throughout 
coming ages God shall display, and men and angels shall 
recognize- "The exceeding riches of his grace, in his loving- 
kindness toward US through Christ Jesus." 



R742 : page 4 

LIFE AND DEATH. 

"See, I have set before thee this day life and death." Deut. 30:19. 



These were the words of Moses to Israel when he had delivered to 
them the law of God, promising life to the obedient, and threatening 
certain death to the disobedient. Accompanying these solemn words 
through Moses, we have also the affirmation and exhortation of 
Jehovah through the prophet Ezekiel (33:11), "As I live, saith the 
Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that 
the wicked turn from his way and live: Turn ye, turn ye, for why 
will ye die, O house of Israel?" 

The same alternative had been placed before Adam in Eden, and 
through his transgression, the sentence of death had already passed 
upon all the race; and there could be no release from that sentence 
until a ransom or substitute had been given, and no redeemer had 
yet appeared. 

The above words follow the giving of the law to Israel; But, God 
knew that his law was the full measure of a perfect man's ability, 
and that therefore, it was impossible for Israel to keep it. Was it 
then mere mockery for God to set before them life, when he knew 
they could not attain it? and to present death as a possibility, when 
he knew it was certain? 

In view of the fact that not one gained life under that law, it would 
certainly appear to be mockery, were it not for the fact that further 
enlightenment through New Testament teachings, proves Israel to 
be a typical people [See "Tabernacle Teachings."] Israel is seen to 
typify the world of mankind; and the sin-offerings, sacrifices, 
atonement, etc., made typically for them, prefigured the real and 
effectual sacrifices and atonement made for the whole world. 

So we must regard this promise of life, and this warning of possible 
death, as given to the whole world through Israel their type. When? 
when the law in full, is given and expounded to the whole world, by 
that "Great Prophet of whom Moses was a type, (Acts 3:22; Deut. 
18:15.) -the Christ, head and body-in the in-coming Millennial 
Age. When they thus receive that law, the first death will have been 
passed, and because of the ransom given they will have been 
awakened from it, to have the privilege of running for life as 
individuals; released from the former sentence or condemnation 
which came on them through Adam. They may then run for life 
with the full assurance of obtaining it, if they run lawfully. Yet that 
there is a possibility of failure is proved positively by the words of 
Ezek. 33:11-16, to all those who believe God true, and not a 
mocker. 

We see then that the Millennial Age is the world's appointed 
Judgment Day. Then the final issue of life and death will be before 
the world. But we have learned further, that not only is Israel a type 
of the whole world, and God's dealings with them typical of his 
dealings with the world in its day of Judgment, but we learn that 
Israel is also typical of the Gospel Church in this day of Judgment. 
(See Tab. Teachings.) 



Since the Gospel Church enters upon its reward before the world's 
judgment begins, it is quite clear that our judgment must be finished 
before that time. In other words, our judgment must be finished 
within the limits of this present life. Death ends all opportunity for 
those who have during this age, consecrated themselves entirely to 
God. Solemn thought, that every moment we stand before the 
judgment seat of Christ. Before us, are now placed the FINAL 
ISSUES of life and death, which will in the future be placed before 
the world. 

"See, I have set before thee THIS DAY, life and death." 

True to his diabolical character, the great deceiver is specially busy 
now among the consecrated, as he will be with the world when 
loosed for a little season in the end of their judgment day (Rev. 
20:3). His object now, as it then will be, is to deceive those running 
for life, and if possible, to deprive them of it. He cannot then, nor 
now, deceive those trusting implicitly in the word of the Lord, with 
full purpose of heart to serve and obey him; but those not so 
trusting and not fully so disposed, he will deceive, not as to what is 
truth, but as to what the result of such a course will be. He will 
repeat the lie given in Eden, "Ye shall not surely die" (Gen. 3:4), 
reasoning variously as emergencies may require: with some, that 
God is too good to pass the sentence of death again, and that even if 
he should, he would rescue them from it as he did from the Adamic 
death. And as an angel of light he will praise the goodness and love 
of God and attempt to prove how it will overleap and overpower his 
justice. Others, he will deceive as to the nature of death, attempting 
to prove it a blessing in disguise, or a necessary step in an evolution 
to a higher nature, or a symbolic expression to imply the destruction 
of evil, or what not? Anything but the dread penalty of wilful sin as 
set forth in the Scriptures to be total extinction of existence. He will 
also attempt to deceive as to the merit and efficacy of the ransom, 
without full recognition of which, God has declared that none may 
have life. Acts 4:12. 

All these various deceptive devices which will be brought to bear 
upon the world in the end of their judgment day, after they have 
been fully enlightened, tasted of the good word of God, and the 
powers (opportunities and advantages) 

R742 : page 5 

of the world to come, are now being advanced among those now on 
trial consecrated believers. Are such able to meet them? If not, we 
must charge God with unfaithfulness in leaving his sheep 
unprotected among the wolves. But no, God is true, and it is not 
possible to deceive his elect those who still maintain a full purpose 
of heart to trust and obey him. His truth, our "shield and buckler" is 
made so plain now that no such child of God can fail to see it, and 
therefore to rest in it. 

Hear further the words of the Prophet: "I command thee [spiritual 
Israel now the world in the age to come] this day to love the Lord 



thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his commandments, and 
his statutes, and his judgments, that thou mayest live.. .But if thine 
HEART turn away, so that thou WILT NOT hear, but shalt be 
drawn away [deceived or allured] and worship other Gods and 
serve them; I denounce unto you this day, that ye shall surely 
perish.... I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I 
have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing, therefore 
choose life." Deut. 30:15-19. 

Not from such earnest words of warning would any reasonable 
mind gain the idea that death, from which Jehovah says "Turn ye, 
turn ye, for why will ye die" and again "As I live, I have no 
pleasure in the death of him that dieth"-is a blessing, a death to sin, 
or a necessary step by which to gain a higher nature. Could any of 
the elect (those in the right condition of heart) be so deceived? Nay, 
if any are deceived, the fault is chargeable to themselves, and not to 
God. 

It is a duty imperatively demanded of the watchmen on the Tower 
of Zion today, not only to point out to Spiritual Israel the blessed 
and inspiring promises now nearing fulfillment, but also to warn of 
present and approaching danger. If any of those whom God hath 
placed in such positions of trust, fail to watch or to warn, their 
blood shall be required of his hand. True, none will be lost solely 
on account of the watchman's unfaithfulness, but on account of 
their own unfaithfulness. The watchmen nevertheless will be held 
to account as though all depended on his warning. 

In obedience to his high trust, Paul thus faithfully warned the 
church, and pointed out in language that cannot be mistaken by 
unbiased minds, the blessing and cursing, life and death, set before 
us. Heb. 10:25-31. 

Another device of the adversary in this critical hour, is to endeavor 
by sophistry and deception, to diminish the incentive for which we 
run the "Narrow Way" making it appear that there is little 
advantage to be gained by such sacrifices as we are required to 
make representing that only mere selfishness can see in the word 
of God a prize (the divine nature) for the Gospel Church above 
what the world shall share. Of course the inference is, that it is folly 
to thus run for what the world will in due time get without such 
exertion. 

Christian be on thy guard, 

Ten thousand foes arise; 

The hosts of death are pressing hard 

To draw thee from the prize." 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R642 : page 5 
"CUSTOM may lead a man into many errors, but it justifies none." 



"IT is easier to find a score of men wise enough to apprehend the 
truth, than one intrepid enough to stand up for it in the face of 

opposition. " 



R743 : page 5 

SATISFIED AND DISSATISFIED. 

Sunday, January 25, 1885, the Rev. Talmage said in his sermon to 
his Brooklyn congregation: 

"If you want to know how life seems to me now, I answer, It is very 
bright. I have had dark days, sad days, tumultuous days, but there 
now is not one cloud on my sky. I would rather be here than 
anywhere else. My surroundings suit me exactly. Except yours, I 
have the best family in all the world. My friends are kind and 
sympathetic; the world to me is a most desirable abode. I have 
nothing against the weather, for if it be cold, I have fuel and stout 
apparel; and, if it be hot, I flee to the mountains, and have no 
indictment to present against anything or anybody." 

On the same page with the above report was the following one of 
the destitution and dissatisfaction existing in Cincinnati as 
expressed by a Communistic parade carrying a red and black flag 
through the principal streets of that city. The report says: 

"One who is on the street at night will find an able-bodied man on 
almost every square, whose plea for a few cents for bed or bread is 
certainly not always that of the professional beggar. Men steal that 
they may be sent to the workhouse, and tell of it when arrested with 
shamefaced exultation. The workhouse is filled to overflowing, and 
the prisoners have to sleep two in a bed designed for only one. The 
charities and the charitable are overtaxed. Cases of destitution are 
brought to light daily till they are monotonous. On Wednesday a 
Russian Jew tried to let out his life through his wrists, because of 
his utter despair of longer earning bread for himself and his wife 
and babies in a strange land. 

"This is the condition which one in every ten of the whole 
population finds confronting him. The transparencies borne last 
Saturday night said: 'Work or bread;' 'The many fast, the few feast;' 
'The pensioned idleness or pensioned industry;' 'Order and an 
empty stomach can never be allies;' 'No mendicants or millionaires.' 
'Self-preservation is the first law of nature;' 'Revolutions grow with 
the discontent of the people;' 'Revolt was never belied by the tin 
cup of the soup-house;' 'Charity covers sin, labor covers the back;' 
'Wealth needs charity, we need labor.'" 

Truly the distinction between men, both in talents and comforts, 
occasioned through the Adamic "fall" and hereditary taint, is very 
great; and to the lower strata of society it becomes more grievous to 



bear as intelligence increases. How much the world needs the 
promised kingdom of God! It is "groaning and travailing in pain," 
waiting and hoping for a good time to come, though how it will 
come they cannot clearly see. They vainly hope that love's 
righteousness shall become universal, and that the question of 
service and wages and a more uniform distribution of life's 
blessings will result. 

Some hope that this grand and desirable result may be attained by 
the preaching of Christ, and point to the millions of professed 
Christians; and, in their desire to increase the showing of results 
even counting those whom they call "anti-Christ" to swell the 
numbers. But while all should be glad to concede that all of these 
systems, both Christian and anti-Christian are exhibiting increasing 
benevolence, yet at the present rate it would be a long time before 
Love would hold the sway over selfishness. In fact, to-day, the 
satisfied and dissatisfied, the luxurious and the poverty-pinched are 
seen side by side in greatest contrast in the greatest city of the 
world (London) under the government which claims to be the most 
advanced in Love and Righteousness. The dissatisfied are 
becoming restless and desire revolution, not realizing that the 
speedy effects of it would be to make their condition worse, as well 
as to destroy the peace of the satisfied class. 

But not until men have exhausted their efforts to legislate the world 
into Love, and to revolutionize it into Righteousness; not until it has 
learned that what is now called Christianizing people is far from the 
real thing, and that after all its boasted millions of Christians only a 
comparatively little flock are really such, not until then, we say, 
when discouraged and sick with its many failures will mankind be 
prepared to see what God hath wrought. 

Then, in despair of establishing a righteous empire whose rule shall 
be for the blessing of all, it will be prepared to receive the true 
kingdom of God. It will then realize that the kingdoms of earth the 
Church-State organizations which they have been taught are God's 
kingdoms, were merely Satan's deceptions to obscure the truth and 
prevent men from loving or expecting the real kingdom of God 
promised. 

Then it will be realized, that while the so-called church systems 
were endeavoring to spread their power and dominion over earth, 
God was selecting from among men a "little flock" to whom it is 
his "good pleasure to give the kingdom," even the control of the 
whole world to rule it and to bless it with righteous government, 
and a restitution to original perfection; in which condition when 
universally attained they shall be able to live in love and peace and 
righteousness. Each shall then be able to love God with all his 
heart, and his neighbor as himself. 

It was predestinated that such a "little flock" should be selected and 
the conditions are named they must all be conformed to the image 
of Christ Jesus; now in the spirit of their minds, and shortly 



glorified with Him and made fully like him, they shall share his 
power (Rom. 8:17). Then, at the same time that these shall have 
been selected, the world shall have learned the need of the perfect 
government which God shall establish through these. It is for this 
government that the world waits and groans, though as yet it 
realizes it not; even "the manifestation of the sons of God." (Rom. 
8:19.) 

And since we know the outcome the blessings in store for it we 
can view with equanimity and calmness the gathering storm 
sympathizing with the expression of the poet: 

I turn me awe-struck from the sight, 
Among the clamoring thousands unite. 
I only know that God is right 
And that the children of the light 
Shall tread the darkness under-foot. 

I know the pent fire heaves its crust, 
That sultry skies the bolt will form 
To smite them clear; that Nature must 
The balance of her powers adjust, 
Though with the earthquake and the storm." 



R743 : page 5 

IT REPENTED THE LORD. 

And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth 
and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil 
continually. And it repented the Lord that he had made man on the 
earth, and it grieved him at his heart, and the Lord said I will 
destroy man whom I have created, from the face of the earth. Gen. 
6:5-7. 

The question naturally arises, If God is omniscient, knowing, the 
end from the beginning, how could he repent of his course in 
creating man? 

The word repent means:-"To change the MIND, or, COURSE OF 
CONDUCT on account of regret or dissatisfaction with what has 
occurred. "-Webster. The question then is, Did God change his 
mind [plan], or, his course of conduct? We claim, that knowing the 
end from the beginning, God's mind could not change, hence it 
must signify change of conduct. That is, God changed his course of 
dealing with man because of man's wickedness which grieved him, 
but he did not need to change his mind or plans, because these plans 
had from the very first recognized the corrupting and degrading 
tendency of sin, and provided (in purpose or mind) the Lamb of 
God-"slain from before the foundation of the world," as the 
redemption price. 



It is difficult for our finite minds to comprehend this, because for us 
to change our course of action, usually means to change our minds 
or plans as well because of our shortsightedness. To comprehend 
Omniscience and Omnipotence is as difficult as to comprehend 
Eternity or the infinitude of Space. But what no one can fully 
comprehend, we as God's children, may at least apprehend by faith, 
guided by his revelation to us. To those whose eyes are anointed 
with eyesalve (Rev. 3:18.) the prophetic statements of God's word, 
both in the Old and New Testament in their fulfillments, now 
discernable, give ample proof that God does know the end from the 
beginning; that he changes not from his original purpose. Mai. 3:6; 
Isa. 14:27. God's plans were perfect before they began to be 
executed; hence all the changes of God's course or conduct are 
working out the accomplishment of his original purpose which 
contemplated these very changes. 

Those who recognize the gradual development of God's original 
plan, can see clearly that the various changes in his course, or 
dealings, as displayed in the Jewish Gospel, and Millennial Ages, 
do not at all indicate so many changes of his mind or plan, though 
they are doubtless so misunderstood by many. Is it asked, Why then 
is it so expressed as to give the impression that because God's heart 
was grieved by reason of man's wickedness, his mind as well as his 
action changed? We answer, This matter is stated in a manner 
suited to convey to the general reader as much as he is able to 
comprehend of God's reasons for the change. God was very much 
grieved and displeased by man's rapid progress in wickedness: that 
instead of loathing his sinful and fallen condition and looking to 
God for relief, he took pleasure in still further degrading himself; 
and God, according to his original purpose, changed the course of 
his dealings and ended that age by blotting out of existence for a 
time those who were so unworthy, that their gross depravity should 
not interfere in the further development of his plan.* Thus also 
when God speaks of the sun's rising and setting, it is not that he did 
not know that it is the Earth's instead of the Sun's motion that 
produces day and night, but because he addresses himself to men 
according to their comprehension. 

It was then and still is, impossible, for the fallen natural man to 
clearly appreciate and realize these matters; and God's purpose 
seems to be to prove to man the Omniscience as well as the Justice 
and Love of his Creator, rather than to tell him of them. 



*Under the strict discipline of the Millennium, those who then 
would not even attempt righteousness, will be compelled to 
conform to it and to taste of its advantages over sin and its results, 
so that if they will they may choose life and live. 



R756 : page 5 



"SHOW me the man you honor. I know by that symptom; better 
than by any other, what kind of a man you are yourself; for you 
show me what your ideal of manhood is, what kind of a man you 
long to be." Carlyle. 



R743 : page 6 

IS PROTESTANTISM A PROTEST? 

The tendency toward a union between Roman Catholics and 
Protestants becomes daily more apparent. It is not long since 
Bishop Potter, of the Episcopal Church, instituted a "Holy Order," 
after the manner and covenant of the Romish priesthood. It is not 
long since the Council of the same denomination held in Detroit, 
heard approvingly an essay advocating the "Auricular Confession," 
by one of their members, and now comes the Rev. Dr. Kellog, a 
professor in the Presbyterian Seminary of Allegheny, as an 
advocate of a sort of PURGATORY. 

All this must be very comforting to their Mother, the Church of 
Rome. That she appreciates it, is evidenced by the following remark 
clipped from the Catholic: 

"We entertain no other feeling but that of pity for the man who 
rehashes the worn-out calumnies of Protestant bigotry and hate, at a 
time that Protestants and Catholics are being brought closer 
together, and to a clearer understanding of the religious issues that 
keep them separated." 

For some years, we have endeavored to point out that Protestant 
sects are the daughters of Rome referred to in Rev. 17:5. That 
Papacy is not only called a harlot (system), but also the MOTHER 
of harlots and abominations. Little did we expect that so soon we 
would hear Protestant ministers boast of this relationship, as in the 
quotation below from the Rev. Mr. Donehoo [Presbyterian] of this 
city: 

"Wince as you will, you must admit that this (the Catholic Church) 
is the Mother Church. She possesses an unbroken history extending 
back to the times of the Apostles. For every fragment of religious 
truth which we prize we are indebted to her as the depository. If she 
has no claims to being the true Church, then are we bastards and not 
sons." 

Very true: the "fragment of truth" and the great mass of error, 
nearly all came to the daughters through their mother. From her 
they got the fashion of sprinkling babies and calling it the 
fulfillment of what the Bible calls baptizing believers. From the 
mother they got their idea of an eternal hell of woe. 

R744 : page 6 

She taught them how to twist the words sheol and hades from their 
plain and obvious meaning to the support of that blasphemous 



doctrine-eternal torment. From her they learned to confess what it 
is impossible for them to understand, much less believe the 
doctrine of Trinity-three persons in one and one person in three. 
From her, they received the heathen doctrine of human immortality, 
which not only contradicts the Bible doctrine of death (extinction) 
as the punishment of sin, and nullifies the offer of immortality to 
the saints who seek for it (Rom. 2:7), but becomes the basis of their 
theory of everlasting torture, claiming that because of (immortal) 
nature man cannot perish, they endeavor thus to make eternal 
torment seem reasonable. Yes, from their mother they got all that is 
bad, not excepting the putting of the standards and decrees of their 
sects instead of the Bible. 

One thing only remains as a real ground of protest between the 
daughters and their mother, and that is the foundation principle of 
the Gospel of Christ. It was this foundation principle that Luther 
preached and which was the beginning of the much needed 
Reformation movement, viz., Justification by faith, and not by 
works. Beyond this first principle the Reformation made little 
progress. 

A realization that Christ Jesus paid the ransom once for all, and that 
our interest in it must be laid hold of by faith in his finished 
redemption, is the great first principle which the Church of Rome 
does not recognize: she is noted in Scripture as the one which took 
away the "continual sacrifice." She substituted the "sacrifice of the 
Mass" for the everlasting or continual sacrifice of Calvary.* Thus 
she made void the ransom. Her daughters have held fast to the 
doctrine of justification by faith through acceptance of Jesus' 
ransom until now, though the philosophy of it was never very 
clearly seen by them. Now, this one ground of PROTEST and 
difference between mother and daughter is being looked upon 
doubtfully by many, and will shortly be abandoned by the mass of 
Protestants, as it is already abandoned by some of their more bold 
and outspoken leaders. Through various subtle sophistries of the 
Adversary this truth is being gradually undermined, the way being 
already well prepared by long established and deep-rooted errors, 
which obscure the force and beauty of the ransom as presented in 
Scripture. When this is gone, Protestantism is gone, for there will 
then no longer be any ground for protest against the "Mother" 
Church. If Jesus be not the ransom price, why pray in his name 
more than in the name of "Mary" or the "saints"? The result, too, 
would soon be to substitute works for faith in Christ's atoning work. 

Rev. Mr. Donehoo continues: 

"It (the Catholic Church) holds up Christ as the Saviour of 
mankind. It is engaged in Christ's work- feeding the hungry, 
sheltering the orphan, reclaiming the fallen, providing hospitals for 
the sick and suffering, asylums for the poor and aged, and reaching 
a class whom the most zealous Protestant can never influence. Talk 
about missionaries to labor amongst Romanists! I would as soon 
think of sending missionaries amongst Methodists and 



Episcopalians and United Presbyterians and Lutherans for the 
purpose of converting them into Presbyterians." 

Good works, benevolence, kindness, charity are in perfect accord 
with the principles of Christianity. We should do good unto all as 
we have opportunity, especially to the household of faith. But we 
protest against such things being considered either the ground for 
acceptance with God, or the proof of possessing the Spirit of Christ. 

These are moral and benevolent deeds only, and should be 
recognized and praised as such, and not be counted for more. Many 
infidels and atheists are kind and benevolent as well. While we 
praise their good deeds, we must not confound them with 
Christianity. The necessary foundation for an altar upon which any 
works must be laid, to be acceptable to God, is, Jesus the ransom. 

The Apostles do not enumerate hospitals and asylums among the 
"fruits of the Spirit." Neither Jesus nor Paul nor Peter gave their 
time or attention to founding such institution, nor did they teach 
others so to do. There is a still more important work to do in 
preaching the glad tidings-in clothing the naked with the robe of 
Christ's righteousness, in healing the sick and lame and blinded 
with the whole truth, and in feeding the hungry with the "true 
bread." 

Let us attend to this work; there are many who, for various reasons, 
will attend to the other-in fact the world recognizes the necessity 
for such institutions as asylums, hospitals, etc., and they are 
liberally provided for by the State. 

Indeed, it can scarcely be questioned that the underlying motive 
which in many cases prompts and maintains these "charities" is 
sectarian pride and selfishness. All recognize the influence of such 
institutions upon the worldly. All can see the opportunities thus 
afforded for the spread of sectarian influence, and some can see 
that, instead of being a tax upon resources, such institutions are 
frequently sources of revenue when State appropriations and private 
bequests, etc., are taken into account. 

The important work of the present is the perfecting of the BODY of 
Christ. The members of that body, wherever they may be, should be 
sought out, helped, strengthened, prepared for union with their 
Head-a preparation which requires the light now shining for its 
accomplishment. To this let us give all our energy and talent; for 
this let us sacrifice as Jesus and the Apostles did, realizing that 
what we have not the time and opportunity of doing for the world 
now, shall more than be compensated for in the blessed work of the 
Millennial Age, now dawning. 



*The sacrifice of the "Mass" is not generally understood. It is 
really a repetition of the sacrifice of Christ, or purports to be such. 
See "Tabernacle" pamphlet, page 78. 



R744 : page 6 



LORD AND SAVIOUR. 



"But there were false prophets also among the people, even as 
there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in 
damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and 
bring upon themselves swift destruction. And many shall follow 
their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be 
evil spoken of."-2 Pet. 2:1,2. 

We are asked to examine the above passage critically. First we 
remark that the words italicised above are all from the same Greek 
word. Destructive heresies swiftly destroy the teachers as teachers, 
and others follow their destructive ways and bring the true 
teachings of Scripture into disrepute. 

A question arises: Does the Apostle predict that the class referred to 
will deny the Lordship of Christ, or deny that he "bought" or 
ransomed them? Those who have the Emphatic Diaglott will notice 
that its interlineary translation reads thus: "Even the having bought 
them, Sovereign Lord denying." Thus making prominent the denial 
of their having been bought, as the destructive heresy. 

And when we carefully consider the matter, the reasonableness of 
this view becomes apparent. If these "false teachers" denied the 
Lordship of Christ, they would not be received at all by the church; 
hence could have no opportunity of bringing in that as a heresy, for 
all the church and all pretending, even, to be of the Church of 
Christ, acknowledge Christ as the Lord and Head of the Church. On 
the contrary, had any man said, I believe in the ransom, but reject 
the Redeemer as my Lord, such position would be ridiculous. We 
have never yet known or heard of any one who acknowledged the 
ransom that denied the Lordship of Christ. We have heard of some 
both in the days of the Apostles, and especially now, who 
acknowledge Jesus as Lord, but deny that he "bought them." It is 
evident, then, that to this last named class only this Scripture is 
applicable. 

And that it is a destructive heresy is evident-destructive of the 
truth, destructive of the faith once delivered to the saints. It makes 
shipwreck of faith, by removing from it the only sure foundation - 
redemption and remission of sins through the blood of the cross. 

The heresy to which the Apostle alludes was future from his day, 
and though the cross of Christ has ever been a stumbling block 
which hindered many from coming into the nominal church, yet 
never until the present time has this destructive and subversive 
heresy obtained so strong a foothold among professing Christians. 

The description suits the methods now employed by teachers of the 
no ransom theory: They "privily" or privately bring in the doctrine. 



They do not openly deny the meaning of the words "bought" and 
"ransom," etc., and openly contradict the Scriptures where these 
words are used; but while quoting these words they covertly and 
privily seek to leave an impression contrary to their true and 
undeniable meaning. 

Let us see well to it that we acknowledge Jesus both as Lord and 
Saviour, and not as Lord only. He was the Lord or Master of the 
Disciples when as a perfect man he made consecration of himself 
and called them to be his disciples or pupils. In view of what he had 
been before he left the glory of the heavenly condition, and in view 
of his superiority as a perfect man among imperfect ones, no less 
than in view of the high exaltation to which he was heir through his 
sacrificial death, it was proper that his followers, who recognized 
his true character and believed his claims, should call him Lord and 
Master, for such indeed he was. 

Our Lord was publicly recognized as Saviour when as a babe he 
was named Jesus. (See Matt. 1:21.) He was publicly recognized of 
God through John at the time of his baptism, as the Saviour the 
Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world. It was by 
virtue of his putting away the sin by the sacrifice of himself that he 
had the right to exercise to some extent his power as Lord, in 
casting out devils and reviving the dead and dying. But it was when 
he had fully completed the sacrifice at Calvary, that the full right 
and authority and Lordship began. 

When he was risen from the dead, he no longer said, "I can of mine 
own self do nothing" (Jno. 5:30; 8:28); but on the contrary he then 
declared, "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth" 
(Matt. 28:18.) The Apostle tells us that full power and authority 
were bestowed on him at his resurrection. He says, he was declared 
to be Lord of the living and dead BY a resurrection from the dead. 
Him hath God raised up to be a prince (Master or Lord) and a 
Saviour. Rom. 14:8,9; Acts 5:31; Rom. 1:4. 

He was our Saviour or Redeemer first, and having bought, 
purchased, redeemed, ransomed us from the dominion or control of 
death, he became rightfully our owner, our Lord, our Master. Let us 
keep our faith-building on the rock foundation, recognizing him 
who is Lord of all, as equally Redeemer or Saviour of all "Our 
Lord AND Saviour Jesus Christ." 



R745 : page 6 



TO HIM THAT OVERCOMETH. 

"It must needs be that offences come, but woe to that man by 
whom the offence cometh,"- MATT. 18:7. 

It is needful and right that severe trial of faith should test the 
church whose trial is now closing, that the faithful overcomers may 



be developed, as well as separated from all others, and that, by their 
exaltation, the new Millennial age may commence. Nevertheless, as 
the trials come, they cause us to tremble; 

R745 : page 7 

and, as some fall in them, it causes pain. Yet our confidence must 
rest in the All-wise Harvester and in his sickle of truth. We must 
remember that he can make no mistake as to who shall stand or 
who fall. Not one whose name is "blotted out" of the book of life 
(Rev. 3:5) shall stand; and not one whose name remains, shall fall. 
He forewarned us who should be "able to stand," and that in all, it 
would be but a "little flock," saying, "Think it not strange 
concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some 
strange things happened unto you" ; "The fire of that day shall try 
every man's work, of what sort it is." 1 Pet. 4:12 and 1 Cor. 3:13. 

"A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right 
hand, but it shall not come nigh thee" [the body of Christ.] "He 
shall give his angels [messengers servants of the church] charge 
over THEE [or truths to sustain and strengthen thee] and they shall 
bear thee up in their hands [sustain and help thee], lest thou dash 
thy foot against a stone." [Lest the feet or last members of the 
Gospel church should stumble over the Rock of offence over which 
the nominal mass of both the Jewish and Gospel churches are to 
stumble.] Psa. 91:7,11,12; Isa. 8:14; 1 Cor. 1:18. 

When the falling is ended, and those who stand are exalted, 
doubtless it will be true, that some fell whom we had expected 
would "stand," and that some will be found standing "complete in 
him," whom we had not expected to come off "victors." 



R745 : page 7 

WISE AS SERPENTS, AND HARMLESS AS DOVES. 

"Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves; be ye 
therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves." Matt. 10:16. 

Thus spoke our divine Lord when he first commissioned his 
apostles to preach the gospel. They were going out to save men 
from death. Their operations would be among all class and 
characters. They themselves would be exposed to persecution and 
death. They would have to meet prejudice and bitter opposition. 
Unbelief and hardness of heart would hinder them at every step. 
They had a most important mission to accomplish. It was important 
that their object should be gained. They must succeed. Christ gave 
them this general rule by which to govern their conduct, as best 
calculated to secure the object they had in view. Human nature is 
much the same in all ages, and the plan of God is mainly the same. 
This rule is doubtless just as good now as it was eighteen hundred 
years ago. 



Why does our Saviour take the serpent as an example of wisdom 
for them to pattern after? There must be some reason for this. He 
does not want those who go out to catch souls to imitate the serpent 
except in the matter of its wisdom. But in that respect he does. The 
habits of the serpent are peculiar, and contain a lesson of 
instruction. Why does not the Saviour tell his servants to be wise as 
lions, wolves, or other ferocious beasts? Why select a serpent? 

Any one who has given the matter any reflection can readily 
answer. The serpent does not, in approaching his victim, rush out in 
a manner to frighten, intimidate, and repulse, like those creatures. 
His approaches are very cautious, and yet effectual. He glides along 
in the most careful manner possible, so as not to needlessly alarm, 
and presents himself in a manner to favorably affect the one whom 
he is seeking to reach. If necessary, he can wait long and patiently, 
while the victim runs or flies hither and thither, still holding himself 
in that position which will most favorably influence. The victim, 
thus drawn toward him, comes within reach, and is taken. When the 
serpent strikes home to secure his prey, there is very rarely a failure 
in accomplishing his object. In all this there seems to be a wisdom 
peculiar to that creature. When the cat or other destructive animal 
lies in wait for its prey, it usually conceals itself until it gives the 
spring which destroys its victim. But the serpent often presents 
itself fully to view, and, by the attractions which it presents, secures 
its object. 

Our Saviour instructs his followers to imitate the wisdom of the 
serpent, while they are harmless as doves. They do not catch souls 
to destroy, but to save. If they desire to accomplish this good 
object, they should use wisdom. The object is the highest and 
noblest that can engage the attention of men. Therefore the highest 
wisdom should be employed to accomplish it. 

The human mind is difficult to manage. How necessary that all who 
try to present God's truth before it, either as 

R746 : page 7 

ministers, or distributors of tracts, or in common conversation, 
should understand their business. It is very easy in ten minutes' 
conversation to leave impressions upon minds which it will be 
nearly impossible to efface. Much injury has been done to the cause 
of truth in the past by individuals in various communities being 
ever ready to "pitch in," as the common expression has it, and argue 
and debate, on street corners or in stores, or wherever there was a 
chance to crowd in the truth, whether people wanted to hear it or 
not, until people became disgusted, and perhaps their ears could 
never again be reached. This is not the wisdom of the serpent. It has 
no resemblance to it. 

Neither do such follow the directions of Peter. They may quote a 
portion of his direction, but they forget or ignore the remainder. "Be 
ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a 
reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear." The 



class above referred to rarely wait to give any one a chance to ask 
them the reason of their hope, but press them upon people against 
their wishes, and they entirely forget the "meekness and fear." Such 
only do harm. 

This great principle of the Saviour and his apostle should be 
remembered by all who engage in the distribution of tracts and 
papers. 

A spirit boasting, or glorying over others, because our views of 
Scripture are more consistent than theirs, will always drive them 
away. We may use the truth as a club to show our great strength in 
the argument, but it will not bring men to God. And, as a general 
rule, unless there be a disposition to listen and consider the truth, 
and hear what is said, talk concerning it will not accomplish very 
much. 

What we want is a spirit of meekness and Christian love, which, 
being real and genuine, and heart-felt, will manifest itself to the one 
listening, and show him that our motive is to do him good, not to 
gain a personal victory over him. When a person can be persuaded 
that is our real motive, it will have its influence. 

We must not undertake to force religion or truth down people's 
throats. Were it possible to succeed in so doing, it would amount to 
nothing really in the sight of God. He wants the willing service 
alone. When we have that spirit of love spoken of above, it will 
give us the very disposition spoken of by our Saviour, at the head of 
this article. For the "wisdom that is from above is first pure, then 
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good 
fruits, without wrangling [margin] and without hypocrisy." It is a 
wisdom that comes from another source which makes men love 
contention and personal triumph, and leads men to crowd upon 
people that which they will not hear if they can help it. It is "earthly 
wisdom," which grows out of selfishness. 

--G. I. Butler. 



R745 : page 7 



THE THIRD DAY. 



BRETHREN IN CHRIST:-I find in the sixth chapter of Hosea a 
reason why Christ was resurrected on the third day. 

Hosea says, "Come and let us return unto the Lord for he hath torn 
and he will heal us, he hath smitten and he will bind us up; after 
two days, (two thousand year-days) will he (God) revive us, in the 
third day, (Millennial day) he will raise us up, and we shall live in 
his sight. Hosea 6:1-2. 

Thus we see the two thousand of the Jew's cast off condition and 
the one thousand years of favor and resurrection, and it furnishes a 
reason why Christ arose on the third day. 



The 3d verse explains still further- "Then shall we know, if we 
follow on to know the Lord; his going forth is prepared as the 
morning; and he shall come unto us as the rain; as the latter (or 
Spring) and former (or Fall) rain unto the earth." So we have 
Christ's first coming to Redeem the inheritance and prepare for his 
kingdom and call his saints. And His Second coming to claim his 
kingdom and restore lost man to his estate. How beautifully these 
prophecies blend together showing us that there is a meaning in all 
that Christ did and it seems glorious that God is willing to disclose 
some of these mysteries to us in this day. So may we walk as to win 
the "prize of the high calling" of God. Rejoice, brethren, rejoice! 



W. E. PARSONS. 



R745 : page 7 

THE MOSAIC ECONOMY. 

"There never was a saner law than the Mosaic. It loved nature, 
could not bear to see the fields impoverished, and decreed that they 
should not be. It could not bear to see the human form mutilated, 
and declared only the unblemished beautiful in the sight of God. It 
did not love to harass or burden the dumb creation; the ox that trod 
out the corn was not to be muzzled. The young, tender tree was 
protected, and was not unduly taxed to yield abundance. The law 
was full of a great sense of the good of nature, a great sense of the 
glory of humanity, and of the large and lovely harmony 
without.... There never was so careful a law about what we call 
sanitation. It cared for the cleanliness of the body. It feared 
infection, and separated those with infectious diseases from the 
great multitude, declaring them unclean. Its laws of ceremonial 
uncleanness had great health in them-a real human sanity. Then, 
though it knew slavery, as all the ancient world did, the slavery it 
knew was the gentlest, and most generous. Every man taken slave 
could in the sabbatic year, regain his freedom, go forth a free man. 
Its laws, too, of property, were noble laws. They made property 
sacred, did not allow its accumulation into a few hands, or into one, 
but secured its fair and equal distribution. Every Jubilee year the 
land was redistributed: the old families that had lost it, might again 
possess their inheritance. If by misfortune or by crime a man had 
lost his estate, he had a chance given to redeem himself and his 
place in the community, to go back into his old and better order. 
Capital, also, was carefully guarded, that it should not become an 
immense and oppressive power in the hands of the rich, to make 
them extortionate over the poor. Jewish law is the justest law to the 
poor yet framed, to the man that toiled, to the man prepared 
honestly by sweat and labor to earn his bread. Do it justice. I ask for 
it from you only justice, but justice I do ask; and that is but a just 
demand. "~Sel. 



R745 : page 7 



CONSECRATION. 



Submission is a strong word, consecration still stronger. Surrender 
is cessation of resistance, consecration a transfer of all we are and 
have to Christ for active service. It covers person and property, 
talents and opportunities, and accepts of Christ as leader, manager, 
friend, and Saviour; present, active, and efficient in all the minutiae 
of life. There are degrees of consecration, and even entire 
consecration is progressive, for new interests, cares, burdens, 
capacities and opportunities arise and await disposal, and Christ is 
revealed in new relations, making new demands, offering new 
privileges; and these await trustful acceptance, so that ever and 
anon the proposition to devote all to Christ and receive all of Christ, 
claims fresh attention. Many commit spiritual interests to his care 
and worry on alone with temporal concerns; they trust him to save 
their souls, but hesitate to ask his aid in business; accept daily 
grace, but doubt respecting daily bread; rejoice in Christ as a 
Saviour, but fail to apprehend him as a brother, a companion, a 
present, constant friend. Consecration is not absolutely perfect until 
the fulness of our Lord is perceived and received, and the fulness of 
life is devoted to him, for every revelation of Christ calls for new 
devotion from us. The consecration must be as broad as the 
apprehension, covering the fulness of Christ and the fulness of 
man.-Sel. 



R746 : page 7 

"CHRISTIAN CONSCIOUSNESS" VS. THE BIBLE. 

In the Independent, Prof. Francis L. Patton sharply criticizes the 
statement by Dr. Harris, in the Andover Review, that "Christian 
consciousness" must be recognized as the final authority in matters 
of faith and practice. In the course of his article he says:- 

"Common consciousness cannot be appealed to as the criterion of 
religious progress without danger of jeopardizing the Protestant 
principle that the Bible is the rule of faith. Dr. Harris admits that 
what he calls the "obsolescent theology" agrees as well with the 
word of God as it ever did, but affirms that it does not agree with 
Christian consciousness. Suppose, however, that the Bible should 
say one thing, and Christian consciousness should say something 
else; or suppose that Christian consciousness should undertake to 
supplement the Bible. What then? It is an old charge against those 
who have had an objective rule of faith, that they made the word of 
God of none effect through their traditions, and that they taught for 
doctrines the commandments of men. We know how the Roman 
Catholic Church followed the example of the scribes and Pharisees 
in this respect. 



R746 : page 8 

Is there no danger that a party will arise in the Protestant churches, 
committing the same error? We think that there is great danger. 
And when, under the influence of a zeal that lacks both knowledge 
and discretion, the attempt is made to force upon the consciences of 
men the yoke of party fanaticism and popular clamor, there is little 
doubt but that an earnest, but at the same time ignorant, pietism will 
find great use for the phrase that is under discussion, and as a 
phrase, catchword, appealing to the sympathies of the unthinking, 
that Christian consciousness may become the 'organ' of what some 
will call religious progress." 

There is little doubt that the state of things outlined by the Professor 
is imminent, as there is that "Christian consciousness" is 
superseding the Bible, as a test in matters of religion. We see this 
"Christian consciousness" manifested in that form of worship which 
mistakes feeling for faith, whose adherents know that they are right, 
because their hearts tell them so!-Signs. 



R746 : page 8 

IN A MYSTERIOUS WAY. 

"No," said the lawyer, "I shan't press your claim against that man; 
you can get some one else to take the case, or you can withdraw it, 
just as you please." 

"There would probably be some money in it, but it would, as you 
know, come from the sale of the little house the man occupies and 
calls 'home'; but I don't want to meddle with the matter, anyhow." 

"I suppose likely the old fellow begged hard to be let off?" 

"Well-yes, he did." 

"And you?" 

"I didn't speak a word to him." 

"Oh, he did all the talking, did he? What did you do?" 

"I believe I shed a few tears; he didn't speak a word to me." 

"Well, may I respectfully inquire whom he did address in your 
hearing?" 

"Almighty God. But, not for my benefit, in the least. You see"-the 
lawyer crossed his right foot over his left knee, and began stroking 
his lower leg up and down, as if to help state his case concisely 
"you see, I found the little house easily enough, and knocked on the 
outer door, which stood ajar, but nobody heard me; so I stepped 
into the little hall, and saw through the crack of another door just as 
cosey a sitting room as there ever was." 



"There, on a bed, with her silver head way up high on the pillows, 
was an old lady. I was on the point of knocking, when she said, as 
clearly as could be, 'Come, father, now begin; I'm all ready' and 
down on his knees by her side went an old, white-haired man, still 
older than his wife, I should judge; and I couldn't have knocked 
then. He began to pray; first he reminded God they were still his 
submissive children, mother and he, and no matter what he saw fit 
to bring upon them, they shouldn't rebel at his will; of course 'twas 
going to be very hard for them to go out homeless in their old age, 
specially with poor mother so sick and helpless, but still they'd seen 
sadder things than ever that would be. He reminded God, in the 
next place, how different it might all have been if only one of their 
boys had been spared them; then his voice kind of broke, and a thin 
white hand stole from under the coverlet and moved softly over his 
snowy hair; then he went on to repeat that nothing could be so 
sharp again as the parting with those three sons unless mother and 
he should be separated. But at last he fell to comforting himself 
with the fact that the dear Lord knew it was through no fault of his 
own that mother and he were threatened with the loss of their dear 
little home, which meant beggary and the almshouse, a place they 
prayed to be delivered from entering if it could be consistent with 
God's will; and then he fell to quoting a multitude of promises 
concerning the safety of those who put their trust in the Lord; yes, I 
should say he begged hard; in fact, it was the most thrilling plea to 
which I ever listened; and at last he prayed for God's blessing on 
those who were about to demand justice" the lawyer stroked his 
lower limb in silence for a moment or two, then continued, more 
slowly than ever: 

"And-I-believe I'd rather go to the poorhouse myself, to-night, 
than to stain my heart and hands with the blood of such a 
prosecution as that. " 

"You are afraid to defeat the old man's prayer?" queried the client. 

"Bless your soul, man, you couldn't defeat it!" said the lawyer. "It 
doesn't admit of defeat! He left it all subject to the will of God; but 
he left no doubt as to his wishes in the matter; claimed that we were 
told to make known our desires unto God, but of all the pleading I 
ever heard, that beat all. You see, I was taught that kind of thing 
myself in my childhood, and why I was sent to hear that prayer, I'm 
sure I don't know; but I hand the case over." 

R747 : page 8 

"I wish," said the client, twisting uneasily, "you hadn't told me 
about the old fellow's prayer, because I want the money the place 
would bring; but I was taught the Bible all straight enough when I 
was a youngster, and I'd hate to run counter to such a harangue as 
that you tell me about. I wish you hadn't heard a word of it; and 
another time I wouldn't listen to petitions not intended for my ears." 

The lawyer smiled. 



"My dear fellow," he said, "you're wrong again; it was intended for 
my ears, and yours too, and God Almighty intended it. My old 
mother used to sing about God's moving in a mysterious way, I 
remember." 

"Well, my mother used to sing it too," said the claimant, as he 
twisted his claim-papers in his fingers. "You can call in the 
morning, if you like, and tell 'mother and him' the claim has been 
met." 

"In a mysterious way," added the lawyer, smiling. Sel. 



R747 : page 8 

THE NEVER-FAILING SPRING. 

In a place where we once had our home there was a spring, 
famous in all the country round from the fact that it was never 
known to fail, or even to vary to any perceptible degree, either in 
volume or temperature. It bubbled up at the base of a very high 
mountain, close by the country road side. And there it may be found 
this day, year in and year out, through summer's parching heat and 
winter's biting frost, always the same, offering up to every passer- 
by a precious draft of clear, cold water. Other springs dry up; the 
water in the brooks sink away in the thirsty sand, and even the river 
becomes a poor insignificant thing, crawling along in the middle of 
its wide channel, the very shadow of its former self, but this spring- 
-the spring- keeps up its steady flow in defiance of the sun's 
withering rays and the torrid atmosphere. It seems insensible to 
climatic changes, and to it all seasons are alike. And this ever- 
flowing spring is known far and wide in that country. Every school 
boy knows it well and loves it, too, and so do the laborers in the 
field. Many knees bow at its brink in the summer time, and hot, 
sunburnt, toilworn faces are often mirrored in its crystal waters. The 
people have great faith in this spring. They would as soon expect 
the mountain to be removed as not to find it giving forth its 
bounteous stream. And when all other sources fail them, they feel 
sure that they know of one that will never deny their thirst. And, as 
we have said, the spring's temperature never changes. It marks the 
same degree all the year round. For this reason its waters seem 
intensely cold in summer, and slightly lukewarm in the dead of 
winter. It does not conform itself to the state of the atmosphere. The 
reason of this we shall explain presently. But what an illustration 
we have here of constancy-this spring that never fails. 

So many professing Christians are like those surface springs, that 
are but the mere drainings of the upper soil. They promise well in 
certain seasons; they gush and flow in copious streams when the air 
is full of rain and the ground is soaked with water. It is easy enough 
to be a spring then. But where are they when the dry time comes, 
when the sun is high and the ground is baked with heat? Men seek 



them, and alas! they are not to be found. When springs are needed 
most they disappear, and where their waters flowed is nothing 
found but arid sand. It is not so hard to keep up appearances of 
spiritual strength in times of revival, when "showers of blessings" 
fall around, but in times of drought, under the scorn of the world, 
under the burning heat of bitter opposition, of fiery trial, of 
persecution -how is it with the soul then? Does it remain in its 
place, giving out as before the gracious influences of a pure and 
meek and lowly spirit, or does it disappear and fade away in sin and 
worldliness? 

Oh, how good a thing it is to be a constant Christian! A Christian 
through all times and seasons, in public and private, in all 
circumstances and conditions of life. Do you not know such souls- 
sweet-tempered, gentle, gracious souls, always near to God, always 
with their faces shining with a light from heaven? You always 
know where to find them at the foot of the cross ready to give 
you, a weary, thirsty seeker, a precious draught from the 
overflowing chalice of their own faith-filled, loving hearts. But the 
reason why the temperature of the spring is always the same is 
because its sources are deep. It has its origin far down below the 
surface of the earth among the very foundations of the mountain 
itself. It is not fed by the drainage of the surface, but by an ever- 
living rock-hewn reservoir down in the secret places of the hills. All 
its constancy and sweetness and purity is owing to the fact that its 
sources are deep. Herein we have the explanation of a mystery in 
spiritual things. The faith that is firm and changes not to suit the 
fashion of the times, the soul that is ever full of grace and truth, the 
character that is Christ-like, conforming not to the ways of the 
world, must have its sources deep deep down in the bosom of the 
Rock. It is no wonder that many fail who profess faith in Christ, 
depending, as they do, upon transitory emotions upon shallow 
convictions and passing excitements. They cannot endure a spiritual 
drouth, because they have no depth. They have no real, vital union 
with the only One who is able to keep them from falling, and to 
present them "faultless before the presence of his glory with 
exceeding joy. "-N.Y. Observer. 



R747 : page 8 



WORKS AND REPENTANCE. 

WHAT are "works meet for repentance"? What are works 
answerable to amendment of life? "Be renewed in the spirit of your 
mind." "Put off ...the old man, which is corrupt, [and] put on the 
new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true 
holiness. Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man the 
truth.. ..Let him that stole steal no more; but rather let him labor, 
working with his hands the thing which is good, that he may have 
to give to him that needeth. Let no corrupt communication proceed 



out of your mouth, but that which is good. ...Let all bitterness and 
wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, be put away from 
you;. ..and be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving one 
another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you. " Eph. 
4:22-32. Here, among other things, it is said, "Let him that stole 
steal no more. " But that is not all. He must give back that which he 
stole. "When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die, if he turn 
from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right; if the wicked 
restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed, walk in the 
statutes of life, without committing iniquity; he shall surely live, he 
shall not die." Eze. 33:14,15. "Then it shall be because he hath 
sinned, and is guilty, that he shall restore that which he took 
violently away, or the thing which he hath deceitfully gotten, or that 
which was delivered him to keep, or the lost thing which he found, 
or all that about which he hath sworn falsely; he shall even restore 
it in the principal, and shall add the fifth part more thereto, and give 
it unto him to whom it appertaineth, in the day of his trespass 
offering. ...And the priest shall make an atonement for him before 
the Lord, and it shall be forgiven him." Lev. 6:4-7. Such are works 
which show amendment of life. Such show that the heart has been 
touched, and wishes to stand right with God and man. Godly 
sorrow for the wrong, turning from the wrong, and then, as far as 
possible, making the wrong right-that is repentance. Sel. 



R748 : page 1 



VOL. VI. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., MAY, 1885. 

NO. 9. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 40 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 
TAKE NOTICE. 



This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 

==================== page 1 



WALL CHARTS.-We have no more. 



FLORIDA LAND.-Only two plots of the land donated to the 
Z.W.T. Tract Fund remain for sale. 



R748 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

"Ye can discern the face of the sky and of the earth, but how is it 
that ye do not discern this time?" Luke 12:56-59. 

Glance backward for a little more than eighteen centuries. There 
stands Jesus with twelve disciples; they are mostly young men, the 
Master himself being but little over thirty. They have never had an 
education, and most of them have been ordinary fishermen. But 
though "unlearned and ignorant men" (Acts 4:13), the disciples had 
a confidence and power in teaching which marked them among 
men as peculiar; and wherever they went "they took knowledge of 
them that they had been with Jesus," for though their Master had 
"never learned," yet he was scholarly, a man of letters. John 7:15. 

But after all, that was an insignificant little band in the eyes of the 
military governor Pilate, in the eyes of the chief priest, and in the 
eyes of the Scribes, and Pharisees-the Doctors of Divinity-the 
apostles of legal holiness in that day. The class chosen to announce 
Jesus as the King of the Jews, saying, "The time is fulfilled and the 
kingdom of God is at hand" (Mark 1 : 15), was not a prepossessing 
one, and to the zealous Jew was so unlike what might be expected 
of their long anticipated Messiah, and so out of harmony with their 
great religious teachers, that they failed to recognize Jesus as such. 

The miracles and teachings of Jesus, and the correspondence of 
these with the predictions concerning Messiah, made by the Lord's 
prophets long before, were the only evidence Israel had, that Jesus 
was the long-expected King. This could be evidence to such only as 
by careful heed to the "more sure word of prophecy," knew what to 
expect, and who by humility of mind would be prepared not only to 
note the prophetic utterances which foretold the rejection and 



crucifixion of Jesus, but to receive him who came in meekness with 
the escort of humble fishermen. 

Even John the Baptizer, his cousin, who had immersed Jesus, and 
who saw and bare witness to his anointing by the holy spirit of God 
was sorely puzzled by the strange course events were taking. He 
had perhaps supposed that when anointed, Jesus would publicly 
announce himself with power and authority, and bring honor and 
dignity to all associated with him; but to the contrary of this, Jesus 
was going about quietly and not attempting the exercise of marked 
power as a ruler, while he (John) had been cast into prison. Things 
progressed so differently from what he had expected that even 
John's faith in Jesus as the Messiah began to fail, and he sent a 
message to Jesus, saying: "Art thou he that should come, or [are 
you also merely a forerunner as I was, and] look we for another," to 
be the Deliverer, the Messiah to bless Israel and through them all 
the nations? 

Mark carefully the answer of Jesus to John; he in substance recalls 
to him the transpiring events, as in the Scripture at the head of this 
article; and he expected John to be able to DISCERN THE TIME 
by the events. He said, "Go and show John again, those things 
which ye do hear and see: The blind receive their sight, and the 
lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are 
raised up, and the poor have the gospel preached to them." Matt. 
11:3-6. 

There was in transpiring events proof that he who was then present, 
was no less than the Messiah promised. But we should not forget 
either, that not only were Jesus' miracles performed with a degree 
of secrecy, but that they were done over a large area of country, and 
that the majority of the Jews probably never saw one of the healed 
persons. Nor had they the printing press and its reporters to spread 
reports of the details of the miracles. 

The learned there, might have known from Daniel's prophecy that 
The time was fulfilled; (Dan. 9:24-27; Mark 1:15,) but for the 
masses, the evidence was simply, and only, the signs of the times; 
but these because blinded by the traditions of men, they did not 
appreciate. In following men the word of God became of none 
effect, so that the people as well as the leaders were blind. The 
blind followed the blind; both stumbled; and thus Israel as a nation 
received not the blessing but only the elect those who were of the 
class chosen, "Israelites indeed." 

And now what do we see? Messiah is present again; the time is 
fulfilled for his Second Advent Jesus a spiritual being, in power, is 
about to exalt his "body" to his own condition, and to judge, 
cleanse, heal and bless the world the House of Jacob and all the 
families of the earth. 

What are the evidences? They have been repeatedly furnished in 
these columns, and are ever increasing. We have shown the 
testimony of the prophets to be that-The Day of the Lord [the time 



of Christ's presence] is a day of trouble; that in it the powers of the 
heavens shall be shaken [earthly governments and authorities 
removed-Matt. 24:29; Heb. 12:27,28; Danl. 2:44.] In it, when fully 
under way, all the tribes of the earth shall mourn because of him 
who now is assuming the control, and who will shake to pieces 
every evil system which hinders, binds, oppresses, or blinds the 
people whom he comes to bless all of earth's families. Then the 
great ones shall fear as they look after those things coming upon the 
earth. They are already in this condition. They see the spirit of 
liberty working among the masses, and they truly see that it will 
soon lead them to madness and bring a sanguinary conflict. Again, 
it is noted in Scripture that in the coming troubles the rich of this 
world will suffer much; (James 5:1-4) and so it is, to-day, the aims 
and threats of the discontented are against the wealthy. We see 
these things all about us; are they not signs of the times in which we 
are living? 

Look again; see the Jew once more finding a home in the land of 
promise from which for so long he has been an exile. Note, too, the 
fact that there is now a beginning of the turning away of his 
blindness, and he is beginning to recognize Him whom they have 
pierced and lament therefor. (Zech. 12:10.) Turn now to the apostle 
James' statement, and note that this rebuilding of Israel is due 
"after" the selection of the people for his name, the Bride from the 
Gentiles. (Acts 15:16,17.) Turn to Paul and note his statement-that 
when the fulness of the Gentiles is come in [the full number 
selected from the Gentiles to be joint-heirs with Christ His Bride] 
then, blindness shall begin to depart from Jacob-Israel after the 
flesh. Rom. 11:25-32. A letter from the one whom God seems to be 
raising up as a teacher among the Jews, will be found in another 
column, and is of deep interest as bearing upon this feature of 
restitution. What is this, if not an evidence of what the time periods 
of the prophets have already showed us? -that we are living in the 
harvest of the Christian age, the dawning of the Millennial age; that 
the selection and trial of "the Church which is His (Christ's) body" 
is about complete. It proves that the DELIVERER (head and body) 
is come, and the blessing coming to Israel is but a premonition of 
the coming blessings upon all nations, of which they are the first- 
fruits. 

Look again, but in another direction; Note the increase of special 
healing of diseases since 1 874. Some are in answer to prayer, some 
in answer to anointing with oil and prayer, and some without 
prayer, or oil, or anything. Thus in various ways to-day, ye see 
increasingly that the lame walk, the deaf hear, the dumb speak, 
blind eyes are opened, and the Gospel (good tidings) of a 
"restitution for the groaning creation, of all things spoken by the 
mouth of all the holy prophets" (Acts 3:21.) is preached. 

The healings of our day are as pronounced and as true, as were 
those at the first advent, except that the dead have not yet been 
raised from the tomb. Nor is it in any one place, but everywhere, 



that this power is manifested and this feature of restitution work is 
beginning. We hear from Sweden, and Germany and Britain, in 
much the same strain, as from all over this land. Among the 
remarkable insurances coming under our notice recently, is that of a 
family in Louisville, Ky.,* in which four deaf and dumb persons 
were perfectly and instantly healed. One of them aged eleven years, 
had never spoken or heard from birth. The two small towns of 
Midway and Primrose, Pa., have during the past month been much 
excited by six remarkable cases of faith cure from various maladies. 
One old man, Hamilton Smith, Midway, Pa., had been so crippled 
by rheumatism that he could not stoop down; but was instantly 
healed, and to a reporter who called to inquire regarding his 
healing, demonstrated his suppleness by kicking higher than his 
own height, and the night he was cured he jumped over a fire board 
fence with ease. He declares that he is stronger than ever, and that 
he is becoming young again. And in fact this seems true. He is 
seventy-two years old but in a short time his white hair has 
commenced to resume its original color; the wrinkles are leaving 
his face, and his complexion becoming fresh so that he might pass 
now, for a man of fifty. 

We might multiply instances; one of a woman healed after an 
illness of sixteen years, who is now thirty-seven years old but might 
readily be mistaken for twenty. She though ignorant of the views 
presented in the TOWER relative to our being now in the dawn of 
Millennial Day, expresses herself as satisfied that 



*Mrs. Ann Mack, No. 2700 Lytle St., Louisville. 

R749 : page 1 

she has entered on the "Resurrection Life" as she calls it. 

If these be not evidences of the beginning of Restitution work, what 
are they? This is the right time for the work of healing; in the time 
of the first advent, restitution and restitution works, healing, etc., 
were not due; they were premature and were only performed to 
manifest forth beforehand, Christ's glory 

R749 : page 2 

and to illustrate the powers of the world (age) to come, which now 
is at hand. In his miracles, as in everything else, Jesus dealt with the 
end of that age as though it had been the Gospel age which it only 
typified; hence the works of the restitution which he and the 
disciples performed, no less than offering himself then as their 
King, and Reaper, were but illustrations of the end of the Christian 
age, his assumption of kingly powers, etc., now fully due, because 
the "body," the church, is complete, and the time for this blessed 
SEED of Jehovah (Gal. 3:29) to bless all the families of earth, is at 
hand. 



If all could see that the world's hope is restitution to perfection, 
many more of that class would be prepared to ask the Lord in faith 
for physical healing and might go on unto the perfection of human 
nature, instead of into the tomb. Not only is the time at hand when 
he that belie veth need not enter the tomb, but such may go from 
strength to strength. If men but realized the Scripture teaching, 
better, and did not get the heavenly hope of the Gospel church, the 
"body of Christ," mixed with the restitution hope of the world, they 
would be much better prepared to receive the blessing of restitution 
now within their reach. The basis of restitution simply stated is this: 
Man became a sinner and in Adam his right and hold upon life was 
lost. Since then, death has reigned over all. But Jesus was made 
flesh in order that he by God's favor might redeem all. He paid the 
full penalty, DEATH, and thus redeemed ALL. (Rom. 5:17-19.) 

Now, all may return to life and perfection because ransomed by 
Jesus. This restitution might have taken effect as soon as Jesus died 
and rose and ascending on high presented the sacrifice on man's 
behalf. Jesus might have returned at once to restore all things but 
another work intervened the selection of the Christian church-"the 
body" "the Bride" of Christ Jesus, to be his joint-heir in the reign of 
blessing and work of restitution. Now, the work of restitution is 
fully due because the selection of the body of Christ, from the 
world is complete, and the work of restitution is beginning while 
the sifting of the consecrated saints progresses to completion. Men 
shall be and now may be, released by faith in him who gave the 
ransom which not only releases from pain and sickness, but 
ultimately from every degree of death, to perfect life. 

So far as our observation goes, the Lord makes use of various 
characters as agents in these healings, even as Judas was one of the 
twelve who worked miracles. And some mentioned as remarkable 
for doing "wonderful works" (Matt. 7:22), will lack the approval of 
the Master, and some were not reckoned among the followers of 
Christ (Mark 9:38,39). Apparently the Lord acknowledges and 
answers FAITH in this direction by whomsoever exercised, because 
it is now due time for restitution work of this kind to have a 
beginning. 

As heretofore shown, physical restitution is not the hope set before 
the "little flock," but on the contrary sacrifice. It is their mission as 
it was their Leader's whose footsteps they follow, to "lay down" life 
as human beings, not to take it up. They might be agents of God in 
blessing others as was Paul (Acts 19:12), and yet like him suffer 
from maladies they were instrumental in curing in others (2 Cor. 
12:8,9). Of the Master it was truly said: "He saved others himself 
he cannot save." Had he saved himself, he could not have been our 
Redeemer. So if we would share his glory, and with him bless and 
restore the families of earth, we must with him, share in his 
sacrifice. 

But while these, appreciating their covenant, will not ask for 
healing or any earthly blessings, it does not follow that if they 



asked, God would always, as in Paul's case, refuse them. Thus Jesus 
said in Gethsemane, "Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my 
Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of 
angels? But then how shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it 
must be." Matt. 26:53,54. 

If the legions of angels had protected him from the priests and 
soldiery then where would have been his sacrifice? Therefore he 
did not ask. Likewise those who now tread the same "narrow way" 
[See "Food," page 134] refuse to ask for the same reason-that they 
may complete their covenant of sacrifice. At times, however, 
without asking, such have been relieved in such manner as to 
enable them to accomplish further labor in the Lord's vineyard 
(Phil. 1:12,13,24,25). 

What think you of the signs of our times? How is it that you can 
discern the face of the sky, but cannot discern this time? Is it not 
more clearly marked than was the first advent? Are there not more 
convincing proofs now, than there were then, even in the signs of 
the times, that we are in the Day of the Lord's presence? 

The Lord willing, we purpose hereafter to devote more space to the 
mention of cases of healing on every hand, that this sign of 
restitution and hence of the Lord's presence (Acts 3:21) may be 
duly noted by our readers. 



R749 : page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Ellenton, April 29, 1885. 

C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR SIR: I wish to ask a question on a subject 
that does not appear quite plain to me in the TOWER. I have been a 
member of the Presbyterian Church for twenty odd years, having 
joined that Church at my old home, St. Louis, Missouri. I am quite 
certain that I joined the Church with a sincere desire to become one 
of Christ's followers, and I fully understood the nature of the vows I 
took, and experienced great pleasure in reading the Bible with its 
commentaries; and this for a number of years. I either expected too 
much in this new relation I had placed myself in, or else I had never 
experienced a change of heart, for in spite of my earnest desire after 
a Christian life and holiness, I was continually breaking God's 
Word in some way or other. This caused me so much trouble that 
finally I grew cold, and of late years have taken very little interest 
in religion, thinking that I must long ago have been out of its pale, 
and might just as well let myself drift along with the masses and 
take my chance with others. At no time, however, has my belief in 
the fundamental truths of the Bible been lost, nor do I think they 
ever will be. I simply found I could not live up to its teachings so 
considered myself out of 



R750 : page 2 

the race. When I first read your paper, however, and afterwards 
"Food for Thinking Christians," I became greatly encouraged and 
had reason to believe that I might yet have a chance of reaching the 
class of them enjoying perfect human nature. This is the point, 
therefore, that I am not clear about from reading in the TOWER. 
What I wish to ask is, Does "Food for Thinking Christians" teach 
that persons in my condition have yet an opportunity of being 
brought back into closer fellowship with the Lord, and finally 
partake of the divine nature and become spiritual new creatures? If 
so, when will that change take place? And how shall one know 
whether he belongs to this class [the spiritual] or will only be able 
to attain to the "perfect human nature"? You will confer a great 
favor upon me by answering these questions. 

Yours truly, 



IN REPLY. 



DEAR BROTHER: We are glad to know that the truth in your 
case has been doing its quickening work. In answer to your 
question I would say that I judge you to be eligible to the high 
calling "the divine nature"; but you can very soon decide that 
matter for yourself. If you ever gave yourself entirely and 
unreservedly to the Lord, you may be sure on the strength of the 
promise, "Him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out" you 
were accepted of him. And those new desires after and appreciation 
of heavenly things are an evidence of your adoption and sealing. 

Though you became discouraged, and therefore grew cold in your 
love and service, because of your ignorance of our Lord's bounty 
and kind consideration for our frailties since covered with our 
Redeemer's righteousness, He has now sent you such a thrilling 
message of his wondrous grace as to quicken you into new life, and 
to remind you of your covenant and of the necessity of fulfilling it, 
and thus making your calling and election sure. 

If you never so consecrated, of course it is your privilege to rise to 
human perfection; but I think from what you say, the former is your 
case. 

I should add, that while it is possible for those who have 
consecrated, to so run as to obtain the great prize; it is of course 
possible to come short of it, "Let us therefore fear," and so run with 
care. 

EDITOR. 

Nebraska, April 8th, 1885. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL: I come to you a new reader of the 
TOWER. I am not of those who have come out of "Babylon" as 
have not been "defiled" in that way. The Lord took me out from the 
world as "a brand from the burning," and has been training me in 



the way of truth. It has been here a little and there a little. I was free 
from prejudice to start with, and, with God's help, have kept so. I 
am always ready to accept of truth and light, no matter by whom it 
is presented. I saw from the start that I could never join any of the 
different denominations and remain with them. This work has been 
going on in me now about five years. I have believed in the return 
of Christ that length of time. 

Some time over two years ago "Food for Thinking Christians" was 
handed me by a dear old man, whose feelings I respected. So I 
accepted of it, took it home and laid it away, counted it as rubbish 
without giving it a hearing. It went to Jerusalem and back among 
my other books in the year of 1883. Going and coming I sold and 
gave away some of my little stock of books, but somehow this little 
no-account affair stuck to me. Well, for over a month now I have 
been pleading with God for light on the "Times of the Fullness of 
the Gentiles. " What is to mark that event? While looking to the 
Lord for light on this and kindred subjects, I took up this little 
work, and well I give God thanks. His mercy is for all, and 
endureth forever. After feeding on this for two days, I started to 
look up my old friend to see if he had anything more for me. I got a 
year's numbers of the TOWER. I want the whole truth, and pray to 
the Father of mercies to keep me free from error. Enclosed please 
find $5. Send me Young's Greek, Hebrew and English 
Concordance; put me on your list for the TOWER, and the balance 
in the Lord's treasury. I can use some extra numbers of the TOWER 
to good advantage. 

Perhaps it may interest you to know something of my plans for the 
future. I have none. I have closed up my business account with the 
world, and, as I believe, have made a full surrender to the Master. 
My only desire is to be led by him, that I might devote the 
remainder of my time for this age, as well as the age to come, in 
His service. Yours, hoping to be made ready for his appearing, 



Glasgow, Scotland, April 4th, 1885. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: On Sunday night, March 29, at 7 
o'clock, the anniversary of the Lord's Supper, the night on which he 
(Jesus) poured out his soul unto death for the sin of the world, 
twelve of the WATCH TOWER readers met in my house. 

After prayer and singing, together we read articles from the 
TOWER, when all joined in reading the Scripture proofs, and then 
partook of the bread and wine according to the Word (1 Cor. 
11:23). We were blessed with a sweet communion, and were sorry 
to separate at 10 o'clock. One brother remarked there were thirteen 
present, Jesus being in the midst of us, blest us and did us good. 

Thank God for the light we receive through the WATCH TOWER. 
The article on "Two Baptisms," which appeared in the TOWER 
seems to have taken hold of the readers here. 



I baptized four into Christ on April 1st., and others are wishing to 
be immersed into truth, which will be done, "For as many of you as 
have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ." Gal. 3:27. 

Yours in Christ, 



Plainview, Neb., March 1, 1885. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: For two years I have been a reader 
of ZION'S WATCH TOWER, and have looked anxiously for it 
each month. I should like to tell you how providential were the 
circumstances that first brought the September (1881) number to 
my notice, but it would be too long a story. I read it carefully and 
compared it with the Scriptures, and felt in my heart that it was the 
truth. And although I have been a member of the Baptist Church for 
twenty-five years, and have tried to do the will of God by his help, 
doubts would often drive away trust; but the TOWER came as a 
shining light, and led me to exclaim with Thomas, "My Lord and 
my God." And it is my daily prayer that He may send abroad his 
light until all the world shall know and do his will. 

Your Brother in Christ, . 



Independence, Kans. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER: I began working with you two 
years ago, and I am sorry to say I have not been able to send you 
but 50 cents in money. I am so poor in this world's goods that I can 
hardly support my family. And yet I shudder when I think of the 
many hidden pitfalls into which I would have stumbled but for the 
TOWER. Quite a number with whom I labored have become 
subscribers of your paper. I do not want you to forget me, and yet, 
if I am eating food which by right belongs to one more worthy, do 
not permit me to stand in the way. I am still teaching whenever an 
opportunity is afforded, but meet with the opposition promised by 
our Saviour. A few days back I was in a Quaker congregation. 
When they asked the question, "If Christ died for all, then why are 
not all saved?" I replied, "Paul says, How can they hear without a 
preacher," &c. The elder of the church asked what I would do with 
the heathen. I replied, "It shall be testified unto them in due time." 

Your Brother in Christ, . 

R749 : page 3 



SUNSHINE OVER ALL. 

What folly, then," the faithless critic cries, 
With sneering lip and wise world-knowing eyes, 
While fort to fort, and post to post repeat 
The ceaseless challenge of the war-drum's beat; 



And round the green earth, to the church-bells' chime, 

The morning drum-roll of the camp keeps time. 

To dream of peace amidst a world in arms, 

Of swords to plowshares changed by Scriptural charms; 

Of nations, drunken with the wine of blood, 
Staggering to take the pledge of brotherhood, 
Like tipplers answering Father Matthew's call. 



Check Bau or Kaiser with the barricade 

Of 'Olive leaves' and resolutions made, 

Spike guns with pointed Scripture texts, and hope 

To capsize navies with a windy trope; 

Still shall the glory and the pomp of war 
Along their train the shouting millions draw; 
Still dusky labor to the parting brave 
His cap shall doff and beauty's kerchief wave, 

Still shall the bard to valor tune his song; 
Still hero-worship kneel before the strong; 
Rosy and sleek, the sable-gowned divine, 
O'er his third bottle of suggestive wine, 

To plumed and sworded auditors shall prove 

Their trade accordant with the law of love; 

And Church for State and State for Church shall fight, 

And both agree that might alone is right." 

Despite the sneers like these, oh, faithful few, 
Who dare to hold God's word and witness true, 
Whose clear-eyed faith transcends our evil time, 
And o'er the present wilderness of crime 

Sees the calm future with its robes of green, 
Its fleece-flecked mountains, and soft streams between. 
Still keep the path which duty bids ye tread, 
Though worldly wisdom shake the cautious head; 

No truth from heaven descends upon our sphere 
Without the greeting of the skeptic's sneer; 
Denied and mocked at till its blessings fall 
Common as dew and sunshine over all. 

-J. G. Whittier. 



R750 : page 3 

THE WITHERED FIG TREE PUTTING 
FORTH FRUIT. 

Matt. 21:19 and 24:32. 



We sometime since made mention of the conversion of a Jewish 
lawyer, Joseph Rabinowitz, of Southern Russia, to faith in Christ 
Jesus. Fully persuaded of the Messiahship of Jesus he returned to 
his home in Bessarabia and began to preach "Jesus our Jewish 
brother the true Messiah," with great success. Shortly after it was 
rumored that he had been murdered, but the latest accounts 
contradict this and say that the movement among the Jews is 
spreading gradually. The following translation of a letter from the 
Reformer to a gentleman of London will be read with interest. The 
fig tree cursed to the end of the age not only has leaves of promise 
but now begins to bear fruit. 

KISHENEY, January 2, 1885. To JOHN WILKINSON, the 
esteemed man: 

Your valuable letter and your pamphlet, "The Work of the Lord 
Among Israel," were received. My heart rejoiced when I read them 
and perceived how great and strong the love of your heart is toward 
the brethren of the Lord Jesus, the Messiah, according to the flesh, 
and how precious the salvation of the Israelitic nation is in your 
eyes. 

I prostrate myself before Jehovah, the God of our Lord Jesus, and 
from the depth of my heart stream forth the words of the Sweet 
Singer of Israel (Psa. 35,) "Let them be ashamed and brought to 
confusion together that rejoice at mine hurt. Let them shout for joy 
and be glad that favor my righteous cause; yea, let them say 
continually, Let the Lord be magnified, which hath pleasure in the 
prosperity of his servant." Amen. 

R751 : page 3 

Herewith I send you a pamphlet, "The First Fruits of a Fig Tree," 
which contains my opinions and statements in reference to those 
children of Israel in Southern Russia who believe in Jesus as the 
Messiah. These documents have been edited by Professor Franz 
Delitzsch, of Leipzig. Out of them you will learn to know the origin 
of our faith in Jesus (our Brother bodily), the Messiah. He is the 
innermost desire and longing of our hearts. Our English friends and 
brethren in Jesus, our Saviour, may be convinced by this above- 
named pamphlet that after the Lord hath made bare his holy arms in 
the eyes of all the nations, and all the ends of the earth have seen 
the salvation of our God, that now the time has come when there 
shall depart and go out from the midst of Israel all unclean persons, 
and the bearers of the vessels of the Lord shall be cleansed. 

True, the salvation of the Lord cannot go out and come into (Joshua 
6: 1) the world with haste, nor can it walk with rapidity, but now as 
Jehovah, the Avant-guard and King of the Universe, has passed on 
before the people of Israel, the God of Israel shall come also as 
Rear-guard, as gatherer of the outcasts of Israel. 

Beloved of the Lord! I herewith write to you that when my feet 
touched the holy city, i.e., Jerusalem, and I beheld the place where 



they pierced Him (Jesus), then and there Jehovah enlightened my 
eyes, so that I understood the Law, the Prophets and Psalms in 
reference to the plan of salvation, and I tasted somewhat of the 
sweetness of that mystery which is, to the sorrow of my heart, still 
unrevealed to the majority of my brethren, the sons of Israel. 

From that time on I devoted my time and name to the welfare of my 
stubborn and unhappy nation to testify unto them with a brazen 
forehead in the strength of God the gospel of promise, which our 
fathers had received, viz: that God hath raised this man, Jesus of 
Nazareth, out of the seed of David as Saviour (Liberator) of Israel. 

Through the depth of the riches and wisdom of God, the highest, 
our Fathers, who were incumbents of the Promise, rebelled against 
Jesus, so that grace might be bestowed upon the heathen nations, 
not through any promise, but through grace in the gospel of the 
Messiah. 

Now, after the fulness of the Gentiles hath come in, the time has 
arrived for us, the sons of Israel, to return to the God of Israel and 
his King and be his beloved children. We should accept our 
heritage, the heritage of Jacob, which is without limit, for we are 
the legitimate heirs, children of Abraham, disciples of Moses, 
servants of the house of David in eternity. Thus our fulness (i.e., the 
coming of many Israelites to Christ) will be our riches and the 
riches of the nations, according to the words of Jehovah by St. Paul, 
a firstborn of Israel, and at the same time the foremost among the 
returning heathen. 

Among my brethren and in large meetings I earnestly admonish, 
"Shake thyself from the dust; arise, put on my beautiful garments, 
my people; through the son of Jesse, Jesus of Nazareth, hath the 
Lord done great things with thee, O Israel, that he might also work 
great things among the nations of the earth, who were blessed in 
our fathers." 

I greatly thank God that I see thousands who cheerfully listen, and I 
trust in Jehovah, who elected David his servant, and his seed after 
him, that in due time all these will be living stones built by God 
himself into a steadfast house and priestly sanctuary, so that 
acceptably sacrifices may be brought hither to the God of Israel in 
Jesus, the Messiah. They shall know and accept the truth, which 
alone can make them free children. 

Many and worthy sons of Israel are waiting and long for the hour, 
the hour of grace of our God. I implore you, in the name of our 
brethren in Russia who seek the salvation, that the friends of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, wherever they be, may not be silent, but that they 
give counsel and speak out boldly, until Immanuel be with us also, 
until Jehovah show us him and his dwelling. 

Then all who see us in our land, Russia, will say of us, "They are 
the blessed seed of the Lord." 



These are humble words written from afar off by one who bows 
before you and seeks a more intimate acquaintance with you, a son 
of Israel indeed. 



JOSEPH RABINOWITZ. 



R751 : page 3 

OUR HOPE IN CHRIST. 

Paul had by the teaching of the Holy Spirit a clear conception that 
the "hope of Israel" as set before them in "Moses, the prophets and 
psalms, was "resurrection from the dead," and that this hope was 
fulfilled, its realization made sure, in the resurrection of Christ. 
(See Acts 23:6; 26:6-8; 26:22-23; 28:20.) 

So the light to Israel was the hope of resurrection. That hope is not 
yet realized. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph and Joshua still sleep. 
Their children scattered over the world are still in the dead spiritual 
condition as a people, typified by their bones. Light, therefore, has 
not yet dawned upon Israel. Whatever views may be held as to the 
light offered to Israel upon Pentecost, or by Stephen-and which 
they rejected -a reading of the prophecies (Isa. 42:6; 49:6, and 
60:3), with the context, would be convincing that the light there 
spoken of as to come to Israel (and which Paul evidently refers to) 
has not dawned. Now the question would naturally be, what delays 
it? I think the answer of the scripture is, "the waiting for the 
completion of the resurrection of Christ. " If we transfer to another 
dispensation the full fulfillment of the prophecies that "Christ is to 
be a light to lighten the Gentiles," and regard that the work of God 
now is the gathering of the body that is to share with its living head 
in resurrection life and power, and that the resurrection of Christ is 
not complete until the whole body is raised, the Scriptures are in 
harmony. 

The Christ of God is Jesus and the redeemed Church (1 Cor. 12:12; 
Eph. 5:23,30,31; Eph. 1:20-23; 2:21,22.) With this view Acts 15 is 
in perfect harmony. God is now visiting the Gentiles to gather THE 
BODY. After the resurrection, Christ will be revealed in GLORY 
AND LIGHT to Israel, and they shall fall before him as did 
Thomas, who is a type of Israel and the veil taken from their 
hearts, they shall go out as the people through whom God will 
lighten the Gentiles. It is instructive to compare in this connection 
Acts 13:46, and Isa. 60:3. Does Paul speak of himself as an 
Israelite, commanded by this passage to go to the Gentiles, or of 
Christ as prophesied of as the light of the Gentiles? Perhaps both 
are included. 

Man was created by God to bear rule and have dominion over the 
earth (Gen. 1:26.) In his sin he lost all. In the promised SEED he is 
to regain all. Compare Gen. 1:26 with Ps. 8 and Heb. 2:5-10, and 
Rom. 8:19-24, for connecting links as to Christ our hope, as set 



forth in the promise of the "SEED." A very interesting study will be 
found in taking up the Bible as a history of Satan's war against the 
seed of the woman. He brought the first born Cain under the curse 
and condemnation of God for murder, by his pride. He killed Abel 
the second born. He corrupted the sons of Seth the third, and 
brought the race to destruction in the flood, God interposing by 
grace to save Noah. After Abraham is called out the war is against 
his family. One after another comes forth in prominence as if the 
promises would be fulfilled in them, but all fail, until the Son of 
God incarnate came and stood every test. He wrought 
righteousness, was without sin; and overcame the power of the 
devil. His title as the Son of man is intended always to carry us 
back to Gen. 3 in adoring gratitude to God for His faithfulness to 
His word and His grace to the sons of Adam (Gal. 4:4-6). By Christ 
and in his church is the victory gained. 

To Abraham, as the man of faith, how applicable is the definition of 
faith God gives us in Heb. 11:1, "who against hope believed in 
hope" (Rom. 4:18). He died at the age of 175. Promised a land he 
had never seen, he was 75 years old before his feet touched its soil. 
His first experience in it was a famine- and in leaving it, promised 
a seed by Sarah, he came near losing her in Egypt. Faith with him, 
as with all God's called ones, was continually tried. But for God's 
grace and providence Abraham would many a time have made 
shipwreck. "Against hope he believed in hope." All of the promises 
centre in the promise of a seed. He is to possess the land through 
his seed. Two or three times he tries to help God out of seeming 
difficulties in the literal fulfillment of his word, as do many of his 
children now. He fell into the line of argument that Sarah was not 
really to have a child it was figurative and not literal and so he 
tried to raise a figurative child-but, as do all who try to plan and 
interpret for God, he made a poor figure in his attempt, and his 
figurative child was cast out. "In Isaac shall thy seed be called." 
"Sarah shall have a son," was the literal word of God. His hope was 
in a literal Isaac, and all his efforts for Ishmael hindered instead of 
helped the thing he hoped for. Yet "against hope he believed in 
hope," and at the age of one hundred, received Isaac as one born 
from the dead, Rom. 4:19,20; Heb. 11:12; and rejoiced in the 
fulfillment of God's promises-in faith; literally, he had seen but a 
scant realization of them. He never possessed the land, he lived and 
died in a tent, and owned no part of Canaan except the place of his 
burial. God 

R752 : page 3 

promised him a seed as numerous as the stars, and like the sand of 
the seashore, in Isaac. When he died, Isaac had been married, and 
although years elapsed, Rebekah had no children, yet after the birth 
of Isaac we have no intimation that the faith of Abraham ever 
wavered. The gift of Isaac was the seal to him of everything 
promised, and looking upon Isaac, he rejoiced in all that was to 
come. And so the word presents the church as not yet having 



entered into the realization of her inheritance, but having Christ, 
knowing that with him God will freely give her all things, Rom. 

8:32. 

It is difficult to turn away from Isaac 

R752 : page 4 

in the manifold views of Christ we have presented through him. 
"He was the first to arise from the dead," in the figure of his birth, 
and his arising from the altar on Mount Moriah. In him the people, 
(Israel) were called, by the birth of Jacob-but not until God had 
first provided him a bride to share the riches and glory bestowed 
upon him by the Father. So in Christ, Israel are to be blessed, but, 
not until the Bride takes her place with the heavenly Bridegroom, 
Rom. 1 1:25,26. No part of the blessed Scripture is more calculated 
to feed the souls of Christ's redeemed and chosen people, and to set 
more plainly before them Christ our hope than Gen. 24, where we 
have Abraham sending the servant after a bride for Isaac. It is not a 
public event-the people of the land not seemingly interested, not 
occupied with its import. The servant goes with the message guided 
by God to the one whom God has chosen to be the Bride. Caravans 
of merchantmen, passing from Damascus to Egypt, soldiers of the 
king of Shinar, on missions of conquest, may have seen Eliezer as 
he journeyed to Mesopotamia, and may have known his errand, but 
they had no interest in it and knew nothing of God's purposes. So 
now the Holy Ghost has come from the Father with a message for 
the chosen Bride, an invitation from an absent Bridegroom to share 
his Father's love, his inheritance-His throne. Noiseless as the tread 
of the camels' feet over the sands of the desert he pursues his way, 
and in every age and in every clime there are waiting Rebekahs, 
who have circumcised ears, believing hearts, and willing minds, to 
hear the story of God's dear Son His dying love, His living power, 
the distant home, the coming glory, and to gladly say as did 
Rebekah, "I will go." The world around takes no note of his errand- 
-of his success, occupied with its schemes of wealth and ambition, 
and of a glory to be built up in Ishmael instead of Isaac. So Ishmael 
lives, and becomes a great nation, with twelve princes, they care not 
who shall become the bride of Isaac. 

What interest to-day has the world at large in Christ, God's dear 
Son, in the revelation made of Him in the Scriptures as the 
heavenly Bridegroom. What light have they on the purpose of this 
dispensation as the calling out of a people for his name? What 
sympathy have they in God's revealed plan and purposes, as 
centering everything in heaven and on earth in the glory of His 
Son? No more than the world had in Isaac's day in the call of 
Rebekah. Yet the message shall come with power, and the report be 
believed by those whom God shall choose. John 14:17; 6:45. 

Rebekah left her home to go to one she had never seen, to go to one 
of whom she had heard, Rom. 10:16,17. She had a long journey 
over the desert under the care of Eliezer. The one hope that lead her 



forth was Isaac. If doubt suggested the fear that Isaac might reject 
her, she knew with that rejection everything was lost, every hope 
perished-for all hope for everything centered in Isaac. As Isaac's 
chosen bride, all that Isaac had she was to share she could have no 
fear for anything while confident in Isaac. So, believing the report 
concerning Christ, have we brethren, turned away from the world, 
and accepting the call of God, do we now journey on to meet our 
Lord? Rebekah had Abraham's words repeated to her by the 
servant, concerning Isaac, as the foundation of her faith. She had 
the constant care and companionship of the servant upon her 
journey, as the earnest of what awaited her when she should meet 
Isaac, but the purpose for which she was called was not fulfilled 
until she met Isaac. She did not occupy the position of Isaac's bride 
until conducted by Isaac himself to that position. So in Eph. 5:27; 1 
John 3:2. How much we now have how little we now have must 
be the thought of every child of God. 

After the calling of the bride in this wonderful chapter, we have 
Israel as an earthly people introduced in the birth and election of 
Jacob. They inherit the promise made to Abraham and Isaac. 
Through them God is to reveal Himself a light to the Gentiles. But 
every promise to them centers as to us in Christ. In contrast to the 
acceptance of Rebekah in humble faith of the call of God, fulfilling 
Rom. 9:30, we have Israel from the outset quarreling with grace, 
and blind as to God's purpose, as in Rom. 9:31,32. In Jacob the 
early Israel is established, the twelve tribes formed, and covenant 
with God recognized. 

To this Israel God reveals Himself, gives them His law, gives them 
teachers and prophets. They should have been the teachers of the 
world, the witnesses for Christ. They failed and were set aside, and 
over and over again this setting aside of the one who had the right 
of the firstborn is acted out in the books of Moses. Ishmael and 
Isaac, Jacob and Esau, Leah and Rachel, Ephraim and Manasseh, 
are examples. In their setting aside we are told plainly God has not 
changed His purposes. They are still His people, it is still His 
purpose to use them as a light to the Gentiles, Rom. 9:15,26-29. 

All of this is shadowed forth in the relations of first, the sons of 
Jacob; second, the world to Joseph. Not until the eleven brothers 
united in bowing the knee before him, were their eyes opened to 
know him, and they delivered from their trouble. And through 
Joseph as the head of the earthly Israel was Egypt fed. Joseph was 
the joy and hope of three different classes. 1. Of the king upon the 
throne who had given him all power. 2. Of his Gentile bride 
Zipporah, who in grace he had married. 3. Of the children of Israel, 
his kinsmen according to the flesh. So he shadows forth Christ in 
His relations to his Father, to the Church, and to Israel. Jacob 
before Pharaoh shows us the position of Israel among the nations 
when joined to Christ. "He blessed Pharaoh," Heb. 7:7. 

Thus "Christ as our hope" is set before us in the word through 
Moses. Jesus said, "Moses wrote of me," and truly the one theme of 



the writings of Moses, as we are taught of God, will be found to be 
Christ. May God give us grace to make Christ the center of study, 
of worship, of service, that all our springs may be found in Him.- 
D.W. Whittle. 



R752 : page 4 



THE WORLD'S HOPE. 



Notwithstanding the world's seeming indifference to the future, 
the vast majority believe that there is a future before them. All men 
instinctively cling to life, and even when dying to a hope of some 
existence in the great unknown. Modern as well as ancient 
philosophers reason from this universal desire for life, that man 
must be an immortal being; overlooking the fact that the same kind 
of logic would prove that every man is wealthy because there is a 
universal desire for wealth. 

While denying that man is by nature such a being as could never 
cease to be, whose existence even God could not blot out, we have 
from time to time shown that God has a grand plan for the 
restitution of the world from death, and that his promise is, that to 
all who appreciate that gift, and will live in harmony with His 
righteous will, He will supply life sustaining elements by which 
they may live forever. We have seen too that He has provided this 
gift in a certain definite way-through the gift of His son- through 
the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. 

The errors with which Satan has, as with leaven, permeated the 
faith of Christians, has helped to hinder the world from seeing the 
symmetry and beauty of God's plan through Christ. The world's 
hope is, that after all, it will be found that faith in Christ, is not 
essential to salvation, but that there is a general system of evolution 
by which all go from a human condition to some higher condition, 
the marks and conditions of progress being, not faith, but morality. 

To these the Scriptural account of the fall of the race from 
perfection is all a mere myth, consequently the ransom of the race 
from the effects of that fall, are equally mythical, and the Scripture 
promise to the world of a restitution, or return to that condition 
which existed before the fall, is absurd. Since they think that they 
did not "fall," they reason that they need no Saviour, and as a result, 
all those Scriptures which speak of ransom, sacrifice, redemption, 
of our being bought, etc., are meaningless to them. They place 
Plato, Socrates, Aristotle, Confucius, and Jesus Christ, all on a 
common level and in their definition of saviour these were alike 
and together saviours of the world in that they all taught 
righteousness, and virtue, and condemned sin. 

Alas poor world! It knows not God, hence it knows not his plan of 
salvation through Jesus only. It was not in his teachings merely that 
Jesus was great. His greatness was in that he was able to say, "Thy 



sins be forgiven thee." It was by virtue of his acceptable sacrifice as 
a ransom, that he was exalted to be a prince and Saviour and to 
grant repentance and remission of sins. This none other could ever 
do. 

Thanks be to God that His gracious plans are so far reaching that he 
has made 

R753 : page 4 

abundant provision for man's willfulness and opposition, by not 
only redeeming them, but by providing a means by which they shall 
come to know and appreciate the truth concerning the only name, in 
order that through faith in His redemption they may live forever as 
it is written: God "will have all men to be saved [from death-the 
result of the fall] and [then] come to a knowledge of the truth." 1 
Tim. 2:4. 

The great expounder of this, the world's hope, Mr. Henry Ward 
Beecher, in his discourse of Sunday, Feb. 1, '85, asked and 
answered this important question as follows: 

"Must not a man have faith in Jesus Christ? 

In regard to that I hold that the right understanding of Jesus Christ 
is the most powerful persuasion to a religious life. Nevertheless, if 
by any way a man has gone up; if he has found in himself the 
kingdom of heaven without knowing Jesus Christ, he will be saved. 
If you believe the old scheme of theology that men fell in Adam, 
that there was a council somewhere up in heaven and that a few 
were foreordained to be saved and that all the rest were to be 
damned, then you have not any room to believe anything I am 
telling you and my preaching is idle." 

And yet Mr. Beecher calls himself a Christian and men call him 
reverend. Surely this is sailing under false colors. He speaks of "a 
right understanding of Jesus Christ," by which we understand him 
to mean an understanding such as he has; and since his 
understanding is the opposite of that of Jesus and the Apostles, we 
conclude that Mr. Beecher must be a new apostle of "another 
gospel," to which Paul refers (Gal. 1:6-9). Peter very clearly 
answers Mr. B. He says of Jesus: "This is the stone which was set at 
nought of your builders, which is become the head of the corner. 
Neither is there salvation in any other; for there is no other name 
under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved." Acts 
4:12. This apostle of the new gospel not only contradicts Peter, but 
places himself squarely at issue with Paul and what he calls "the old 
scheme of theology, that men fell in Adam." The old scheme is 
stated by Paul in Rom. 5:15,17,18,19,8 to 10, and makes necessary 
the ransom-sacrifice of Jesus, to which the new gospel and its 
apostles object. The same is true of Jesus' statement of the "old 
scheme of theology": he declared: "The Son of man is come to 
save that which WAS LOST." Matt. 18:11. 



Of those who are building their faith on the foundation of the 
Apostles- Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, Mr. 
Beecher well says: "You have not any room to believe anything I 
am telling you, and my preaching is idle." This is well stated, and is 
just what we have been trying to show. Those who are building on 
the true foundation laid in the Bible, should speedily be convinced 
that all theories thus contrary to it are "idle," useless, profitless; and 
to those not filled with the truth, and who have a little room for it, 
this insidious form of infidelity may prove very hurtful. The more 
they look at it, and "wonder what he will say next," the greater the 
danger. Only one course is safe when we have proved any theory, 
and find it contrary to our tried standard [The Bible]- drop it and 
leave it finally. To handle such things is like handling poison; it is 
liable to be absorbed into the system unconsciously. We are all by 
reason of our fallen condition more susceptible to error than to 
truth; besides, evil is many sided, presenting itself in a hundred 
delusive guises, but truth is but one. Error always presents itself as 
truth, and its messengers as the messengers of light. (2 Cor. 11:13- 
15). Hence it becomes us to test or prove such as come in our way 
and claim our attention. 

Nor should we be always sipping and tasting of poisons so as to 
have no time to feed upon the truth, or a vitiated palate which 
cannot appreciate truth, for we have at hand a speedy and infallible 
test-the Word of God. Any system or theory which rejects or 
ignores the teachings of Jesus and the Apostles is not of God- 
hence of darkness, and leads to darkness. Any system which uses 
Scripture passages simply as texts, and ignores the teaching of the 
passage in its connections, is evidently a trap and a snare, and out 
of harmony with our standard. Any system which uses one passage 
of Scripture which suits it, and contradicts another passage merely 
because it does not suit its theory; or, which uses one text of 
Scripture as an offset or contradiction of another, is manifestly 
erroneous. Any system which attempts to use Scripture words or 
phrases but to deny or ignore or wrest their true meaning, is 
undoubtedly most deceptive and blinding error. Each of these 
methods would manifestly be "handling the Word of God 
deceitfully" 

R753 : page 5 

to make it prove their theory, instead of handling it honestly to 
prove to them God's theory. 

All such, when proved false by our only standard, should be 
dropped at once. We cannot trust to our reasoning powers and stop 
to parley with error, for unless fully armed with a full, clear and 
comprehensive knowledge of the plan of God, many of Satan's 
misleading theories might seem at least possible. Even the Master 
would do no more than show that Satan's arguments were contrary 
to the teachings of Scripture by quoting Scripture in reply: "It is 
written," etc. 



By following this method, how many would find that much of the 
preaching, though not as injurious as Mr. Beecher's, is nevertheless 
"idle," and a waste of time on the part of those who attend. If 
governed by this rule, how many would find, as Mr. B. suggests, 
that they have really "no room to believe" what they hear? Judged 
by this scriptural test, how many theories which consume precious 
time, as well as confuse and perplex the mind, would be rejected as 
"idle"?* 

Let us always remember, however, that we are not to decide what is 
truth and what error by our prejudices and preferences, but by the 
Word; not by our general impression as to what the Word teaches, 
nor by a fragment of it imperfectly remembered, but by a careful 
examination of the text and context. 

Any teacher who does not cite the text upon which he bases an 
argument claimed to be scriptural, is unworthy the name of teacher 
or expounder, and his products are unworthy of study. Those who 
do quote should be carefully examined, not only to ascertain that 
the Word of God is handled honestly and fairly, but also to impress 
the truth, upon the reader's heart. 

Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell 
together in unity (Psa. 133:1); but truth and error, light and 
darkness are not brethren, they are implacable and everlasting foes, 
and have been ever since error was born- for truth is eternal. And 
while the children of light and truth must from their very nature, 
love and sympathize with men as members of a common race, and 
whensoever they can may do them good, yet they should not 
sympathize in their course of error with those who have become 
children of darkness and whose influence is opposed to the truth. 
Hence, though we would not injure a hair of their heads, and would 
not even attempt to restrain their liberty in presenting error (because 
the time for binding evil has not yet fully come), yet we should be 
bold for the truth; we must not shun to declare the truth and show 
the error, else we are unworthy a place or name among those called 
"the children of the light." 

And this is the course marked out as the true path of love. Love to 
God is above all, and love to God's word Jesus puts next (Mark 
8:38). The apostle claims that true love not only "rejoiceth in the 
truth," but it "rejoiceth not in iniquity." (1 Cor. 13:6). He teaches 
that those exercised by true love should "have no fellowship with 
the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather REPROVE them." Eph. 
5:8 and 11. And we read "He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ 
hath both the Father and the Son: If there come any unto you, and 
bring not this doctrine [i.e. bring any other doctrine] receive him 
not into your house, neither bid him God speed. For he that biddeth 
him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds," 2 John 9:10. God who 
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined into our 
hearts" "ye should show forth the praises of him who hath called 
you out of darkness into his marvellous light." "For what fellowship 
hath righteousness with unrighteousness? And what communion 



hath light with darkness? And what concord hath Christ with 
Belial? Or what part hath he that believeth with an 
infidel?. ..Wherefore come out from among them and be ye separate 
saith the Lord and touch not the unclean thing." 2 Cor. 6:14-17. 



*We recommend such a test of the teachings of the TOWER. If 
then you decide that its foundation is not laid in the teachings of 
God's Word, you should order it stopped. If you find that its 
teachings are built upon and supported by the Scriptures, it will 
give you the more confidence in the unfolding plan of God which it 
endeavors to present. 



R754 : page 5 

SPIRITISM EXAMINED. 

"Regard not them that have familiar spirits ...to be defiled by 
them." Lev. 19:31. 

"There shall not be found among you.. .a consulter of familiar 
spirits, or a wizard or a necromancer... because of these 
abominations the Lord thy God doth drive out (the nations) from 
before thee." Deu. 18:10-12. 

The belief that the dead are alive in another sphere or condition of 
being is not new. It was part of the religion of the ancients, and was 
the very root of all mythology. This naturally made it appear then 
as it now does, at least reasonable that these dead persons under 
such circumstances should be capable of, and did hold intercourse 
with the living. 

This very plausible reasoning, based on a misunderstanding (the 
facts being made known in the Scriptures only) has given cover and 
force to the deceptions practised by "demons" under the guise of 
dis-embodied spirits of men. They have eagerly availed themselves 
of this mode of concealing their identity, and have thus perpetuated 
their sway over the minds and lives of many. 

God regards this intimacy or familiarity with spirits as a vile 
abomination, and threatened those who would engage in it 
(mediums) and those who would inquire of them with death. 

This consulting of spirits was evidently extensively practised by the 
heathen nations that had inhabited the land of Canaan. Against 
spiritism, "orthodoxy," so called, makes a feeble show of 
opposition, but it is really powerless to cope with it, because the 
orthodox theories give it encouragement and strength. This is 
shown by a sermon preached by Rev. W. J. Robinson, of 
Allegheny, which we quote below from the Pittsburgh Dispatch, of 
November 3d, 1884: 



MODERN SPIRITUALISM 

"An unusually large audience assembled last evening in the First 
United Presbyterian Church, of Allegheny, to hear an interesting 
and instructive sermon on "Modern Spiritualism," as delivered by 
the pastor of that congregation, Rev. W. J. Robinson, D.D. He had 
chosen for his text the words: "They have Moses and the Prophets. 
If they hear not them neither will they believe, though one rose 
from the dead. " In his introductory remarks he said he did not see 
the necessity of any soul returning from the spirit land, as they 
could tell no more about it than had already been revealed by the 
word of God as set forth in the Scriptures. He cited the declaration 
of King David in regard to Absalom's spirit returning. David said, 
"I will go to my son; he shall not return," and again, Job had 
emphatically declared, "the dead shall not come until the heavens 
are no more. " There are but three instances of the return of souls 
from spirit-land in all the records contained in the Bible. When 
Jesus took three of his disciples into the mount, they fell asleep, 
and, upon awakening, saw Moses and Elijah was one of these; 
Samuel's apparition to King Saul forewarning him of his death on 
the morrow, and the coming reign of David was another, and the 
returning of Dives, the rich man who persecuted Lazarus and turned 
a deaf ear to his requests for the necessities of life, was the 
remaining one. 

As to Samuel's coming, there was no need of it, as Saul knew what 
was inevitably to happen to him for his wilfulness and disobedience 
of the commands of God; but it is evident that Samuel came to 
convince men of the uselessness of such visitations, as he could tell 
only what was already known. Moses had been dead several 
hundred years. Elijah had departed for the other world 150 years 
previous. Dive's message was concerning that hell of torment of 
which all had heard. He told them that repentance on earth alone 
would save a soul, and that such a thing was impossible in hell. 
And that was also familiar to every one who had heard the 
Scriptures read or explained. All these came with messages and 
only reported facts which God is constantly keeping before the eyes 
and in the minds of men. But how different were these Bible 
revelations to those spoken of to-day. Only one in all the ages 
appeared in response to a call. And then the manner of their 
coming. Those of the olden times were voices which spoke 
messages of truth, while those of to-day, so called, are rappings, 
which would indicate anything else as well as a return from Spirit 
Land. The Bible-told messages were the truth, while those of 
modern times speak a mummery that whatever else the spirits had 
learned they had lost their former senses. They speak drivelling 
nonsense. The difference lies between truth and falsehood and light 
and darkness. The Bible contains all men need to know; there is 
found the testimony of the dead. "And now, while the dead did not 
come back to us, we are rapidly going to them. Study this world 
and your Bibles, and prepare for the world to come," were the 
concluding words of his sermon. 



This may be regarded as the expression of "Orthodoxy" as to the 
condition and abode of the dead. 

"Only one (says Dr. Robinson) in all the ages responded to a call," 
but if one why not more? And this one was God's faithful servant 
Samuel. If this were true, then God's righteous servant was under 
the dominion of a wicked medium, and all God's servants would 
undoubtedly be subject to the same kind of power, and if the great 
God was powerless to protect Samuel from this abomination which 
was so abhorrent to his will, how could any of his children expect 
protection from the powers of darkness? We cannot find words to 
express our indignation and abhorrence of such blind and 
misguided views of God and his word. Is it any wonder that 
Spiritism is spreading, when teachers in high places misquote and 
flatly contradict the word of God? God's word declares, "The dead 
know not anything;. ..there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, 
nor wisdom, in the grave whither thou goest" (Eccl. 9:5,10). "In 
death there is no remembrance of thee; in the grave who shall give 
thee thanks" (Psa. 6:5). Either so-called Orthodoxy and Romanism 
and Spiritualism are right, and that the characteristics and 
sensibilities of life are possessed by the dead, and God's word is a 
lie, or else God's word is true, "the dead know not anything," and 
these man-made systems teach falsely. There can be no middle 
course. We must reject one or the other. 

If Dr. Robinson had quoted Job correctly he would have 
demolished his own argument. Job says (Chap. 14:10-12), "Man 
dieth, and wasteth away: yea, man giveth up the ghost ("gasps out- 
expires" -Young), and where is he?... as the waters fail from the 
sea, and the flood decayeth and drieth up, so man lieth down, and 
RISETH NOT: till the heavens be no more, they shall not awake, 
nor be raised out of their sleep." 

Could anything be stated more plainly than this? It shows the 
absence of everything that characterizes life wisdom, knowledge, 
work, device, remembrance, or thanksgiving. And none are exempt 
from its penalty. "In Adam all die." No man can deliver his soul 
(being) from its power. He is cut off from the "land of the living"- 
all life, for the time being, shown by the words "man dieth.. .and 
where is he?" implying that he no longer exists except as he has a 
place in God's purpose to be realized through a resurrection. 

The penalty or wages of sin is death- extinction of life. There is no 
escaping it, nor is there any possibility of rising out of it: this is 
proven beyond a peradventure by these Scriptures, and is made 
very emphatic by the words- "riseth not," and "shall not awake," 
but that there will be an awakening or resurrection of the dead at an 
appointed time is apparent from the completion of the sentence-till 
the heavens be no more; i.e., till the new dispensation is introduced; 
the present referred to by Jesus (Matt. 24:29), and by Paul, (Heb. 
12:26,27), being shaken and removed. As no exception to these 
statements of God's word is possible, it should be evident that the 
possibility of communication with dead men is a delusion. The 



deception practiced in Spiritism is the more gross, because, not men 
but demons are communicated with. There is abundant proof of this 
furnished by God's word. Nevertheless "orthodoxy" is powerless to 
cope with this abomination because of her adherence to false 
theories as to death and her wilful ignorance of the testimony of 
God's word to the contrary. 

The mediums of modern spiritism are identified with those who 
anciently had "familiar spirits," who under the names of Witch and 
Wizard then claimed power to bring up and communicate with the 
dead as they now do. This is shown by the reply of the Witch of 
Endor to Saul's request: "Whom shall I bring up unto thee"? and 
Saul answered, "Bring up Samuel" (1 Samuel 28:11). That which 
she did bring up assumed to be Samuel as do the same spirits now 
assume to be dead friends of living men. If this spirit told the truth 
as claimed by Dr. Robinson, and the "orthodox" theory be right, 
wicked Saul would next day be with righteous Samuel. 

If, however, this consulting of familiar spirits was contrary to God's 
express command "Regard not them that have familiar (or 
intimacy with) spirits. ..to be defiled by them" (Lev. 19:31) how 
could God's prophet who had denounced this as wickedness, be a 
party to it now that he was dead? And whether called up willingly 
or unwillingly, he would in either case have become subject to the 
powers of darkness in this intimacy with one that was deemed 
guilty of death, because of this kindness. 

If it was not Samuel, then who was it? We answer, It was an evil, 
lying spirit who personated Samuel. 

These wicked spirits eagerly avail themselves of every opportunity 
to bring mankind under their foul sway, deceiving those who 
commune with them as to their identity, notwithstanding God's 

R755 : page 5 

command: "There shall not be found among you.. .a consulter of 
familiar spirits, or a wizard or necromancer, for all these things are 
an abomination unto the Lord: and because of these abominations 
the Lord thy God doth drive out (the nations formerly inhabiting 
Canaan -whose sin Israel's king imitated) from before thee" (Deut. 
18:10). And "the soul that turneth after such as have familiar 

R755 : page 6 

spirits and after wizards... I will set my face against that soul and cut 
him off from among his people" (Lev. 20:6). Of these commands 
Saul was well aware: he knew that he was in the most deliberate 
and wilful manner acting contrary to these commands in consulting 
the Witch of Endor; and God visited upon him the threatened 
punishment for this transgression. "Saul died for his transgression 
which he committed against the word of the Lord which he kept 
not, and also for asking counsel of one that had a familiar spirit, to 
inquire of it" (1 Chron. 10:13). This settles the point at issue. Saul 
sinned in asking counsel contrary to God's command of one that 



had intimacy with a spirit to inquire of it. Therefore it is plain, not 
only that it was not the Lord's prophet that was consulted, but that it 
was an evil spirit the same in kind as those cast out by Jesus and 
his disciples. That they were of this same class of fallen spiritual 
beings, is conclusively proven by the similarity of description in the 
case of the "damsel possessed with a spirit of divination... which 
brought her master great gain," by soothsaying, which so grieved 
Paul that he "turned and said to the spirit, I command thee in the 
name of Jesus Christ to come out of her, and he came out the same 
hour" (Acts 16:16). This corresponds with the account in 1 Sam. 
28, "Saul said to her, I pray thee divine (make known) unto me by 
the familiar spirit." The divination practiced by the Witch of Endor 
was of the same nature and through the same agency used by this 
damsel out of whom Paul cast the unclean spirit or demon. 

Nor does the appearance of Moses and Elijah on the mount of 
transfiguration, quoted by Dr. Robinson, support the theory that 
dead men live, for Jesus expressly declared to these disciples that 
this was a "vision," and charges them to tell no man of this 
foreshadowing of the kingdom of Christ until after he was risen 
(Matt. 17:9). 

All the parables recorded in the New Testament receive a non- 
literal interpretation by orthodoxy, except that of Dives and 
Lazarus, which, contrary to this generally accepted principle, they 
literalize: this involves some absurdities, such as Lazarus carried by 
angels into Abraham's bosom; and the great gulf fixed so that they 
which would pass hence (from heaven) to you (in an orthodox hell) 
cannot, &c. They commonly add to this literalism that "they who 
enter hell return no more: they who sink there, sink forever." Dr. 
Robinson, however, adds a new phase to it which reaches the 
climax of absurdity and inconsistency in trying to make it appear 
that Dives returned from spiritland (an orthodox hell) with a 
message. For a consistent elucidation of this parable, see "Food for 
Thinking Christians," page 154. See also page 74. 

S. O. BLUNDEN. 

N.B. Those of our readers who have not yet had a copy of this little 
book ("Food") can procure a copy free, by applying to the Editor. 



page 6 

YOUNG'S CONCORDANCE.-Seven copies remain at the old 
price, $2.25; when these are gone the special price will be $3.00 to 
our subscribers, which is $2.00 below the regular price. 



THE pamphlet entitled THE TABERNACLE AND ITS 
TEACHINGS is now out of print. Many requests for this pamphlet 
continually coming to hand, we have arranged to publish it soon as 
a number of the TOWER. 



R755 : page 6 



AN OPEN LETTER. 



[The following by a subscriber, dated Feb. 3, 1885, was 
unavoidably delayed until now, in this office. -EDITOR.] 

REV. R. HEBER NEWTON, Dear Sir: I have just been reading the 
abstract of your sermon in to-day's Tribune and cannot resist the 
temptation to traverse briefly your position on the doctrine of 
Election. It seems to be your effort, as of many who cannot accept 
the old standard and are yet unwilling to flee out from the technical 
borders of old affiliations, to give merely a different statement to 
old dogmas or to show how the old statement may be reconciled to 
the keener or the bolder insight into all things prevailing to-day. 
You appear to treat the doctrine of election as formulated by 
protestant fathers as an attempt to account for observed conditions 
of human life, rather than to be purely their conception of the 
teaching of the inspired Word. If it was mainly the former, it would 
deserve from us as much reverence as any other merely human 
philosophy and no more. If it was an attempt to epitomize, rather, 
the teaching of the Bible, it deserves consideration only so far as it 
is found to be a truthful abstract thereof. The present day has a 
perfect right to decide upon that point, for the present has two 
advantages over the past in any question of Biblical study. The first 
is, that scholarship is abler and is better provided with the means of 
accurate historical and exegetical research. The second is, that no 
part or section of revelation is comprehended until the time when 
its vital work is to be done in the world. The later the era the more 
probably correct its judgment as to the real import of the divine 
message. 

You recognize the repulsive character of the old statement by which 
it appears that the "ninety and nine" are not in the fold, but doomed 
to the mountain side and the bottomless pit forever while only the 
one is chosen to be saved. So do I. No philosophy, no terrors that 
can be denounced, no pleading, nothing short of a demonstration 
hereafter can convince me that a being of love planned such a 
scheme as that. How do you proceed? You would convince men by 
ocular evidence that in the world such a condition of things obtains, 
that some, a few indeed, survive and prosper while many, the mass, 
go under the wheels of a Juggernaut, and that what is, is right, 
though in a way mysterious and beyond the purview of mortal 
vision though aided by all the light shed by the "Lamp" of God. 
You would say, "Be reconciled, for such is God's way, and out of it 
good will come though at present his way and the world's way seem 
alike hopeless for the weaker of the earth and heartless for all." 

My conception of your position may be all wrong, for newspaper 
abstracts are apt to be misleading, and I both read and write in great 
haste. If so, pardon me. 



Now for another view. Election is true. If any reliance is to be 
placed on Biblical statements of plain matter of fact, God chose his 
prophets, and Christ his disciples and not they him. From Abraham 
to Simon Peter, the servants of the Sovereign of Heaven have 
bowed only as the scepter was laid down upon their shoulders. 
They could speak and act divinely only as the Spirit wrought upon 
their hearts and tongues. The words of Christ incite us to believe 
that he continues to select his followers in this as in every other age. 
He giveth repentance to whom he will. The only reason why 
objection can be felt to the doctrine, is that he appears to have 
selected so small a proportion of the race, and that with the doctrine 
of election is conjoined that of condemnation to endless doom for 
all not chosen. All mankind stand related to Christ, and he is 
declared all powerful in heaven and on earth. Our highest sense of 
justice requires liberty of choice and power of action, as grounds of 
responsibility, which circumstances have surely denied to many 
who seem to fall under condemnation. Men admire striking 
statement, and the framers of the catechism seem to have yielded to 
the attractions of antithesis. If some men were chosen, elected, 
those not so favored must surely be doomed, they argued. The 
elevation of one class must be equaled by the degradation of the 
rest. Height must be equaled by the depth and happiness by misery. 
The crude and childish conception of purgatory was to be escaped 
from and counteracted, and the frivolousness and irreligion 
developed under the pomp and show of Romanism were to be 
frightened out of men by a stern theology. No one can say the 
attempt did not succeed. God's servants are his, though their words 
may not embody the first truth, or their acts reflect the divine will to 
perfection. What is the reverse to the truth of election, its other side 
I mean? Our version says, "Jacob have I loved and Esau have I 
hated," but we all know that "hated" should read "loved less." The 
election of Abraham does not argue the destruction of Lot. In fact 
Ezekiel, in chapter 16 says, that even Sodom shall be restored to her 
former estate and be a sister to Jerusalem. Abraham was told 
repeatedly why he was chosen; that through him or his seed all the 
nations, kindreds, families of the earth should be blessed. There 
was no antithesis in that. All the prophets were chosen to do good 
to other people. The disciples also were selected only as the 
foundation stones of an edifice whose proportions should be 
measureless grandeur and beauty. Who shall say what are means 
and what are ends? Is not the saving of the ninety and nine a 
grandeur and a better consummation that the salvation of the one? It 
is the weakness of every age, as of every nation and of every 
individual, to magnify itself and to imagine the final greatness of 
the earth to be near its culmination in itself. The Jew supposed 
Judaism to be the final truth. We know it was not. May not our 
sixteenth century theologians have been similarly self deluded. A 
new Bible is not to be given. Judaism and Christianity have their 
root in the same primal revelation. Suppose this Christian age in 
which election has merely taken a wider scope, to be but 
preparatory to a nobler era yet, when the converts of the present 



shall become the apostles mighty for the regeneration of "all the 
families of the earth." Do you call this a fanciful speculation? Were 
it no more, it would give men a better conception of the character of 
their Heavenly Father than the antithetical 

R756 : page 6 

one. The aspirations of noble souls eager for the good of all would 
find in it the mirror of their loftiest dreams. Instead of having to 
explain away inconsistencies of doctrine almost to the verge of 
apology, they would point to the glory of a consummation worthy 
of the eternal Father and of the self-sacrificing Saviour. Is it only a 
speculation? Go back to the Word and see whether it does not yield 
a footing broad and solid, for this conception of God's plan of 
grace. Do you ask the location and the method of the millennial 
regeneration? The earth, and not some distant or unknown 
purgatory, is to be the theatre and the resurrection as described by 
Paul in 1 Corinthians 15, the way, by which the myriads who have 
perished in ignorance and blindness shall be brought into the 
enlightening presence of the new day. "Every in his own order," 
says Paul. 

Death will have purged away the taint of evil heredity, and the new 
life will be fuller, freer, more favorable to the acceptance of Christ. 

We know well enough that certain predictions of the Scriptures do 
not apply to our day. But when the laborers no longer are few, 
when the knowledge of God shall cover the earth, when Christ shall 
possess the uttermost parts of the earth and the heathen, when the 
way of life shall be so plain that the way-faring man, though a fool, 
shall not err therein, when the wells of water now springing up in 
Christian hearts here and there shall have become the "river of the 
water of life," of which "whosoever will" may partake freely, then 
the doctrine of election will have its justification. 

Christ and his Bride will not be childless, though the children may 
not attain equal honor with their parents. There are the hundred and 
forty and four thousand, as well as the multitude whom no man can 
number. 

If we explain the very limited salvation of this and preceding ages 
on the basis of the survival of the fittest we must assume that the 
ninety and nine are not worth saving, a proposition at variance with 
all Christian professions as to the value of souls and presumptuous 
in the last degree, since none but God can know whether any of his 
creatures are not worth saving. That being whose visible creations 
are so marvellously complete and perfect has surely a plan for the 
restoring and perfecting of his chief creation-man. 

It is natural to think that God's plan will develop in stages, and 
when apprehended will not require apology or defense. The fact 
that the old and partial views are no longer believed, proves that the 
revelation of a fuller truth is due, and only awaits apprehension and 



expression, for it is embodied in the recorded word of God. Are our 
windows open toward Jerusalem? 



Very truly yours, 

J. ALBERT STOWE. 



R756 : page 6 



WALK IN WISDOM. 



"Walk in wisdom toward them that are without redeeming the 
time. ['Securing the season.' -Diaglott; 'buying the opportunity'- 
Rotherham.] Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with 
salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer every man." Col. 
4:5,6. 

Paul drew such a bold, clear line of separation between himself 
and the world, that no one observing him need be in doubt of his 
inflexible purpose and his faithfulness in carrying it out. And when 
he wrote to the Corinthian church, "Be ye followers of me" (1 Cor. 
4:16), there was no danger of misunderstanding. They could not 
help knowing that he meant the narrow way of sacrifice- in the 
very foot-prints of the Lord. Alluding as an illustration to those last 
exposed in the theatre to fight with wild beasts, or with each other, 
and who were devoted to certain destruction, he says, "I think God 
exhibited us the Apostles last, as devoted to death; for we are made 
a spectacle to the world, 

R756 : page 7 

both to angels and to men." And so are all who follow in the 
footsteps of these faithful ones-the footsteps of our Lord. 

In view of the fact that those who have consecrated themselves as 
sacrifices, are being made a spectacle to all those outside, as well as 
within their own company, Paul further urges that we bear this in 
mind, and that we walk wisely, so that, so far as it is possible, our 
conduct, etc., may be transparent before the world. We call to mind 
many of his words of special instruction on this point. Among 
others he says (Rom. 12:18), "If it be possible, as much as lieth in 
you, live peaceably with all men." If circumstances have placed you 
among contentious and disagreeable people, here is a good 
opportunity to show them in your actions, and without the least 
ostentation, your spirit of self-sacrifice, your benevolence, brotherly 
kindness and love. Such a spirit will rebuke the world and show 
them a more excellent way, whether they are yet ready to walk in it 
or not. This spirit, however, should not permit continued oppression 
and injustice for the sake of dearly bought peace. Sometimes we, as 
Paul did, may have to speak very plainly and pointedly, and warn of 
a coming time of reckoning when the actions of the present time 
must all be accounted for. (Acts 24:25.) Thus Paul reasoned with 



Felix, until the strong man trembled in view of the time of 
reckoning. 

Again he says, (Rom. 14:16), "Let not your good be evil spoken 
of. " Even though some things may be right enough and lawful to 
us, if they become an occasion of stumbling to others, we should 
deny self if need be, that others be not caused to stumble. 

"Let your speech be always with grace [liberality, favor] seasoned 
with salt." In reproof, warning or counsel, a spirit of liberality will 
not lose sight of commendable features in those opposed, nor fail to 
commend it. Temperance [moderation] should characterize all our 
conversation, and in all our dealings with men of the world, as well 
as with Christians, courtesy, liberality and kindly consideration for 
their interests, should be evident, even though their lack of such 
consideration toward us should be glaringly manifest. Not only 
should our speech be liberal, temperate, courteous, but it should 
also be seasoned with salt. Salt is a figure for truth. Truth, like salt, 
has the power of preserving from decay that which is good and 
pure. We should, therefore, be well established in the truth of God's 
Word, that we may be able to answer every one, giving a good 
Scriptural reason for both our faith and our practice. 

But mark the significance of the words "buying" or "securing the 
opportunity." Shortly those now sacrificing will be reigning. The 
time for sacrifice and suffering will be over. Seeing the reward as 
we do, we should wisely secure the present opportunity which can 
never again be enjoyed. When the Church has been glorified, the 
world's time of trial and discipline begins, and their way up to 
perfection will be more or less painful and difficult; but it will be a 
source of encouragement and comfort to them to know as they look 
back to our still more difficult path of sacrifice, that they have not a 
Priest who cannot be touched with the feeling of their infirmities. 

Are we in any way hoping to escape the cross, and yet to wear the 
crown, as members of the Royal Priesthood? Such hope is certainly 
vain. Let us each ask ourselves, What kind of a spectacle am I 
before angels and men? Let us endeavor to ever keep this thought in 
mind, and let everything be done with an eye to this great 
responsibility, counting it all joy when our names are cast out as 
evil, when like our Lord we are despised and rejected of men. 
Those who now reject and despise the sacrificing ones will, by and 
by, be comforted and blessed through this sacrifice. At present they 
think it strange that we run not with them to the same excesses, 
often thinking and speaking evil of us. But we must bear in mind 
that we walk toward a shining mark which they cannot discern; and, 
therefore, should be patient and courageous as seeing that which is 
invisible to the world. 

Contrast for a moment the real position of the saints with those 
flourishing in the world about us. Some of them are living in 
present affluence and gratifying themselves with every luxury, but 
soon these, and even life itself, must be laid down, and they must 



wait in the unconsciousness of death possibly many years, until 
their turn for the awakening comes, and then must awake without 
their past possessions and to be more or less severely disciplined up 
to perfection. But now that we are in the day of the Lord, those 
faithfully enduring trial and sacrificing even unto death, finish their 
course here, to be changed instantly, in the twinkling of an eye, 
without a moment's unconsciousness, to the glory of their new 
condition-even the divine nature. 

Think on these things, dearly beloved, that ye may be enabled to 
walk in wisdom toward them that are without, securing the 
opportunity for sacrifice, remembering that it is a great privilege 
because of its great reward, and that now is the accepted time the 
time or opportunity granted. Secure the opportunity and with it the 
great prize of our high calling. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R757 : page 7 

THE FEET OF CHRIST. 

"How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of Him that 
bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace, that bringeth good 
tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, "Thy 
Godreigneth."Isa. 52:7. 

Among the many beautiful and appropriate figures used to 
represent the "little flock" and their union with Jesus, is that of a 
human body Jesus the head, and the true church the members of 
the body. 

Sometimes, as in 1 Cor. 12:13-27, all the parts are represented in 
any assemblage of the church, the hand and foot, &c, as well as the 
various excellent qualities which belong to the head hearing, 
seeing and expression. Thus the head of the church is present with 
the members of his body whenever two or three or more of them 
meet in his name; and the body is complete and as effective for 
growth in Grace, Knowledge and Love, and far more so, than if 
hundreds of unbelievers and merely nominal Christians were 
present. When thus spoken of the more able and intelligent ones are 
mentioned in contrast with the less able, by calling one class head 
members, (Eye, Ear, etc.,) and the other class feet (v. 21). Thus 
mentioned the word feet will be seen to mean the lowest members 
which require the especial assistance of the others. 

But another sense in which feet may be understood, is as indicating 
the last part, or completion of the body. So to speak The Christ has 
been in process of development during the Gospel age- the head 
first, and we, the living, representing the feet, last. This certainly is 
not an unreasonable deduction, and there are several texts which 
seem to indicate that the last members of the overcoming band, are 



mentioned especially under the term "feet"-not in the sense of 
degraded but as the last-or end of the "little flock." 

The Scripture above cited is of this character, and while Paul quotes 
a part of it (Rom. 10:15) "How beautiful are the feet of them that 
preach the Gospel of peace and bring glad tidings of good things," 
and while it has undoubtedly been true of all the members of the 
Body of Christ, that they were the bearers of glad tidings, and that 
to all who received the message their footsteps were welcome, yet it 
is true also that the proclamation of many of the sweetest notes of 
the glad tidings of restitution, are reserved until now during the 
sounding of the seventh trumpet. (Rev. 10:7; Rom. 16:25), when 
the mystery of God is finished, which he hath kept secret from the 
foundation of the world. 

Truly ours is a choice and favored day compared with any age of 
the church, for though God's Word has always been a lamp to 
enlighten "the body" all through the dark night, yet it is true, that in 
an especial sense it is giving light to the "feet," as we read: "Thy 
word is a light to my feet." Living in the time of the fulfillment of 
so much prophecy, we walk in the blazing light of the lamp, and on 
us and our day the eyes of all "the body" throughout this age have 
anxiously rested; and of our day-"The day of the Lord," and our 
gathering together unto him, both Paul and Peter wrote more 
frequently than of their own day. Hence it need not surprise us, if 
under the figure of "feet" the Prophets mention us. 

There is one part of the text above quoted, which certainly was 
never applicable to any but the present members; this part Paul 
omits, because it was not applicable until now, viz: "That saith unto 
Zion thy God reigneth. " 

As Jesus in his application of Isa. 61:1, used only that part of the 
quotation which was applicable at that time, and left unquoted the 
words "the day of vengeance of our God," because the 
proclamation of the day of vengeance was not due until our day; 
and therefore while the whole message referred to, has been 
proclaimed by the Christ, yet only the feet have been privileged to 
utter it all, so with the scripture now under consideration: Jesus and 
the Apostles had a great and important part in proclaiming "the 
good tidings of good," but only "the feet of him" have been 
privileged to say "unto Zion, Thy God reigneth." 

The beauty of the feet's position, and the honor connected with their 
proclamation, does not appear to the eyes of the world. Oh no, none 
of the members of the Christ have been of earth's heroes or wise, 
but in their eyes "we are counted fools." No, it is from the spiritual 
standpoint, the standpoint of God and of those who have ears to 
hear, that the bearers of these good tidings are esteemed. We rejoice 
then in our privilege as being among those who announce to Zion 
these tidings that the kingdom began in 1878. 

At present our tidings can only be received by faith in the same 
authority on which we base our statements the Word of God 



consequently, not many are now able to hear. But soon there will be 
abundant evidence of the truth of the statement in the crumbling 
and falling of the various systems of iniquity -both in the uprooting 
of the blasphemous heresies of the Church, Nominal- Babylon the 
Great, Mother and Daughters; and afterward, in the judgment and 
chastisement of the nations of the earth, who through these false 
teachings, have established oppressive governments, which the 
nominal churches assure them are Christian governments, telling 
the people they are of God's appointment and are the "Kingdoms of 
our Lord and of His Christ." 

Receiving their original right (?) of ruling from Papacy, these 
kingdoms are to-day recognized and blessed by all the daughters. 
But these are all parts of that great system of Anti-Christ, or 
opposition to the real Church and kingdom of God mentioned by 
Paul (2 Thes. 2:8), which the Lord shall consume by the spirit of his 
mouth (truth) and destroy by the bright shining of his presence. 

Truth, the spirit of the Lord's mouth may come through a thousand 
channels, even blasphemous infidelity may be one of the agencies, 
and we believe it is the truth uttered, though mixed with error and 
blasphemy, which is the secret of power against Babylon, for it 
strikes her on her time honored and festering sores of error. It is 
truth with respect to human rights and equality, which is now 
moving Communists, Nihilists and Socialists to resist oppressive 
governments, and which will in time overthrow them; and truth it 
is, which will prepare the world for the blessed reign and rule of the 
kingdom of God, though in the development of truth, in its various 
branches, both the nominal church and the world must pass a 
terrible baptism of trouble:-Yet in all, truth will be conqueror and 
come off victorious, because now the rule and government has been 
assumed by "Him whose right it is. " He has taken to himself his 
great power and his reign is commenced, consequently we may 
soon expect the wrath and angry nations of Rev. 11:18. 

How clear it is then, that the declaration to Zion, "Thy God 
reigneth," is due now before the feet are joined to the body in glory, 
and before the judgments of the Lord go abroad; for then, it will 
need no proclamation; it will be manifest to all, by the outward 
signs, that the kingdom is set up-even the tribes of the earth shall 
then see recognize that the great day of his wrath is come. 

It is the feet of the Christ that bring the glad tidings, though others 
may echo and re-echo the glad song. 

Again, David who often represents or personifies The Christ, says: 
Jehovah "Brought me up out of a horrible pit (depth of 
confusion), out of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a rock and 
established my goings." Psa. 40:2. We might make a similar 
application of this Scripture. The whole body of the Christ (except 
the head) was down in the pit of confusion and mire of sin; all 
through this Gospel Age Jehovah has been lifting them up, or 
taking out a people for his name separating such from the world 



and mire of sin; and last to be lifted up are the feet, and truly the 
feet have been placed upon the rock of truth. 

While the whole body has had truth as a basis of faith and trust, yet 
undoubtedly the feet are more firmly established 

R757 : page 8 

by it than any previous part of the body, because we live in the time 
where the light of all past ages centers and the mystery of God is 
finished. 

"How firm a foundation ye saints of the Lord, 

Is laid for your faith in his excellent Word." 

Again, while it is true that all members of the body sung a new 
song of praise to God when lifted from the depths of confusion and 
mire of sin, yet it is especially true of the feet the song of praise 
breaks forth as soon as the feet touch the solid rock of truth and 
realize that- 

There's a wideness in God's mercy, 

Like the wideness of the sea." 

They can now sing with double joy the restitution song- 

"All nations which thou hast made 

Shall come and worship before thee." 

Again, we find a striking reference to the feet of the Christ in Psa. 
91:11-12: "He [Jehovah] shall give his angels charge over thee to 
keep thee in all thy ways: They shall bear thee up in their hands, 
lest thou dash thy foot against a stone." 

This prophecy by David refers to the Christ as a whole; its personal 
application by Satan was rejected by Jesus as a misapplication of 
Scripture (Luke 4:12), but when we apply the reference to "foot" to 
the feet or last part of the body of Christ, all is harmonious. The 
stone referred to we understand to be the same as that of Isa. 8:14, 
viz.: That Jesus is the stone of stumbling. 

Jesus at the first advent was a stone of stumbling before the feet of 
the nominal Jewish Church, and they stumbled over him because, 
being out of harmony with God, they could not see in him the 
Messiah. In their pride of heart they, especially the Pharisees and 
Doctors of Divinity, were sure that Messiah would come in their 
way, and own and accept of them as a people. They stumbled 

R758 : page 8 

and were broken as an institution. But the real feet of the real 
Jewish Church- the Israelites "indeed" -these received the then 
present Messiah and were blessed and lifted up by that "stone" to 
the higher plane of the Gospel church. "To as many as received 
him, to them gave he liberty to become sons of God." (The Jewish 
house was the house of servants the Gospel house a house of 
Sons.) 



As there was a stone and stumbling there, in their "harvest," or end 
of their age, so the parallelism which we find associating the 
Christian age with its shadow, the Jewish age, demands that the 
stone should be present in the path of the Gospel church, to be 
either accepted or rejected; and if the parallelism continue (as we 
see it has), then we should expect that here the feet of the nominal 
church would stumble as its shadow did, and for the same reasons. 
And so we find it, the living generation of the nominal church-the 
feet, have failed to discern the presence of the Lord-"they know 
not the time of their visitation"- and all but the true feet of the true 
body have stumbled; as it is written: He shall be for a stone of 
stumbling and rock of offence to both the houses of Israel. To 
"Israel after the flesh" he presented himself in the flesh, and to the 
spiritual Israel he presents himself a spiritual being to each on their 
own plane. 

But we cannot for a moment doubt, that as Jesus at the first advent 
took special care to make himself known to every "Israelite 
indeed," and gave such clear evidences (while to others he spoke in 
parables and dark sayings) (Psa. 78:2), so here at the second advent, 
every one wholly consecrated to God (not to churches and creeds), 
and as such a part of the true feet, are to be made aware of that 
presence, and consequently do not stumble over it. This special care 
for all such is what is referred to by the text considered- "He shall 
give his angels charge, etc., lest thou dash thy foot against a stone." 

Only the feet could stumble over such a stone. The stone of 
stumbling was not in the path of the members of the body which 
preceded us. And when we look back and see how closely "the 
lamp" has been put "to the feet" and how it has been kept trimmed 
and burning brightly, revealing to us the stone which nominal Zion 
is stumbling over and being shipwrecked upon, but which to us is a 
tried stone, elect, precious, the head of the corner, or the chief stone 
of all in the glorious spiritual Temple, we thank God for His care 
over us, and rejoice that we are counted worthy to be members of 
that company, which in the eyes of the world has no beauty that 
they should desire it, but which is a root out of dry ground-the feet 
of Him that bringeth glad tidings, that saith unto Zion, Thy God 
reigneth. 



R758 : page 8 



JEHOVAH'S FEET. 



"Thus saith Jehovah, Heaven is my throne and earth is my foot- 
stool." Isa. 66:1. [Literal.] 

The word feet is sometimes used in Scripture, as in this text, to 
represent permanent establishment, or rest. Stephen after quoting 
the above (Acts 7:49), adds the words: "What is the place of my 
rest" -residence? 



Jehovah used his foot-stool before sin entered, but since then he has 
removed his presence and allowed sin to reign and Satan to be "The 
prince (ruler) of this world." (John 14:30.) In a typical way he 
established his presence among the Israelites in the Tabernacle and 
Temple, and in a higher and better sense, his presence has been in 
the Gospel Church as in a shifting tent or Tabernacle, all through 
the Gospel Age, but soon the Temple glory, or his presence in the 
Glorified Church-head and body -will be manifested to the world. 
And in that glorious reign of the Christ complete, typified by 
Solomon's peaceful reign, and under the shadow of that glorious 
temple, of which that made with hands was a type, all the families 
of the earth shall be blessed, and brought into complete harmony 
with God. Then the knowledge of the Lord will fill the whole earth; 
and all sin and every opponent of right having been destroyed, All 
the ends of the earth (people) shall remember and turn to the Lord, 
and the glory of the Lord shall fill the whole earth. 

Thus, through the reign of his Anointed, Jehovah will prepare and 
cleanse his foot-stool to place his feet, his abiding presence, there, 
as he declares through the prophet Isaiah (6:13) "I will make the 
place of my feet glorious." 

In harmony with this same thought we find in Zech. 14:3,5, a 
description of when and how Jehovah will establish his feet, or 
residence. This Scripture, as well as some of those above quoted, 
which evidently apply to the Father- Jehovah-are often misapplied 
to our Lord Jesus; and while Jesus and his Church will doubtless be 
the active agents of Jehovah in subduing all things (Phil. 3:21), yet 
the fact remains, that the work here mentioned is Jehovah's, and the 
Hebrew text leaves no question about it. 

We will quote and apply this prophecy (verse 3): "Then shall the 
Lord [Jehovah] go forth and fight against those nations, as when he 
fought in the day of battle. " The scene is laid in "the time of 
trouble," probably near its close, (perhaps, as we read the prophecy, 
about 1914 A.D.) It is surely during "the day of the Lord" (verse 1) 
when the first return of Israelites to Palestine will have taken place 
[a second, and greater returning mentioned by the prophets 
evidently will not take place until after the time of trouble.] The 
Israelites will have been in comparative peace and security there, 
and measurably free from the trouble which, meantime, will have 
been disturbing and overturning and impoverishing the nations of 
the earth. Their wealth and prosperity excite the cupidity of the 
nations, which we read come up against "my people Israel dwelling 
safely in their own land, ...to take a spoil and a prey." Ezk. 38:8,12. 

The battle at first goes against Israel, as described in verse 2; then, 
the time having come for a manifestation of God's justice against 
the nations and his favor to his anciently-favored people, He 
manifests his power and fights against the nations, not by Jesus and 
the saints appearing on a mountain with carnal weapons, but we 
read "as he (Jehovah) fought in the day of battle." Jehovah fought 



Israel's battles anciently without being seen by other than the eyes 
of their understanding. 

Thus the Angel of the Lord slew (with death) the hosts of the 
Assyrians (Isa. 37:36); put to flight the Midianites (Judges 7:21), 
and "smote great nations and slew mighty kings. (Psa. 135:10.) And 
"as" he fought for Israel then, so he is to do again for their 
deliverance. The coming deliverance will be so great and marked 
that they will recognize God's power and favor, and being blessed 
by being brought to a condition of nearness to God, in prayer and 
supplication, they will come to a full recognition of the fact, that as 
a people, they had rejected and pierced their Redeemer. "They shall 
look upon (recognize) him whom they have pierced," and shall all 
mourn because of Him. Zech. 12:8,10. 

Verse 4: "And His (Jehovah's) feet shall stand (be established) in 
that day upon the Mount of Olives. " This is another picture of the 
establishment of Jehovah's dominion. As the above description 
showed us how it will be manifested to Israel that God's arm is 
ruling, now we get the inside or spiritual view of the kingdom's 
establishment, and appropriately, symbols are used in the 
description. The feet of Jehovah standing or resting-the Mt. of 
Olives-its location to the east (or sun-rising) of Jerusalem (the 
peaceful habitation)-the division of the mountain into two parts- 
the valley formed into which Israel will flee, &c. ; these all, we 
understand to be symbols; as also the reference in verses 6 and 7 to 
the day of the Lord being a dark day. It remains dark until the close 
of this period of trouble, or until the evening of that dark day, then- 
"at evening it shall be light;" that is when the day of wrath is over 
the Sun of Righteousness will arise with healing in his wings- 
blessing and restoring morally and physically. 

A mountain is a symbol of a kingdom, and Mt. Olivet would signify 
Kingdom of Light and Peace.* Then, in this "day of the Lord," 
already begun, Jehovah will establish himself in a Kingdom of light 
and peace. This, we believe, will be accomplished through his 
representative, Jesus, who takes his great power and reigns. The 
organization of his church by resurrection and change, to the same 
condition (spiritual bodies), we understand to be the organization of 
the kingdom whose exaltation to power, invisibly smites and 
consumes evil systems and governments. By the teaching of the 
Word, we understand that this organization of the kingdom began 
in 1878, and will be complete when the living members are "ready." 

This kingdom once established is Jehovah's foothold, and is to be 
the seat of government from which shall emanate the laws, etc., for 
the guidance and blessing of mankind. Another figure is Mt. Zion. 

The division of the mountain into two parts represents the two 
phases of the kingdom of God: one the higher, spiritual, invisible 
kingdom, composed of Jesus and the Gospel church; the other the 
earthly phase of the kingdom, composed of perfect fleshly beings, 



visible to humanity-Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets, 
and all those of past ages justified by faith. 

The valley represents a place of favor and protection, made and 
guaranteed by both the heavenly and earthly phases of kingdom 
power; and into this place of protection and safety Israel is 
represented as fleeing. Then they shall recognize him whom they 
have pierced. 

The earthly phase of the kingdom will thus be seen to be essentially 
Israelitish, and according to the promises of God, ungodliness shall 
be turned from Israel (Rom. 1 1:26) and they shall come to the 
inheritance of the land, and promises vouchsafed to Abraham; and 
then the fleshly seed of Abraham will be used as the agents of 
Jehovah in carrying to the world the blessings purchased by Christ, 
the higher spiritual seed of him whom Abraham typified- Jehovah. 

This earthly phase of the kingdom is to spread and increase until it 
fills the whole earth and is under the whole heaven, and the kings of 
the earth shall bring their glory and honor into it-by coming into 
harmony with its laws. 

These two phases of the kingdom will be in perfect harmony; the 
earthly being under the control and direction of the heavenly. "Out 
of Zion (the spiritual phase) shall go forth the law, and the word of 
the Lord from Jerusalem," the earthly phase. (Isa. 2:3.) 

Though in due time there will be an earthly element of the kingdom 
visible to humanity, which shall be a praise in the whole earth, yet 
in the inception of the kingdom it will not have this double 
character. [Jehovah's feet stand on the Mount of Olives as one at 
first, before its division]. And so we read that when demanded of 
the Pharisees when the kingdom of God should come, Jesus 
answered and said: The kingdom of Heaven cometh not with 
observation, neither shall ye say, Lo here! or lo there! for behold it 
will be in your midst (Luke 17:20). That is to say-the kingdom of 
God will be among, but invisible to men in its coming. It is only 
after it has come and done a work, that the visible phase is due 
during the Millennial age. 

It is for this kingdom in both its phases (especially the spiritual, 
where our inheritance is) that we pray "Thy kingdom come, Thy 
will be done on earth as it is in heaven." Welcome the day when 
Jehovah's feet will be established and his footstool made glorious! 



*An olive-branch has long been a symbol of peace, and the 
original word elaios mercy, is derived from elaia an olive. The oil 
from the olive is the principal source of light among the Orientals. 



R758 : page 1 



page 1 



VOL. VI. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JUNE, 1885. 

NO. 10. 



ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF 
CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 40 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 
TAKE NOTICE. 



This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



R758 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

You know that you have weaknesses; special points upon which 
you are aware by past experience you are specially liable to fail, 
under trial and temptation. It may be the pride of life and love of 
the world, which seem to draw your feet from the narrow way 
oftenest. It may be that business has such an attraction to you that 
you have at times been almost swallowed up with its ambitions and 
cares, and that its demands upon your time and talent have been for 
a season almost overwhelming, and that you found your appetite for 
spiritual things forestalled by the earthly, and your consecrated time 
absorbed in labor for the meat that perisheth. 

Or it may be that your special weakness is a love of approbation, 
which absorbs consecrated time in making your person, your home, 
and your family charming, as well as hinders you from engaging in 
service for the Lord and your fellow-saints in carrying them 
spiritual food, lest some should think you "peculiar," and "strange," 
and should "cut" your acquaintance. 

Or your difficulty may be uncongenial family relationship and 
opposition to study and Christian growth from that quarter. 

Or, it may be that seeming duties and necessities in your 
circumstances demand your time and keep you as they did Martha 
from communing with the Master, and from engaging in and 
enjoying the higher and grander privilege of breaking to others 
spiritual food. No matter in which particular direction your 
besetment lies, rest assured that yours is not an exceptional case. 
Every soul knoweth its own burdens, and before each one Satan is 
permitted to lay obstacles and hindrances in order that each may be 
tried and thus have opportunity of overcoming and proving his love 
and his appreciation of the prize and of the Lord's approval, by 
faithfulness under adverse conditions. 

What is your duty? What shall you do? Give up, because the way 
is not smooth? Why certainly you did not expect to be classed an 
"overcomer" without having something opposing you to overcome. 
No, you knew well when you started, that the Master and 
forerunner on this way, said: "Straight (difficult) is the gate and 



narrow is the way. " You remember he said that every follower in 
his footsteps must expect to endure the crossing of his human will 
and interest all through the "way." You remember how strongly he 
put it that none might deceive themselves, when he said, "If any 
man come to me, and hate not [love less] his father and mother, and 
wife and children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life 
also, he cannot be my disciple. And whosoever doth not bear his 
cross and come after me cannot be my disciple." Luke 14:26,27. 

And do you not know that your temptation on these weak points of 
your besetment are daily becoming more absorbing, more difficult 
to resist? Do you not see that we are living in the "evil day" which 
is evil or full of special danger, because of its increase of 
temptation on every point of weakness to every member of the 
body? that the besetments of the world, the flesh and the devil are 
more subtle and deceptive, and more powerful than ever before? 
Yes, you realize it. To be forewarned is useless unless it leads us to 
action, that we may be forearmed and protected. What are you 
going to do about it? We answer, Break the bondage at any cost; 
though it be dear to your heart as your eye or hand pluck it out, cut 
it off, cast it from you. Make thorough work of it, strangle it, 
overcome your besetments at once and thoroughly. Lay aside every 
weight and hindrance which impedes your growth in grace, which 
hinders your sacrifice, the fulfillment of your covenant in the 
service of the truth, that you may patiently run the race set before 
you. You must either overcome these besetments by changing your 
course and cutting them off, or they will overcome you, and bring 
you more and more under their control. Hence the Apostle's 
advice, Make straight paths for your feet. Remove from your 
pathway at once every hindrance and stumbling-block which the 
adversary may put in your way, and keep right on, running for the 
prize of the high calling and keeping your eye on Jesus and Paul as 
examples of endurance and overcoming. They endured the 
temptation, but speedily ended it by promptly casting it from them. 
We must do likewise; to parley with besetments is to fail; to 
endeavor to carry them along on the way is impossible the way is 
too narrow. We must choose at once whether we will be turned 
aside by circumstances and obstructions, or whether we will turn 
them aside and follow on to the end of the way to glory, honor and 
immortality. 

With time and talents fully on the altar, and with thorough 
determination and work in overcoming the obstacles put before you 
by the adversary, what a power for the truth could be daily 
exercised by the readers of the TOWER. Not that the truth will fail 
without our effort, but that we need to make the effort on behalf of 
truth for our own development in grace, and as proof that we are of 
the overcomers accounted worthy both to suffer the reproach of 
Christ and to share his glory. 

Everyone who possesses these glorious hopes should be a preacher 
of them; should let the light so shine as to glorify our Father in 



heaven. Some can labor in a special manner but one hour a day, 
some more; all can let a general halo of light shine from the daily 
walk before their fellow Christians and the world, but not without 
overcoming the obstacles and besetments with which the adversary 
is sure to attempt to hinder you. Who is on the Lord's side? Let him 
make it manifest. It is the weak and small side in the world now, 
but shall not be so long. Now is the grand opportunity to champion 
truth. Therefore gird up the loins of your mind and fight a good 
fight, and soon palms and crowns of glory we shall wear. 



R759 : page 1 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Lamar County, Texas, March 30th, 1885. 

BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL: -Please send me a few copies of your 
"Food for Thinking Christians," also a few copies of the TOWER 
for free distribution. My own number of the TOWER comes 
regularly and is read with interest by myself and wife, and then 
carried from one neighbor's house to another till I lose track of 
them entirely: but they shed light enough in every household that 
they pass through to awaken an interest in the minds of the readers- 
-enough at least to make them search the Scriptures to see whether 
these things are so. Several have called on me for the pamphlet 
entitled "Food for Thinking Christians," and also the "Tabernacle." 
I think I will be able to send you some subscriptions soon. 

Your brother in the one hope. 



Manchester, Mass., May 19, 1885. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I herewith send two dollars for the 
WATCH TOWER; I cannot afford to go without it. It is about all 
the teacher I have. There are none in this place that believe with 
me. I was brought up a Roman Catholic. The dear Lord 
enlightened my mind and I joined the Baptist Church; but the light 
grew brighter and I had to come out of the churches or stop 
growing in grace and knowledge of the truth. I praise God that he 
has enabled me to follow him, and now I have Catholics and 
Protestants alike mine enemies, but I realize that he that is for me is 
more than all them that are against me; and like Paul, I rejoice that 
he has counted me worthy to suffer with him. The TOWER has 
been a great comfort to me, and I try to have others read them. The 
word of the Lord will accomplish that whereunto it was sent, and 
his servants will obey his commandments and do his will. 

If you have any tracts that would enlighten those bound by the 
creeds, yet striving to serve God, if you send a few, I will use them 
prudently and be very thankful. 



Yours in the Lord. 



Springfield, Mass. 

BROTHER RUSSELL, Dear Sir:-I have just received this month's 
TOWER. Please let my subscription commence with this year. I do 
not want to lose the reading of any. I feel like one just waking out 
of sound sleep, dazed and bewildered, and yet feeling that I am 
really waking up to the truth. 

Yours, etc., . 

R753 : page 1 



Canton, Ills. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL.-We, that is wife and I, have become so 
much attached to the Watch Tower that we cannot give it up now. I 
know not how you got my name, or how it came to us. It came as a 
light to our minds clearing away the mists of creeds and enables us 
to see the truths of the Bible in a clearer light. We are still reading 
and comparing scripture with scripture. We have the privilege of 
reading the WATCH TOWER "Food" and "Tabernacle," and the 
chart, and think that through a full consecration and an earnest 
search after truth, all will be made plainer still. We hope before 
long to be able to help advance the interests of the work. 

Yours in Christ. 



R759 : page 1 



GRADUALLY, NOT SUDDENLY. 

Some evidently misunderstood our remarks in last issue relative 
to faith healing. We do not wish to be understood that during the 
Millennial age God will limit the methods of restoration to health, 
to prayer and anointing with oil. We are by no means sure that 
medicine and other agencies will be discarded. The methods of 
restitution will doubtless be as varied as were the methods 
employed by Jesus in healing diseases at his first advent. One 
secretly touched the hem of his garment; another stretched forth his 
withered hand; for another he prayed. Some were healed in answer 
to their own faith (Mark 5:34); some in answer to the faith of 
another (Matt. 8:5-13; Mark 5:23,42); some were healed instantly 
(Matt. 8:14,15), and some sent 

R759 : page 2 



away unhealed were cured on the way (Luke 17:14); some were 
healed by means of an ointment and washing (John 9:7), some 
gradually (Mark 8:24,25). Likewise we may expect diversities in 
the operation of restitution now beginning. 

Again, some get the idea that we expect that every one now healed 
by faith, prayer, and anointing with oil, in the name of the Lord, 
would be sick no more, but speedily attain to human perfection. By 
no means; we have repeatedly endeavored to show that the entire 
Millennial age will be a time of restitution, that the work will be 
very gradual, and that perfection will not be attained by the race 
until the close of that age. Those who now experience healing, will 
require healing for other ailments doubtless, and to some extent 
their freedom from sicknesses will depend upon their purity of life. 
(John 5:14, and James 5:15,16.) That none could possibly attain to 
perfection as men yet, is absolutely certain, for the same reason that 
none healed at Jesus' first advent were made perfect. The sacrifice 
of the anointed was not yet completed. The body of Christ will not 
have filled up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ, until 
the last member of that body has drunk to the dregs the cup of 
death. Until then, the "Body" 

R760 : page 2 

will not be complete and perfected in spiritual nature, and hence the 
world's restitution could only have a slight and illustrative 
beginning until then; for they without us shall not be made perfect. 
Heb. 11:40. 

Others write, saying that though some of the present healings were 
undoubtedly of God, yet others were performed by Spiritists and 
were evidently of the devil. We answer, that even admitting this as 
claimed, it would be no argument against our acknowledging that 
which is of God as such. Satan has ever sought to counteract the 
force of truth by counterfeiting it. God sent out the gospel by Jesus 
and the Apostles, preaching peace and reconciliation by Jesus 
Christ and his ransom sacrifice, and straightway Satan sends out his 
ministers as messengers of light (2 Cor. 11:13-15), preaching 
"another gospel" and "perverting the gospel of Christ." (Gal. 1:6,7). 
Jesus promised a kingdom and dominion to his faithful followers, 
and Satan grasping that promise perverted it, and establishing 
Papacy, taught that it was the kingdom of God promised, etc. 

When the apostacy had done its worst, and truth was trampled 
under the feet of Babylon, and the time came for calling the saints 
out of Babylon to a higher realization of truth, and a closer 
communion with God under increasing light from his Word, Satan 
also began to call "come out," and set snares for the truth hungry in 
what he is pleased to have called "Churches" also, chief among 
which are Spiritism and Swedenborgianism, whose bait is "new 
light. " Thus he ensnares some, while he alarms others so greatly 
that they will not even look outside the so-called "Orthodox" sects 
for food or light, and are thus kept in bondage and his object 



equally subserved. But shall we who have the light and food fear to 
show it because of Satan's counterfeits? Satan is an old hand at 
counterfeiting and over three thousand years ago acting through 
Jannes and Jambres he withstood the truth at the hand of Moses, 
deceiving the people by his imitations. But did Moses stop, and 
say, Because others can do to some extent the same things, 
therefore I will cease? Nay, he did his part and presently the power 
of his opponents was swallowed up before him. Of a similar class 
"in the last days" of this age, having "a form of Godliness" Paul 
speaks (2 Tim. 3:1,5-8), saying that from such we should "turn 
away," and he assures us that as Jannes and Jambres withstood 
Moses, so shall these resist the TRUTH. "But they shall proceed no 
further: for their folly shall be manifest unto all men as their's also 
was." 

We are well aware that spirit-mediums have been creating a great 
"talk" about their healing of the sick and their successful diagnosing 
of disease, but we do not know of any actual healing of diseases by 
these. Satan has considerable of "the power of death," including 
disease (Heb. 2:14 and Job 2:7), but we are not informed that he has 
the power of life, which includes health; and if he had the power 
(which Jesus' words rather intimate-Luke 11:14,17,18), he surely 
has not the desire to do good and bless except as a means to delude 
and counteract by counterfeiting the truth. 

With Jesus' words before us, we may safely say, that if Satan has 
turned from being a destroyer to be a restorer, then evidently he is 
reduced to desperate efforts to maintain his power over mankind, 
and we may hail this as another sign of the end of his empire; for, If 
Satan casts out Satan, his kingdom cannot long stand and will the 
sooner fall. 

If Satan and his angels will do good, and heal and bless mankind, 
we certainly will not cast a straw in their way. Let them do all the 
good works they will, and the more the better. Commend their 
good deeds, reprove their evil deeds and false doctrines with the 
word of the Spirit, the Word of God, and as the Apostle said, They 
will not proceed far before their folly and inconsistency will be 
manifest to all. 

It is well that we should remember always Jesus' words to the 
disciples. John said, "Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy 
name, and he followeth not us; and we forbade him, because he 
followeth not us." And Jesus answered that they should not forbid 
or interfere with anyone doing good works. He does not approve 
the man's method, etc., but states, as a general principle which none 
of us should lose sight of, that "He who is not against us is on our 
part." Mark 9:38-40. 



R759 : page 2 



THE FAITH OF CHRIST. 

"Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the faith." 2 Cor. 13:5. 

All must admit that there can be no reliable testimony as to what 
constitutes the faith of Jesus and what are the evidences of its 
possession outside of God's Word. We must conclude therefore 
that he who desires that information with its bearing on his 
relationship to God must seek it there. To do this successfully and 
satisfactorily the closest scrutiny must be observed in examining 
not only the foundation upon which we have built, but also the 
material (truth or error) we have used in building thereon. Faith 
means belief, confidence or trust: these applied to anything would 
be faith; but "the faith" is much more than these. This faith besides 
believing the word of God solely, is productive of and results in the 
life corresponding to the character of him (Jesus) whom it lays hold 
on; induced by promises of God's word. First of all, however, by 
faith in the vicarious ransom-sacrifice of Jesus, we became 
reconciled and at peace with God. (Rom. 5:1-10.) In this way we 
became "justified freely from all things" not because of our faith 
but through faith and because of Jesus work of sacrifice whom we 
thus rely on as our substitute or ransomer. Thus Jesus is made to us 
the only foundation of hope- "other foundation can no man lay." 
The faith of Christ however involves much more than acceptance of 
or belief in Jesus' sacrifice as the at-one-ment between us and the 
Father. This opened the door of favor to us, that he might become 
not only all that to us, but also "wisdom and knowledge and 
sanctification and redemption." In him are hid all these treasures 
which must be received by us if at all, by faith. After we became 
reconciled to God, our increased appreciation of the riches of his 
favor depended on our further progress in presenting ourselves 
living sacrifices "holy and acceptable to God. " In this way we 
became sharers of THE FAITH which Jesus had; the faith of Christ, 
of all those who are joint-sacrifices with Jesus and who are 
promised joint heir-ship, and this is the faith of Christ. 

United with Jesus as sacrificers, we have become by THE FAITH 
sons of God on the divine plane. We were buried with him (Jesus) 
by baptism into death (Rom. 6:4) to self-the human; and as we 
reckoned ourselves dead, we became alive, and are living to God by 
the faith in the Son of God, being "sealed by the Holy Spirit of 
promise." 

Having therefore the same spirit that was in Jesus, the same self- 
sacrificing life that characterized him will also characterize us if we 
abide in him and in the faith. And by this we shall know if we be in 
the faith. "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his, 
and if Christ be in you the body is dead," Rom. 8:9,10. We know 
we have the faith and the Spirit of Christ by its working out in us as 
in him, prompt obedience and willing sacrifice. This is the witness 
of the Holy Spirit to us. "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our 
spirit that we are the children of God (Rom. 8: 16). "By this we 
know ...we love God and keep his commandments, ....and [to us] 



his commandments are not grievous" [so that we rejoice to sacrifice 
in doing his will]. 1 John 5:2,3. This is also manifest to those that 
are without- "We are living epistles known and read of all men." 
"Ye shall know them by their fruits" whether THE FAITH of Christ 
actuates them. 

A false presentation of God's character has been Satan's most 
powerful weapon of attack against the Christian faith. Those who 
have taken the torment plan of making men repent and believe the 
gospel have foiled their own purpose. In this they have shown less 
wisdom than men of the world in blackening God's character to 
create love, and despising the riches of his goodness and 
forbearance and longsuffering, not knowing that the goodness of 
God leadeth men to repentance. Rom. 2:4. This stigma on the 
character of God they endeavor to excuse by saying, He must be 
just. They fail to notice, however, that they make him lest just than 
imperfect man, for in the administration of human justice torture is 
abhorrent. 

Thus by false theories, and neglect of THE faith laid down in the 
Scripture, God's attributes are made at war with each other, and 
such cannot say with Paul, "I am not ashamed of the glad 
tidings... for the righteousness of God by faith is revealed therein in 
order to faith. Rom. 1:6. E.D. If God therefore declare through 
Paul that his goodness leads men to repentance, and his 
righteousness is revealed for the express purpose of inducing men 
to have faith in him, how say some that the restraints of society 
would be gone if the truth were presented. In this they err greatly; 
God being the judge of what is best. 

S. O. BLUNDEN. 



R760 : page 2 



QUESTION COLUMN. 



Ques. Some are disposed still to question the necessity of the 
outward symbol of Baptism. Can you tell us whether the apostles 
were ever immersed? 

Ans. A number of Jesus' disciples were previously the disciples of 
"John the Immerser" and it is scarcely within the limits of reason to 
suppose that while with John and Jesus they would baptize others 
and neglect it themselves. Paul was not a whit less than the chiefest 
of the apostles and he was baptized forthwith by the first of God's 
children he met. (Acts 9: 18.) The Eunuch to whom Phillip 
preached but one sermon caught the force of baptism to such an 
extent that he embraced the first opportunity of sufficiency of water 
to be planted in the likeness of Christ's death. (Acts 8:33-39.) 
When Cornelius and his house believed and after they had received 
the Holy Spirit, Peter commanded the symbolic, water immersion. 
(Acts 10:48.) Is it probable that he commanded others to obey the 



Master's example while he himself neglected it? Do those who now 
question the "necessity" of this symbol, command others to thus 
follow the Master's footprints and fulfill all righteousness? 

But we have never presented this question as one of "necessity," but 
as one of joyful privilege to all who really see its force and are 
really buried with Christ. To treat it as compulsory is the very 
opposite of its spirit. That which is compulsory is not a sacrifice. 
Hence the propriety of this being presented both by the Lord and by 
us as a privilege. 

Another letter inquires whether the fact of the Lord's presence does 
not in some manner relieve them from the necessity of performing 
this symbol. We answer here, that so long as the sacrifice is in 
process, it is certainly proper as it ever was for those who have 
never done so to symbolize that sacrifice. When the sacrifice is over 
and the whole "body" glorified with the head, there will be neither 
opportunity nor propriety for either the actual drinking of the "cup" 
of Christ's sufferings and being "buried" with him, nor will there 
then be propriety in drinking the symbolic "cup" (wine) or 
performing the symbolic baptism, in water. 

No; there is no necessity laid upon you to be baptized, either 
actually or symbolically; neither is there necessity that you should 
be of Christ's Bride and joint heir; neither is there necessity that you 
must sit with him in the throne and share his crown of glory and 
honor and immortality. The Lord will find a sufficient number to 
complete the "little flock" without forcing or urging anyone. But if 
you are in the race at all, "take heed, let no man take thy crown." 
See that you have the spirit of sacrifice burning within you and you 
will not seek what you can avoid, but cry "Lord what will thou have 
me to do." As in the beginning, so it must be now: "They that 
gladly received his word were baptized." Acts 2:41. 



R761 : page 3 



COMING BY-AND-BY. 



A better day is coming, a morning promised long, 

When truth and right with holy might, shall overthrow the wrong; 

When Christ the Lord will listen to every plaintive sigh, 

And stretch his hand o'er sea and land, with justice by and by. 

The boast of haughty tyrants no more shall fill the air, 
But aged and youth shall love the truth and speed it everywhere; 
No more from want and sorrow shall come the hopeless cry, 
But war shall cease, and perfect peace will flourish by and by. 

The tidal wave is coming, the year of jubilee, 
With shout and song it sweeps along, like billows of the sea; 
The jubilee of nations shall ring through earth and sky, 
The dawn of grace draws on apace, 'tis coming by and by. 



Oh, for that glorious dawning we watch and wait and pray, 
Till o'er the height the morning light shall drive the gloom away, 
And when the heavenly glory shall flood the earth and sky, 
We'll bless the Lord for all his works and praise him by and by. 



-Sel. 



R760 : page 3 

CHRISTIANITY DEFINED. 

An Exchange gives the following definition of the word 
Christian: - 

"A Christ-ian is one who has the Christ spirit. This is our 
understanding of the original meaning of the word. We suppose all 
will assent to and accept it as correct.... Men are Christ-ians 
according to the spirit of the Christ which is in them and manifested 
in the flesh. In some persons it is small, in others large. Either 
hidden or manifest this spirit resides in all. Consciously or 
unconsciously it is contained in every man or woman that lives or 
has lived." 

We are well aware that the above passes current for truth, and that 
nearly "all assent to and accept it as correct;" but we shall neither 
by silence nor in any other way, leave the impression that the 
TOWER assents to such a definition. We strongly protest that it is a 
false representation, and a rapidly growing error. One reason 
perhaps for the growing popularity of the above definition is that it 
embraces nearly all mankind under a name which has grown 
popular among civilized people. 

According to this definition, nearly every one outside of prisons, 
gambling dens, etc., and many in them, are Christians; for is there 
not something true and noble in ninety-nine out of every hundred 
people? Our Exchange declares that "consciously or 
unconsciously, it [the spirit of Christ] is contained in every man or 
woman that lives, or has lived." Then it would follow according to 
its idea, that "every man or woman that lives or has lived," has been 
a Christian. Only by following to its legitimate conclusion such a 
definition of Christianity is its absurdity manifest. And yet to this 
absurd definition, as our Exchange asserts, nearly all assent. 

R761 : page 3 

Confucius, Plato and other moral philosophers truly deserve the 
respect and esteem of all who can appreciate their strivings after 
righteousness and truth, but to hold them up as Christians - 
Apostles of Christianity-because they recognized and practiced 
some of the truths which Christianity inculcates, would be as 
absurd and illogical, as to call every stone a diamond, because a 
diamond is a stone. 



Truly "if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of His." 
But this does not prove that because a man possesses some 
elements of character corresponding to some elements of the spirit 
or disposition of Christ, he is therefore one of His followers-a 
Christian. In like manner it would be correct to say, If this be not a 
stone, it is not a diamond; but such a statement would not imply to 
any intelligent mind, that everything that has any of the qualities of 
a stone, is a diamond. 

Those who call morality, Christianity, and who recognize everyone 
possessed of moral qualities as a Christian, have accepted a false 
standard, and all the conclusions they may draw therefrom, must be 
equally false. According to this false standard, the Scribes and 
Pharisees of Jesus' day at whose instance he was crucified were 
very eminent Christians; for certainly a more morally exact people, 
it would be difficult to find on the pages of history. They were 
people of noted piety according to this same worldly moral 
standard. They were noted as such, as highly in their day, as are the 
clergy of the various religious systems to-day; yet if these were 
Christians, the founder of the system, Jesus, did not know it, for He 
said of them "Ye are of your father the devil." (John 8:44.) Not that 
they were utterly devoid of every moral principle, but they were 
under the control of evil in the main as is the large majority of 
mankind to-day, who are no more Christians than were those who 
crucified Jesus. The apostles' estimate of who are Christians differs 
widely from that of our Exchange, but agree with that of Jesus. 
John says (1 John 5:19) "We know that we are of God, and the 
whole world lieth in wickedness." And again (3:1.) "Behold what 
manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be 
called the SONS OF GOD [Christians]: therefore, the world 
knoweth us not, because it knew Him not." 

According to the moralist's estimate set forth by our Exchange, the 
preaching of Christ Jesus throughout the world was unnecessary. If 
preaching be necessary it should be morality and not justification 
and remissions of sins in the name of Jesus through faith in him, 
and a work accomplished on behalf of all by Him. Thus they could 
go among the Chinese and teach morality in the name of Confucius; 
they could go among the Mohamedians preaching morality in the 
name of Mahommet and find what our Exchange calls "Christians." 
Many of these are doubtless as moral as people living in so called 
Christian lands. But Paul knew and taught far differently, and our 
Exchange and all who accept such as its definition of Christianity 
as correct, would do well to carefully consider the teachings of the 
great Apostle and exponent of Christianity. He believed with Peter 
and John that Jesus was the only "door" of access to God, that 
"There is none other name under heaven given among men 
whereby we must be saved." "Neither is there salvation in any 
other." Acts 4:12. 

It was because he believed that faith in Jesus was the only way of 
salvation, that he labored and sacrificed to spread that name; and in 



this light how forcible his argument when he says (Rom. 10: 14): 
"Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved," 
but "How shall they call on Him in whom they have not believed? 
and how shall they believe in Him of whom they have not heard?" 
His argument is that Faith in Christ is essential, and that knowledge 
is a pre-requisite to faith. 

Hence our argument is: No one can be a Christian without first 
having a knowledge of Christ. Not merely a historic knowledge 
that such person lived, died and rose, but a knowledge of the object 
of these, and the results accomplished thereby, for us. All this and 
a grateful mental acceptance of those results, constitutes believing 
in Jesus believing in Him as our ransom, who in consequence shall 
soon deliver from death those whom he redeemed with his own 
precious blood. 

To such a believer only, is the name Christian at all applicable, and 
in its strictest sense it applies only to those, who heartily believing, 
present themselves joint sacrifices together with Jesus; or as he 
himself expresses it, (Matt. 16:24): "If any man come after me [be 
my disciple, a Christ-ian] let him deny himself and take up his cross 
and follow me." Let him deny all ability to wash away his own 
sins, let him deny his own righteousness and accept of mine, and 
then become my follower. 

"If any man have not the spirit of Christ" in this respect-to sacrifice 
earthly advantages and things highly esteemed among men, for the 
sake of being co-workers with Jesus in the accomplishing of the 
plans of Jehovah "he is none of His;" (Rom. 8:9.) he is not in the 
true sense of the word a Christian. Beloved think it not strange 
concerning the fiery trial that is to try you, as though some strange 
thing happened unto you, but rejoice inasmuch as ye are partakers 
of Christ's sufferings.... If any man suffer as a CHRISTIAN let him 
not be ashamed; but let him glorify God on this behalf." 1 Pet. 4:12- 
16. 



R761 : page 3 

TO THE ELECT OF GOD (IN A TIME OF TROUBLE.) 

The elect of God exist, although no man can individually identify 
them. They are after a common family likeness, although 
differently situated in the present evil world. They have one faith, 
and one aim, and one mind, though following different occupations, 
and living in different parts of the earth. We greet them in the 
name of the Lord, wishing them and praying for them grace, mercy 
and peace from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Beloved, ye are known of God, though you may not be discerned 
by men. You are scattered up and down the world, in a cloudy and 
dark day, undistinguishable to human eyes, from the common mass 
of mankind. Your divine mark or seal, wherever you are to be 



found, consists of the belief, obedience and love of the truth which 
God has caused to be set forth in the writings of Moses, and the 
Prophets, and the Apostles. Having this mark, you are precious in 
his eyes. Your faith is well-pleasing to him; your obedience, your 
free-will offerings, your sacrifices in his service at a time when all 
the world ignores him ascend before him as the odor of a sweet 
smell, and are acceptable to him through the High Priest of our 
profession. And they will be spoken of again, to your great joy, in 
a day when they will seem to have been all forgotten, and when 
they will seem too small to be mentioned in the presence of the 
world-stirring events that will belong to the coming again of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. I write to you concerning our common 
affliction common in a large sense. I do not write to you because I 
know you. Some of you I doubtless know; but no man knows you 
as "the Lord knows them that are his." A man cannot even know 
himself in this sense. As our beloved brother Paul has said, "I 
judge not mine ownself; he that judgeth me is the Lord." We know 
the principles upon which men will be saved, because they have 
been revealed; but we are not capable of discerning infallibly where 
these principles have had their effectual work, though we may 
discern where they are set aside and violated. I write to you as 
those whom the Lord loves, and who will be banded together in a 
joyous company when the Lord comes. I write to you as one of 
you, having the same experience and the same 

R762 : page 3 

need. The scorner may mockingly enquire what right I have to 
write to such. I answer, the right of brotherly love, which belongs to 
every man who can rise to his privileges in Christ. Brotherly love 
leads to brotherly concern in all things, but particularly in those that 
relate to our standing in God, our position in the present probation 
and our hope concerning the purpose of God which will surely be 
accomplished. Your present lot is grievous in many respects; and at 
times you are greatly cast down, and nigh despairing altogether of 
the Lord's promised kindness in Christ. I write to remind you of the 
cause you also have for encouragement and joy. 

You feel unworthy of the great salvation to be brought unto you at 
the revelation of Jesus Christ; remember that, though, only those 
whom the Lord esteems worthy will enter the kingdom, yet part of 
that worthiness consists in the very sense of unworthiness which 
oppresses you. God's favor is for those only who rate themselves at 
God's standard; and by this standard we are, as Jacob confessed 
himself to be, "unworthy of the least of all the mercy and the truth" 
that the Lord shows to his people. For what are we at best but 
worms of the earth, fashioned in God's image, made of his clay, and 
permitted to live for a few years on the face of his glorious earth. 
The most righteous man can say with Job, whom the Lord 
approved, "Behold, I am vile. ..wherefore I abhor myself, and repent 
in dust and ashes." If a righteous man could feel this abasement  
(most reasonable abasement in mortal flesh in the presence of the 



divine glory) is it a marvel that we who add error to weakness and 
sin to corruptibility should sometimes feel "broken in heart and 
contrite in spirit"? It is right: but be not destroyed by this 
abasement. It is pleasing to God. To such he more than once 
plainly declared he looks with approval. 

But your sins, they distress you: it is right they should; but look 
again and be comforted. There is a sin not unto death. You are not 
callous towards the Lord. You do not run in the way he has 
forbidden. You do not love the present world, and run with it in all 
its "ungodliness and worldly lusts-the lusts of the eye and the pride 
of life." You do not deny God and live in deliberate disobedience of 
his commandments. On the contrary, you love his name and word; 
you believe his testimonies and rejoice in his institutions; you love, 
and look, and long for the appearing of his Son whom he has 
promised to send; and you are striving in all the ways of life, so far 
as in you lies, to do his will as expressed in his commandments. But 
you fail often. You come short of what you would do. You 
frequently do things you would not do; and you are distressed on 
this account. It is right to be so; but do not forget the provision that 
has been made: Christ has taken away our sins. We are washed in 
his blood. He stands in the 

R762 : page 4 

Father's presence, not only as the accepted sacrifice, but as the 
appointed high priest for his house. He ever liveth to make 
intercession for us, according to the will of God. If we confess our 
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to forgive us 
all our iniquity. If we walk in the light, the blood of Jesus Christ 
cleanseth us from all sins. God forgives us for Christ's sake. 

Perhaps you are oppressed with a sense of the unsuitability of such 
persons as you, being promoted to honor and power in the kingdom 
of God. Remember it is God's deliberate plan to make choice of 
such. "Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not 
many noble, are called,. ..but God hath chosen the weak things of 
this world." Jesus spoke of this, and said: "Even so, Father, for so it 
seemed good in thy sight." He even gave thanks to the Father for 
proceeding on this plan. There is a reason in it all. The kingdom is 
to be established for God's honor, not man's; for the Spirit's objects 
and not those of flesh. Hence, it is a necessity that men be provided 
for its administration who are not proud and lifted up in their eyes, 
but who are lowly and who know and reverence God so deeply as 
to find pleasure in his exaltation. The blessing of man will come out 
of it all, but glory to God first. If God made choice of the 
aristocracy, his purpose, ("I will be exalted among the heathen") 
would not be accomplished. They are full of themselves. He 
chooses men who are empty of themselves that they may be full of 
God. Poor men, in the day of evil, are the kind of material out of 
which he can provide the earthen vessels in which his eternal 
treasure can be deposited, "that the excellency of the power may be 
of God and not of man." 



But you say: "Such poor weak people as we, are not fit to be kings 
and priests." True, not as you are now. It is not as you are now that 
you will be elevated to that position. You will be changed from the 
mortal to the immortal, and this change will fit you in every way for 
what you will have to do. It will give you strength and grace and 
capacity and gladness of heart. You will be able to carry 
yourselves as kings, and to sustain yourselves without fatigue, and 
to bring the wisdom of Solomon to bear in the judgment of all 
matters you may have in charge. Qualification of this sort is all in 
God, who will liberally crown his children with the highest gifts in 
the day of their exaltation. The one thing needful is a humble, 
loving, obedient heart and pliant will, which can only be developed 
and put to the proof by the exercise of faith in a day like this; and 
the operation can only be successfully performed, in most cases, in 
circumstances of poverty and self-denial. Consequently your lowly 
position and inefficient state, instead of being a cause of dubitation, 
should help your confidence, as furnishing in your case, the likely 
elements of suitability for the glory to be revealed. 

But in another way, you may feel the cloud return. The time is 
long, and human nature is weak, and power fails, and you feel 
yourselves walking towards the darkness which bounds the horizon 
of all natural life; yea, the darkness will oftentimes steal into your 
inmost soul, and fill you with an indescribable horror, as you 
survey the vastness of the universe, in which God is apparently 
silent, and the almost infinite mass of abortive life that appears 
upon the earth from generation to generation. Be comforted 
concerning this, also: this darkness is inseparable from God's plan. 
Nay more: it is essential to it. Human life on the earth can no more 
reach the glory to be revealed without this experience, than the 
fruits of the field can appear without ploughing and harrowing. It is 
part of the plan. God's wisdom is in it, and his love, for God is 
love. We shall see it. Meanwhile we must exercise faith, without 
which he cannot be pleased. Faith working by love can see a little 
even now-by starlight, as it were. The darkness is prolonged for 
the world as a whole; but it is short for any generation. It has been 
on the earth for ages, but no generation lasts for ages. We knew 
nothing of it last century; our turn had not come. Our turn has now 
come: it depresses, but it will soon be over, and when over, the next 
thing in our experience (apparently the immediate next) if actually 
delayed however long, is the eternal sunshine of the Father's 
manifested presence, power and glory. We shall find then what has 
been done for us by present exposure in the darkness and coldness 
of earth's winter. It is the Father's appointment for us meanwhile. 
What can we say but "Thy will be done?" He doth not willingly 
afflict. Not only so, but he ministers to our need while we pass 
through the darkness. None of the elect of God is left alone. God 
is with him to guide and strengthen in many invisible ways. God 
cares for him: pities him; chastens him; upholds and prepares him 
for the inheritance that is in store for all the sons of light: an 
inheritance in which they will commune with unspeakable joy, after 



the prolonged and bitter fight of faith victoriously waged in their 
several evil days. But remember the end. Remember the joyful 
muster of the Lord's elect. 

This touches another sorrow you have. In your several spheres of 
probation, you are yearning for what you never realise. You hunger 
and thirst for the prevalence of a noble enlightenment among men. 
You love God yourselves with all your heart and souls. You long 
to see others rejoice in him and exalt him in a sincere and 
intelligent way. You have a compassionate regard for the condition 
of mankind, and desire, with even a tearful earnestness, to see them 
in a blessed condition. You sigh and faint for the delights of 
sanctified and intellectual friendship in which the hearts of 
companions should open with a noble warmth to the great and 
noble topics that the universe presents to the mind, instead of 
gravitating heavily to the petty accidents of animal life. Ah, and 
you are afflicted with your own incapacities that blur the sight and 
enfeeble the hands, and drag you into abysses of gloom as dark and 
dreadful as Jonah's habitation in the storm-tost sea.-Now, there is 
comfort concerning all this. It is somewhat negative in its form; 
but, then, it is true, and true comfort wears well, whereas false 
comfort fails you in the long run. The comfort is that these things 
are unattainable in the present condition of human life upon earth, 
but they are attainable and will be realized in their very perfection 
in the kingdom of God. The recognition of this is a help. We 
reconcile ourselves hopefully to our lot, enduring the hardness of 
the desert by knowing that it is a desert, and in the confident 
anticipation of the land of promise at the end of the journey. One 
comfort more. It is not displeasing to the Father that we thus 
hunger and thirst to the point even of misery, after righteousness. 
On the contrary, Jesus said, "Blessed are ye that hunger and thirst 
after righteousness; for ye shall be filled." 

Finally, you are troubled and distressed by dissensions in the 
household of faith. Many of you have been plunged into deep grief, 
even unto many tears. "Beloved, think it not strange concerning the 
fiery trial." It is nothing new. It is the modern form of a very 
ancient and 

R763 : page 4 

frequent experience, resulting from the fermentation of diverse 
elements brought together by the knowledge of the truth. We must 
trust to God's wisdom in permitting of the admixture of these 
elements. He has done so from the beginning. Do not be too much 
distressed by it. The results that come of it do not alter things; they 
only prove, and try, and manifest things. The word of the Lord 
standeth sure amid all the chafes, and changes, and corruptions of 
men. The Lord Jesus, from the serene exaltation of the heavens, has 
for centuries beheld the confusions, and commotions, and wars that 
have wrought havoc among men in his absence. He has beheld 
them without surprise. He foresaw them and foretold them. He 
said there would be strife and division; that iniquity would abound; 



that the love of many would wax cold; that the trial would be too 
severe for some, but he that should endure to the end would be 
saved. Can we imagine that such things are permitted without a 
purpose? The apostolic age was rife with them; is it a marvel if we 
have our share? There is but one answer on the part of enlightened 
reason, and that answer will help us to stand in the midst of the evil 
and to hold fast unmoved the hope of the gospel, looking to Christ, 
who lives, distrusting ourselves, who die. Our life is fleeting away; 
the battle will soon be over. Be strong and of good comfort. Stand 
fast; quit you like men. Keep close to the word in daily reading, 
and the peace of God will rule your hearts and minds and preserve 
you amid all chafes and tumults, unto his glorious kingdom, which 
will heal all sores, and chase all darkness for ever away. 

Your fellow-sufferer, fellow- soldier, fellow-pilgrim and fellow- 
suppliant of the mercy of God unto eternal life. 

-Robert Roberts. 



R763 : page 4 

THEN, THE END. 

"Then, the End, when he shall give up the kingdom to the God 
and Father; when he shall have abrogated all government and all 
authority and power. For he must reign till he has placed all 
enemies under his feet." 1 Cor. 15:24,25. 

It is a blessed privilege which the Church of Christ may now 
enjoy, to trace the plan of God for human salvation clear through to 
its consummation, and then to read with joyful satisfaction -Finis. 

So we find it foretold. Six thousand years of man's suffering and 
dying experience is ended, and we are in the beginning of the 
seventh (thousand year) day of human existence. This seventh 
millennium is to be the most marked and eventful day in the history 
of the race, a day to be specially remembered throughout the 
multiplied ages to follow. For six thousand years death has been 
swallowing up the human race as fast as it came into existence. 
The elements of decay, both physical and moral, are at work at the 
heart of every opening bud of human life. But the now dawning 
seventh day shall witness the reversing of this order, the undoing of 
all this work of destruction. 

It is variously designated in the Scriptures as the Day of Judgment, 
the Times of Restitution, the Resurrection Day, and the Day of 
Christ. In the dawn of this day the kingdom is to be set up, and so 
thorough will be its work that when this seventh day shall close, no 
force or governmental power will be necessary to secure obedience 
to God's will; for his will shall then be done on earth as it is done in 
heaven, without compulsion, freely, and from choice. 



The great work of Christ during this age is Resurrection, 
Restitution. Few can believe that such a work is possible, even 
with God; and in order to exercise faith in the promise of a 
resurrection, and at the same time to help themselves over the 
difficulty of a seeming impossibility, the majority of Christians 
ignore the true meaning of death, and claim that after death the 
being is more alive than ever. But admitting the true significance 
of death as the Scriptures so clearly define it, viz. : extinction, 
annihilation, we ask, with Paul, "Why should it be thought a thing 
incredible with you that God should raise the dead?" Acts 26:8. 

It is not presumable that we should be able to fully comprehend the 
philosophy of the resurrection or re-creation. The work of creating 
a living intelligent being is a work which we find it impossible to 
understand. Many men have great inventive genius, and have done 
many wonderful works, yet not one knows the secret of creative 
power: it is superhuman, beyond both our power and our 
comprehension. But to re-create an intelligent being who had once 
been utterly destroyed, so that it and others will recognize its 
identity, is a still greater work; but why should it be thought beyond 
the scope of divine power? It is not surprising that the world does 
not believe it, but the child of God led by the Spirit should find no 
such barrier to his faith. The world will, in due time, be convinced 
of the truth by actual demonstration, while the Church is taught by 
a different, yet equally convincing method; if we continue under the 
Spirit's leading, and turn not back to the darkness of unguided 
human reason. 

The awakening from death will be one of the early events in the day 
of Christ, though not one of the first. As we have learned, the 
living nations must first be brought to a degree of readiness for such 
an event. The dead shall not be awakened until surrounding 
circumstances, etc., are more favorable for their discipline and 
development. The great "day of his preparation," "The Day of the 
Lord," the Day of Wrath upon the Nations, must first do its work in 
overthrowing the oppressing kingdoms of this world, in casting 
down great Babylon with its deceptions and snares, and in binding 
Satan, the great enemy. 

The new, the heavenly kingdom, must be fully established, and its 
power and authority recognized by all the living, and the work of 
reformation among them be under way first. We do not presume 
that any of the dead will be brought back to be subjected to the 
same temptation and snare which now make shipwreck of the virtue 
of so many. There will be no licensed evils, and allurements to vice 
will not be permitted under that reign. 

When the angry nations, worn out with their own vain endeavors to 
adjust human affairs, shall realize that only 

R763 : page 5 

anarchy is the result, and shall learn to be still and to know that 
Christ is Lord (Psa. 46:10), and shall recognize His authority and 



power, then the preparatory work will be accomplished, and the 
proper work of the new kingdom may begin the glorious work of 
restitution; bringing mankind back to their "former estate" of 
human perfection and Godlikeness. Gen. 1:26,27. 

The awakening from death, as well as the healing of those who 
have not completely died, are only the beginnings of restitution or 
resurrection, which will not be complete until the original 
perfection of mind and body, lost for the race by Adam, and 
redeemed by Christ, shall have been restored to all who would 
come to the waters of life and drink freely. 

The awakening will find men morally and intellectually as they 
were when their existence terminated; hence the raising to 
perfection will require training, discipline, etc., etc.; and we are told 
that Christ shall reign until the work shall be fully accomplished- 
"He must reign till he has placed all enemies under his feet. Even 
death, the last enemy, will be rendered powerless," [or, Death shall 
finally be rendered powerless]. Vs. 25,26. When sin is completely 
eradicated; when sickness and pain are no more; when all sorrow 
and sighing and tears are forever banished; then, and not until then, 
will death be destroyed, Adamic death, the great enemy, will be 
rendered powerless, destroyed, blotted out completely under the 
reign of him who obtained this authority and power by the sacrifice 
of himself. The object of Christ's reign is to bring about the grand 
results for which he died. The world redeemed by his death shall 
be saved by his life. Rom. 5:10. We are assured by the prophet, as 
well as by the Apostle, that he shall not fail, but shall come off 
victorious over death. Isa. 25:8; Hos. 13:14; 1 Cor. 15:25,54-57. 
Jesus shall not fail to accomplish his great mission. He must reign 
until he has accomplished it, when he will deliver up the restored 
empire to "God even the Father." Were we to guess how long a 
time this restitution would require, we would probably estimate 
differently, some longer, some a shorter period; but we are not left 
to conjecture. We are informed that it will be fully accomplished in 
a thousand years, during which time Satan and evil will be under 
restraints, and the saints, with Jesus their Head, shall live and reign. 
Rev. 20:3,4. And how fitting, six days of evil and degradation, and 
one day of restitution, ushering in the countless ages of everlasting 
righteousness and happiness on earth as in heaven, among men as 
among angels. 

It follows then, that the thousand years of Christ's reign shall 
complete the great work of salvation, and beyond it there is no 
probation for any; all will have had a full opportunity, with every 
favorable advantage. In the end or closing period of that age Satan 
is to be loosed for a little season for the final testing of mankind, 
and at its close he and those who follow his spirit and leadership 
shall be destroyed. That will be the "second death," from which 
there is no recovery. Rev. 21:7,8. 



Jesus ransomed no one from the second death; the ransom he gave 
was in settlement of the first or Adamic death only (Rom. 5:17-19), 
and it is it, that 

R764 : page 5 

he shall destroy during his reign, by releasing from its dominion, all 
whose liberty he purchased with his own precious blood. All Jesus' 
enemies shall be subjected to his power, and every person and 
principle wilfully opposed to his and the Father's righteous law 
shall be destroyed. The second death is not Christ's enemy, but 
becomes a servant of righteousness in the permanent removal of 
everything opposed to righteousness. Nothing will be left to mar the 
perfectly restored creation. Then Christ shall present his finished 
work to the Father-a work whose perfection and glory will highly 
honor both the Father's plan and the Son's execution of it a work 
which will make manifest the wisdom, power, justice, and love of 
God to all his intelligent creatures, and which will lead men to 
honor the Son who executed the plan, even as they honor the Father 
who arranged it. 

When the work of restoration is complete and mankind has 
regained the image of God obliterated by sin, there will no longer 
be necessity for coercion. Obedience will be cheerfully and joyfully 
rendered when God's law is written in every heart. Hence, when 
Christ shall deliver up the kingdom to God even the Father, his will 
shall be done on earth as it is done in heaven-freely and from 
choice-joyfully. The language of every heart will then be, "I 
delight to do thy will O my God; yea, thy law is within my heart." 
The perfect human nature will then be as it was at first, a law 
inscribed nature. (Jer. 31:33.) There is no necessity for the exercise 
of compulsory power where knowledge and ability are perfect, and 
where love reigns supreme in the heart. 

To deliver up mankind to Jehovah's government before they have 
been perfectly restored, would be to deprive them of the protection 
of the precious blood before they had obtained all the blessing it 
was designed to afford them. To deliver them over imperfect to 
God's government, would be to deliver them to sure destruction; for 
God's law is perfect and approves only those who are absolutely 
perfect, and condemns all others as it did Adam, for even one sin. 
Therefore as Paul expresses it (Heb. 10:31), when speaking of some 
who would ignore and deny Jesus' ransom and protection: "It is a 
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God." It is fearful 
because of the absolute perfection of God's law, and the fact that 
His only allowance for imperfection is through Jesus, until the 
imperfect ones have been restored. But when at the close of the 
Millennial reign the whole world shall be delivered up to God, even 
the Father, it will no longer be a fearful thing, because having been 
perfectly restored by the Redeemer, all will then delight to do God's 
will perfectly. 



It has been suggested and publicly taught by some that the ages to 
follow the Millennium will afford opportunity for the perfecting of 
such as during the Millennial age will not submit to the authority of 
Christ; and that by repeated endeavors, through ages if necessary, 
the incorrigible shall all be brought to obedience to God; and that 
thus, not one of God's creatures shall ever be destroyed even 
Satan not excepted. 

This idea is regarded by its advocates as a marked evidence of their 
superior generosity, love, and good will toward all. But leaving this 
out of the question for the present, let us consider briefly if the 
suggestion has any real foundation. 

First, we have seen that the reign of Christ is foretold to be of a 
thousand years' duration (Rev. 20:4), and that at the end of that time 
he gives up the kingdom. (1 Cor. 15:24.) From this we must 
conclude that if there is to be any probation, or reconciliation of any 
beyond that time, it must be accomplished through some other 
agency than that of Christ. 

Secondly, we have seen that the object of Christ's reign is stated to 
be the restitution of all things, the resurrection work Acts 3:19-24; 1 
Cor. 15:20-26. 

If the above suggestion were true, if it could be proven from the 
Scriptures, then it would follow that Christ shall fail to fully 
accomplish the work assigned to him, and that he will give it up at 
the end of the thousand years because of his inability to complete it, 
and that some other agency shall accomplish it. 

But is this true? We answer unhesitatingly and emphatically, No. 
We are sure that the entire work of reconciliation -restoration, is to 
be accomplished through Christ, because it is written, that God 
"hath committed all judgment unto the Son," that "He shall not fail 
nor be discouraged until he have set judgment in the earth" (Isa. 
42:4), and that "He must reign till he hath placed all enemies under 
his feet," in subjection. 

We are not left in doubt that the work of reconciling the world will 
be accomplished within the limits of Christ's reign (Rev. 20:4), 
because this is the very object of that reign. And beyond doubt God 
is able to undo in one thousand years, the work which Satan has 
accomplished in six thousand years. 

There is absolutely no ground for believing in a probation for any 
beyond that time, because it is expressly stated, that in the end of 
that time, Satan and those who follow his leading shall be 
destroyed, and that Christ shall have put all enemies under his feet. 
(Heb. 2:14; Rev. 20:15). 

On the strength of these scriptures we consider it clearly proven 
that God can and will make a thorough end of evil, and of evil 
doers who prove themselves incorrigible, and that speedily; and that 
the ages following the Millennium shall be ages of eternal 
blessedness, without the least alloy of sin. The righteous shall 



flourish and "evil doers shall be cut off"-"in His day"-the 
Millennial day. 

Generosity, benevolence, and good will, are beautiful and 
commendable traits of character when centered on proper objects, 
but if extended towards the enemies of God, they become 
obnoxious in his sight, and worthy of condemnation. When the law 
of God condemned a guilty criminal to death, all Israel was 
commanded to stone him, thus expressing their acquiescence and 
approval of God's judgment. (Deut. 13:9.) 

To claim a generosity and benevolence beyond that expressed in the 
Word of God, is to assume superiority to God, and is very un- 
Christlike. He who sympathizes with the evil doer whom God 
condemns, is partaker of his evil deeds. (2 John 11; Psa. 15:4.) 

Let us seek God's will in God's way and it will speedily reprove and 
correct the vanity of frail humanity, should it attempt to be either 
wise or benevolent above and beyond what is written. "The meek 
will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach His way." 
Psa. 25:9. Let all the meek answer with assurance, "Great and 
marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy 
ways." 



R764 : page 5 

"BEFORE honor is humility; and before exaltation is humiliation. 
Pride is a besetting sin of this age, and spiritual pride is one of the 
devil's strongest snares. Beware of these pitfalls." 



R764 : page 5 

EVERLASTING DESTRUCTION. 

"It is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to 
them that trouble you: and to you who are troubled, rest, [together] 
with us; when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with 
his mighty angels [agencies], in flaming fire, taking vengeance on 
them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord 
Jesus Christ: Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction 
[aionion not limited, i.e., upon which destruction no limit has been 
placed,] from the presence of the Lord and the glory of his power: 
When he shall [have] come to be glorified in his saints and to be 
admired in all them that believe (...) in that day." 2 Thes. 1:6-10. 

This passage positively contradicts two classes of theorists. 
Those who claim that all will be saved eternally, are contradicted 
by the Apostle's statement that a class will merit and receive 
destruction, in harmony with Jesus' statement relative to the same 
"goat" class in Matt. 25 :46. The large class which claims on the 
contrary that the punishment of the wicked is everlasting torture, 
are equally contradicted by the Apostle. He declares that the capital 



punishment which God will inflict upon the finally impenitent is 
DESTRUCTION, and that a class will receive this punishment or 
wages of sin death. 

But we notice the above passage specially, because some have 
thought it to teach that the class "who know not God," will be 
destroyed immediately when the Lord shall become "present," and 
thus fail to share in the Millennial blessings. 

Aside from the saints who shall rest, the Apostle refers to two 
classes: the ignorant, who know not God [do not appreciate God's 
character and plans] and obey not the gospel," and "all them that 
believe" in that [Millennial] day. 

First the Lord comes is present; next comes the revealing of his 
presence. Until the revealing or manifesting of the Lord's presence, 
none will know of it except his saints, his "friends," (John 15:14) to 
whom it is revealed by faith through the testimony of the Scripture. 
Presently comes the revealing to the world which will be in flaming 
fire; trouble, judgments consumingly destructive to evil and 
ignorance, and wrongs of every sort; taking vengeance, visiting 
tribulation upon evil systems and all wrong-doers. 

This flaming fire, or punishment of wrong doing, with stripes and 
penalties, will continue to burn during the entire 

R765 : page 5 

Millennial age against wrong-doers, for Jesus reigns in order to "put 
down" all evil and the final result is stated to be the development of 
the two classes above referred to. 

Those "who believe in that day" when the knowledge of the Lord 
shall fill the whole earth, and who come into harmony with him 
who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life shall be blessed; and He 
shall be "glorified" in the final perfection of all such in the end of 
the Millennial age-"all them that believe in that day." On the 
other hand those who shall continue to be of the class who 
appreciate not God's character and obey not the good tidings of 
restitution shall be then accounted wilful sinners against full light 
and opportunity; and as such meet the specified and just reward: 
they shall "be punished with everlasting destruction from the 
presence of the Lord and from the glory of his power." For these 
there is not a further gleam of hope in either reason or Scripture. 
The object of Jesus' reign is to permit all who desire life on God's 
conditions, to obtain it. That reign will not close until its object 
shall have been fully accomplished every redeemed son of Adam 
shall have 

R765 : page 6 

full opportunity of proving himself worthy to retain the life which 
the great Restorer redeemed with his own. With the full end of trial 
must come a full end of evil: Neither sin nor sinners can go beyond 
the Millennial age and with its close all such shall be destroyed. 



Seven thousand years of mingled evil God sets before us as the 
limit. "The Lord preserveth all them that love him, but all the 
wicked will he destroy." Psa. 145:20. 



R765 : page 6 



GOD'S ORDER. 



But I would have you know that the head of every man is Christ; 
and the head of the woman is the man; and the head of Christ is 
God. ICor. 11:3. 

The Apostle Paul here uses the human body as an illustration of 
God's order and arrangement among his intelligent creatures. The 
symbol is an apt one, and suggestive of perfect harmony. The head 
is the director and care-taker of the body; every interest of the body 
is taken into consideration by the head, and every possible 
provision made and applied to meet those interests. And in turn, 
the members of the body are always at the prompt and willing 
service of the head. And such is the sympathy between the various 
members that if one is disabled the other members are ever on the 
alert to execute the plans devised by the head for its recovery. 

The headship of Jehovah was expressed to Adam in his perfect 
condition in Eden, when God said: "Of every tree of the garden 
thou mayest freely eat; but of the tree of the knowledge of good and 
evil, thou shalt not eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest thereof, 
dying, thou shalt die (Gen. 2:16,17,- margin). Here was an 
expression of Jehovah's rightful authority, his loving care and his 
generous provision-his headship. Man in turn should have 
expected to reverence, respect and obey the authority, to reciprocate 
the love and to gratefully accept and enjoy Jehovah's bounty. In the 
obedience expected, the idea of base servility was absent. Love 
commanded and love should have delighted in obedience. 

Even Christ Jesus, highly exalted as he is, delights to acknowledge 
the headship of Jehovah- "My Father is greater than I"; "I came not 
to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me." And again: 
"I delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, thy law is within my 
heart" (Psa. 40:8). In harmony with this thought of the headship of 
Jehovah, the prophet Isaiah represents Christ as the "Arm of 
Jehovah" (Isa. 53:1; 59:16), and in obedience to Jehovah's will he 
was active, prompt and willing, even unto death. Thus our Lord set 
us an example of the true relationship which should exist between 
himself the head and the members of His body. 

Since Christ has redeemed mankind from death, all judgment, 
authority and power is given unto him; the office of the head is now 
vested in him; hence Paul declares: The head of man is Christ. And 
whatever is implied by this term in expressing the relationship 
between our Lord Jesus and Jehovah, his head, is also implied in 
that relation between Christ and man. He, then, who would be 



perfect, must find his chief delight in learning and doing the will of 
Christ, even as Christ Jesus delights to do the will of Jehovah. It 
should be his constant aim to bring "into captivity every thought to 
the obedience of Christ." 2 Cor. 10:5. 

The next step in God's order indicated by the Apostle, is man the 
head of woman, or as shown in Eph. 5:23, the husband the head of 
the wife. Many who see clearly the headship of Jehovah, and the 
headship of Christ, fail to see the headship of man in the domestic 
relation. Prejudice, public sentiment and the abuse of power, have 
made this and similar expressions of the faithful Apostle quite 
unpopular. And this is not surprising, in the fallen and disordered 
condition of humanity. The Apostle Paul is variously charged with 
being a despiser of women, and as speaking without divine 
authority; and this even among Christians. But when rightly 
viewed, Paul, as usual, is found to give faithful expression to the 
divine order dictated by unerring wisdom for the highest good and 
happiness of all. 

If the husband is the head of the wife, it implies exactly the same 
responsibilities on the part of each as named above. The husband 
should be the protector, provider and director in the affairs of life, 
and the wife the cheerful, willing co-worker in harmony with his 
will. He, therefore, who would assume the relation of head, should 
see that he is capable and willing to fill it after the divine pattern; 
and she who would become a man's partner in life, should see that 
she is ready to fill such position according to the divine 
arrangement. 

Yes, says some one, that would all do very well if men were 
perfect, but we know that it not unfrequently happens that the wife 
has more ability and judgment to act as head than the husband. 
Very true, but that should be considered before such contracts are 
made. If unhappily it has not been considered in time, such wives 
should make the best of the situation and quietly assist in the office 
of head, with as much modesty, and as little appearance of doing 
so, as the circumstances will admit. It also happens, says another, 
that the husband's will often runs counter to the Lord's will; how 
then? We answer, If the husband is consecrated to the Lord, and 
yet his will appears to be out of harmony with the Lord's will, he 
will be very ready, either to prove his course to be in harmony with 
the Lord's will or to change it. And here we see the wisdom which 
dictates that we should not be unequally yoked with unbelievers (2 
Cor. 6:14). But if such contracts have been formed before we 
became consecrated believers, we must bear in mind that our first 
responsibility is now to our Lord our Heavenly Bridegroom. The 
worldly husband is not the head of his wife as a "new creature" 
espoused to Christ. Her first allegiance, is, therefore, to her real 
though invisible Lord, and in so far as may be consistent with this 
new relation, she should endeavor to fulfill the old also-a thing not 
possible in every respect. For one of those consecrated to God as 
living sacrifices to thereafter become unequally yoked with one of 



the world's children, is to violate the direct command of God (2 
Cor. 6:14), and to take a long step towards ignoring union with 
Christ, "for what communion hath light with darkness"? The 
children of this world strive for the things of this world and delight 
in the world's approval, while the consecrated child of God has 
renounced all these and should be striving only to obtain those 
things which are beyond and entirely unknown to the world. But if 
both are united in the Lord, and walking after the Spirit, to do the 
will of the husband is to do the will of Christ. 

The Christian wife sustains the same relation to the Christian 
husband that the Christian husband sustains to Christ, and that 
Christ sustains to God who is head over all. Should submission on 
the part of any be regarded as mere servility? By no means. Christ 
did not so regard it; why should we? There is neither servility nor 
tyranny where love rules. Love is neither boastful of its authority 
nor ashamed of its submission. 

This order of headship we believe will still be God's order when all 
things are brought to perfection; and although there is much friction 
and lack of harmony now, because of human imperfection, there 
will be none whatever then. When Christ having finished his work 
delivers up the kingdom to the Father, he shall still be "subject to 
the Father. " The wife will then be subject to the husband because it 
will be her delight to do his will, for the woman was made for the 
man; and the husband will delight to honor the wife, because she is 
the glory of her husband. 

Ah, says Mr. Ingersol, when God said: "Thy husband shall rule 
over thee," he established domestic slavery. Truly domestic slavery 
has followed, but did God establish it? Not at all. Sin established 
it. It is a part of the wages of sin. Man, created to bless by his 
power to rule, too often falls into the error of tyrannical misrule, 
and the desire of the wife which is toward her husband, alas, often 
ends in bitter disappointment -just as God had said. And not until 
the remedy is fully applied will the curse be lifted. And when that 
remedy is fully applied, man will recognize his true position and fill 
it, and woman likewise. The husband will delight to honor the wife 
as the weaker vessel, and the wife will see that she reverences her 
husband. The wife will look up with a lawful pride in her 
husband's 

R766 : page 6 

manly strength and glory, while he will regard with admiration and 
affection her womanly grace not equal and alike in all respects, but 
each possessing those qualities of heart and mind which make them 
companions for each other. 

If the relationship between husband and wife in the divine order 
stands thus, it cannot be true as some teach, that man and woman 
are exact equals in every respect. God never makes one the head 
over another exact equal. Jehovah is superior to Christ, Christ 
superior to man and man superior to woman the weaker vessel. 



Man's superiority consists in his greater strength, both physical and 
mental. These various steps are in God's order. True, in the present 
mixed and imperfect condition, many women are superior to many 
men, but such women should be very sure not to become wives of 
such men; for in so doing they must either violate the divine order 
(Eph. 5:22), or else submit themselves to an inferior which is also 
out of harmony with the Lord's design. 

In view of these considerations, let us note the instruction of the 
Apostle Paul, and see that its very object is the same as that 
contemplated in the union of the first perfect pair in Eden: "Wives 
submit yourselves unto your own husbands as unto the Lord; for the 
husband is the head of the wife even as Christ is the head of the 
Church, and he is the Saviour [preserver, care-taker] of the body. 
Therefore, as the Church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be 
to their husbands in every thing. Husbands love your wives even as 
Christ also loved the Church and gave himself for it, that he might 
sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word. That 
he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or 
wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without 
blemish. So ought man to love their wives as their own bodies" 
(Eph. 5:22-28). Children may then obey both parents, since each 
will be in harmony with the other and with the Lord. 

In recognition of the same principle, the headship of man, Paul 
further states: "I do not permit a woman to teach or to assume 
authority over man, but to be quiet" (1 Tim. 2:12). Surely Paul 
does not mean that a woman's lips must be forever sealed that she 
may not declare the good tidings of great joy to others. Does not 
the same Apostle say: "There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is 
neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all 
ONE in Christ Jesus." And does not the prophet Isaiah teach that 
all the anointed, are anointed to preach the good tidings. It is in 
harmony with these, then, that we must understand the above words 
of the Apostle. 

The Apostle's idea seems therefore to be, that in no case, however 
important the truth we are commissioned to bear, is woman to 
assume a position of authority and command. She may tell the 
blessed tidings of great joy anywhere and everywhere, and to 
whomsoever she has opportunity; but always with becoming 
modesty, stating the truth so clearly that of itself it may carry 
conviction with it and her own individuality be lost sight of. This 
element of character is one which naturally belongs to woman, but 
is generally very soon lost by those who attempt to work in a public 
way. The work for the majority of women, is the individual, quiet 
and none the less effective work. Her greatest influence is that 
exerted strictly within her divinely appointed sphere. If opportunity 
and ability should point out a more public sphere of usefulness, she 
may fill it as long as such opportunity lasts, if in so doing, she bears 
that modest, quiet demeanor, in action, word, and apparel, which 
becometh woman professing Godliness. 



Again, we see that in this relationship of husband and wife, is 
prefigured the beautiful relationship between Christ Jesus and the 
church. And as in the type, so in the antitype, the church, the bride 
of Christ is to be subject unto him in everything; earnestly seeking 
at all times to know, and then delighting to do his will. As the 
woman is not to assume authority and direct the man, so the church 
is not to assume authority and to attempt to direct in the Lord's 
work, but is to be "quiet," searching diligently to know his plan and 
methods, and then endeavoring faithfully to execute them. 

When God's plan shall be brought fully into execution, we see that 
loving authority and joyful submission will fill the universe with 
blessed peace and everlasting joy-and "God shall be all in all" (1 
Cor. 15:28). Head over all -his will done in earth as it is done in 
heaven. Seeing this to be God's ultimate design, it should be our 
endeavor now, so far as it is in our power, to carry out and illustrate 
that purpose now. It can only be fully illustrated, however, by 
those who are "united in the Lord." 

The Apostle's high regard for woman and woman's work is shown 
by his mention of several faithful co-laborers and helpers among 
them see Rom. 16:1-6,13; 

R766 : page 7 

also Phil. 4:3: "I entreat thee.. .help those women which labored 
with me in the gospel.... whose names are in the book of life." And 
Acts 1:14: "All continued with one accord in prayer and 
supplication with the women." And 1 Cor. 11:5: "Every woman 
that prayeth or prophesieth (teacheth)." 

These scriptures teach, that women did a work in the Apostles' days 
which was approved and appreciated by them and by the Lord. Yet 
women usually spoke only at the smaller gatherings; and when Paul 
said, "Let the women keep silence in the congregations," he 
probably had reference to the public gatherings at which it was the 
custom to have more or less debate. In these public debatings, Paul 
thought a woman's voice would be out of place, and this is the 
opinion of most thinking men and women to-day, though it has by 
many been carried to an extreme, forbidding them to pray or teach 
on any occasion, even in more private assemblies of Christians; this 
we regard as an error. 

God has arranged that the man and woman are representative of 
Christ and his Bride, the Church, and this rule by which the 
husband is the head of the wife is always maintained in the 
Scriptures. And probably this is one reason that men have always 
been given the more active and public work of the ministry, and 
women more the work of assisting and more private teaching, yet 
equally as acceptable to God. So Christ is the active agent in 
carrying out his own plan. He is the great minister of all, and we as 
his Church are permitted to be helps meet for his use; to do a lesser 
part and yet an acceptable part, well pleasing to God. 



These remarks are suggested as answers to many inquiries from 
beloved sisters in Christ who love to tell the blessed story of God's 
wonderful plan, who yet doubted the propriety of so doing lest they 
might be in conflict with the inspired teaching of our Brother Paul. 

We hope that all such will thus be aided in clearly reading their 
commission, to declare the glad tidings in such manner as becometh 
women of the anointed body. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R766 : page 7 

"THE LORD YOUR GOD PROVETH YOU." 

"And many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many." 
"There shall arise false Christs and false prophets, and shall show 
great signs and wonders; insomuch that if it were possible, they 
shall deceive the very elect. Behold I have told you before." Matt. 
24:11-24. 

"If there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams and 
giveth thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign or wonder come to pass 
whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, let us go after other gods which 
thou hast not known, and let us serve them; thou shalt not hearken 
unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: for the 
Lord your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the Lord your 
God with all your heart and with all your soul." Deut. 13:1-3. 

When the disciples came to Jesus inquiring what should be the 
sign of his presence and of the end of the age, before answering 
their question [See art. "The Sign of His Presence" in our January 
issue.] he took occasion to give some important information as to 
events which should transpire before that time. Among others he 
foretells the rise of many false prophets and false Christs, and of 
their power to deceive. Then he adds, "Behold I have told you." 

To be forewarned is to be forearmed, if we heed the warning. But 
forgetting the warning and instruction, the many, as Jesus foretold, 
are deceived by these pretenders, and because iniquity abounds, the 
love of many of God's children waxes cold. Standing where we do 
to-day, in "The Time of the End," and looking back, we are able to 
discern many false Christs and false prophets, and can see how 
Jesus' words have proved true, that many have been deceived 
thereby. 

The word Christ means anointed, and is applicable not only to the 
anointed head, but also to the anointed body of Christ, all who as 
followers of Jesus have made a covenant with him by sacrifice: 
hence those systems pretending to be the anointed body, and who 
are not really such, are false Christs. The various great religious 
systems each claim to be the anointed body, the church, the body of 
Christ, though each regards its founder as its head. Though these 



systems contain members of the true church whom they have 
blinded and enslaved, yet as systems they are false false Christs 
and being deceitful ensnarers of the true they are really anti-Christs. 

R767 : page 7 

The chief and greatest of these systems is the great "Mystery of 
Iniquity," the Church of Rome, whose head is the Pope. Its "lying 
wonders" have truly deceived many, and out of this system have 
sprung the various minor systems, each claiming to be the church, 
the body of Christ, and each acknowledging and following others 
than the true head of the true Church-Christ Jesus, though all 
assume his name. 

Not only have these great false christs anti-christs arisen, 
flourished, and deceived many, but many individual false prophets, 
or false teachers have also arisen; and through the combined 
influence of all these, iniquity (erroneous faith and practice) 
abounds. The truth has been covered, and error has been advanced, 
accepted, and acted upon. In the significant language of the prophet 
(Isa. 59:14,15), "Truth is fallen in the streets, and equity cannot 
enter. Yea, truth faileth; and he that departeth from evil maketh 
himself a prey." 

Since inquiring minds begin to weary of the confusing errors 
presented by the various and conflicting false christs and false 
prophets, it is becoming quite a popular method with all of these, to 
silence inquirers with the assurance that what they believe is really 
of little importance, that the all important thing is to live a virtuous 
life, and to give their influence and support to some one of the 
many false christs or false prophets, and to work in harmony with 
them and under their direction. 

But let us consider for a moment what has been the effect of some 
of the false doctrines which have been advanced, and see if this 
idea, which has now become so common, is a correct one. Take for 
example the dogma of inherent immortality. This idea was first 
advanced as a fundamental doctrine of Christianity by the apostate 
church of Rome, and has been held and guarded with special care 
by all denominations of so-called Protestants. From this as a root 
principle, have grown the dogmas of eternal torment, of purgatory, 
of death as a mere transition period, an instant of change with no 
cessation of life, for say they, man is immortal, and cannot die. If 
man must live forever somewhere, they argue that such everlasting 
existence must be in torment if not in bliss. In harmony with this 
idea, death cannot be regarded as an enemy, nor as the punishment 
of sin; nor can any blessing be seen in the scripture teaching of a 
resurrection. And further, if death be not regarded as the 
punishment of sin, the logical inference is, that the death of Christ 
as man's Redeemer or Substitute, availed nothing. This logical 
inference has not yet been drawn by the masses of those who 
compose these great systems, simply because of their drowsy 
lethargy; but for centuries the false idea of inherent immortality has 



been strengthening its roots, and shooting out and building up its 
branches, and soon the sure fruit will be a general denial of the 
redemption secured through Jesus' death. Already, prominent 
thinking ones in these various systems, reasoning, not from the 
Scriptures, but from the so-called orthodox standpoint, are boldly 
declaring their conclusions, and with no little effect upon others. 

This is the logical effect so far as faith is concerned, of that one 
single item of error firmly rooted. This error and those which have 
grown out of it, have also deterred the church from pursuing the 
most important part of her work, viz.: the building up of each other 
in the truth as presented in the Scriptures, from which alone come 
the highest and purest incentives to a holy life and to untiring zeal 
in the divine service. Furthermore, by inculcating ideas of God 
which represent him as cruel and vindictive, encouragement has 
been given to those base qualities of man's depraved nature, and as 
a consequence, the most cruel persecutions and pitiless and 
revolting crimes that the world has ever witnessed, have been 
perpetrated in the name of Christianity, and by those claiming to be 
the followers of Christ. 

Take another dogma which is held and guarded with the utmost 
jealousy by all these systems, viz.: the dogma of The Trinity, an 
idea so absurd that its very absurdity is taken as proof of its divine 
authority, though not a text of scripture can be quoted in its support, 
save a single spurious clause (1 John 5:7-8. Without the 
interpolated words it reads plainly as follows:-"For there are three 
that bear record, the spirit, and the water, and the blood; and these 
three agree in one" testimony), introduced for this express purpose, 
now generally known and admitted to be an interpolation. This 
dogma teaches that God is three separate and distinct persons, equal 
in power and glory; that the Father is a person, the Son is a person, 
and the Holy Spirit is a person, yet all three are one person. In this 
confusion of ideas none can form a clear conception of God, and all 
their thoughts of him must be very mixed and cloudy. It tends also 
to mystify their comprehension of the sacrifice which Jesus made 
for our redemption; for, if the three persons are one person, then 
when one died all must have died, and the universe was left without 
God for three days, and mere chance must have raised him up from 
death if the true idea of death be accepted; or if death be considered 
but a period of transition from one nature to another, then this must 
have been the case with Jesus also, and consequently if he was of 
the divine nature before death, he must be a different nature now. 

And so one absurdity leads to another, and leaving the principles of 
the doctrine of Christ as set forth in the Scriptures, the various false 
bodies of Christ have built themselves up into systems of great size 
and influence in the world. Their great claims and apparent success 
have deceived very many of God's children; repressed their zeal for 
the truth, left them in almost complete ignorance of the Gospel 
hopes, both for the world and for the little flock of overcomers, led 
them to worldly conformity, and prejudiced them against the truth 



and against all true truth seekers. And as the prophet said, the few 
remaining truth seekers become a prey-a prey to the hatred, 
opposition and persecution of the church nominal. Ah, yes, what 
we believe makes a very great difference. Our FAITH has a most 
potent influence in moulding both our character and our destiny; 
and every child of God should beware of any system or person that 
seeks to guard its theory against thorough examination and 
criticism by underrating the importance of a correct faith. 

True to Jesus' words, because iniquity (erroneous doctrine and 
consequent erroneous practice worldliness, etc.) abounds, the love 
of many waxes cold. The Lord seems afar off, incomprehensible 
and almost unknown. How can they delight in his word who are 
ignorant of it? or how rejoice in his promises who do not 
comprehend them? or how strive for the offered prize who do not 
discern it? 

The elect of God cannot be thus deceived; they have walked and are 
walking with God in the midst of a crooked and perverse 
generation, searching, believing and trusting his word, walking in 
its light and striving to fulfill the conditions for the attainment of its 
exceeding great and precious promises. This fixedness of purpose, 
and adherence to it, not only designates such to be the elect of God, 
but it shields them from the deceptions and snares of false christs 
and false prophets (teachers). Though many such have doubtless 
lived and died in those false systems, they overcame their influence 
through faith and loyalty to God. We should not forget that the 
separation of the wheat from the tares was not commanded until the 
"harvest." Matt. 13:30. It was the Lord's design to let wheat and 
tares grow together until the harvest; but in this harvest time it is his 
will that all such should come out and be separate when his truth 
makes manifest the true character of these systems. 

But even after coming out of these anti-christ or false-christ 
systems, there are many false prophets who assume authority to 
direct the consecrated, who teach theories subversive of the truth 
and pervert the Scriptures to support them. Such false prophets 
always have been and always will be found, so long as Satan has 
power in his hands; that is, until he is bound. 

And our Heavenly Father permits it so to be: why? To prove his 
people: "For the Lord your God doth prove you, to know whether 
ye love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your 
soul." The Lord would prove whether we have received the truth in 
the love of it and of its Author. It is very often the case that truth is 
received by some because of their love for those who bear it, and 
without personal searching to prove that it is from God. Such have 
not received the truth in the love of IT, and sooner or later some 
circumstances will unsettle them. If the prop falls into error such 
will surely fall with it; or if love for the prop grows 

R767 : page 8 



cold, the love for truth thus received grows cold with it. But love 
for our brethren in Christ, and special love for those who serve us 
most, will never overthrow the faith of those who receive the truth 
in the love of it. 

Should controversy arise because the way of truth is evil spoken of 
even among those through whom the blessed Gospel has been 
received, and who have been greatly loved for their work's sake, it 
will only impel those who are wholly the Lord's, to a more diligent 
searching of the Scriptures, and thus more earnest inquiring of the 
Lord to make very plain the way. 

Peter reminds us that there were false prophets in Israel, even as 
there should be false teachers among us; (2 Peter 2:1) and Moses 
declares that it was permitted to prove Israel. If faithful to God, no 
consideration of a personal character, should lead them to turn 
away from God's truth after these false teachers. When we 
remember that these things happened to Israel as types for our 
instruction, the words of Moses become very significant:-"If thy 
brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the 
wife of thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own soul, entice 
thee secretly, saying, Let us go and 

R768 : page 8 

serve other gods... thou shalt not consent unto him, nor hearken unto 
him, neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou spare, 
neither shalt thou conceal him. But thou shalt surely kill him; thine 
hand shall be first upon him to put him to death and afterwards the 
hand of all the people." (Deut. 13:6-9.) 

Thus the Lord proved Israel's determination to obey him at the 
sacrifice of any earthly friendship if need be. And in this Israel was 
a type of both the world in the age to come, and also of the church 
in the present time. Temptations even from dearest friends to 
depart from the living God and serve idols, whether those idols be 
self-exaltation, or any other thing, must be resolutely met with a 
fixed purpose to follow the Lord wholly. Such suggestions may not 
be harbored nor consented to by those fully consecrated to God, 
even though they come in the most deceptive disguise, and by 
dearest friends. And not only so, but deceptive errors and 
influences must be put to death; they must be pelted to death by the 
stones of truth. Our weapons are not like those of fleshly Israel- 
not carnal but spiritual, and mighty in pulling down the strongholds 
of error. 2 Cor. 10:4. 

Ever bearing in mind that the Lord your God doth prove you, to 
know whether ye love the Lord your God with all your heart and 
with all your soul, and whether your love to him is paramount to 
every other love, however strong, we may meet the trials of 
severing friendships and dissolving earthly ties, with firm 
unflinching confidence in God, who will crown with everlasting 
joy, the faithful overcomer who has fought to the end the good fight 
of faith. 



R768 : page 8 



CHRISTIAN UNION. 



I exhort you therefore... to walk in a manner worthy of the calling 
wherewith ye were called; with all lowliness of mind and 
meekness, with long suffering, bearing with one another in love, 
giving diligence to keep the oneness of the spirit in the uniting bond 
of peace: one body [church] and one spirit [aim- mind] according 
as ye were also called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one 
Faith, one Immersion, one God and Father of all he who is over all, 
and through all, and in all.... 

"And he gave some indeed [as] apostles, and some [as] prophets, 
and some [as] evangelists, and some [as] shepherds and teachers; 
with a view to the fitting of the saints for work of ministry, for an 
up-building of the body of Christ; until we all advance into the 
ONENESS of the faith, and of the full knowledge of the Son of 
God; into a man of full growth, into a measure of stature of the 
fullness of the Christ; that we may no longer be infants, billow- 
tossed and shifted around with every wind of teaching, in the craft 
of men, in knavery, suited to the artifice of error; but pursuing truth 
in love, may grow into Him in all things who is the head, Christ; 
out of whom all the body fitly framing itself together and 
connecting itself through means of every joint of supply, according 
to an inward working in measure of each single part, is securing the 
growth of the body unto an up-building of itself in love. Eph. 4:1- 
16. Rotherham's Trans. 

Christian Union is an end greatly to be desired and sought for 
among God's children, yet it is of great importance that we have 
union on the true and Scriptural basis. Union on any other is as 
detrimental, as true union is advantageous. 

In the above exhortation of the apostle, we have christian union 
presented as a possibility, as a thing to be desired, and as a 
necessity to the healthy growth and development of the body of 
Christ. He presents also the conditions under which it may be 
attained, and by which it may be perpetuated. 

Let us notice first the character of that union of which Paul speaks. 
He says it is a union in which all so united acknowledge the one 
Lord, are inspired by the one faith, are baptized with the one 
baptism, begotten of the same Father, filled with the same spirit, 
and discerning and striving to attain the same high calling, 
recognizing one another as fellow members of the same body, and 
fellow-heirs of the exceeding great and precious promises. Being 
in the world yet not of it, walking separate from it, misunderstood 
and despised by it, how natural it would seem for those of such 
common hopes and experiences, to feel bound together by an 
almost indissoluble tie of love and sympathy. 



To a very great extent this union is felt and is strengthening among 
the consecrated ones; yet we apprehend that its necessity and 
advantage are not fully appreciated by all the body. Frequently we 
hear such expressions as the following among christians:-"Of 
course we cannot all see alike; the Lord permits you to see some 
things which he will not show to me and vice versa." "Of course 
our minds being differently constituted, some portions of truth you 
or I must fail to comprehend, while others may enjoy them." And 
so they think it impossible to be in fullest accord and sympathy; and 
if any two or three do agree perfectly, it is counted by them as an 
evidence of weakness on the part of some of the number; for surely 
say they, "Independent thought and study must develop 
differences." And with this belief pride often steps in and suggests 
the desirability of a little difference, lest too close an agreement be 
understood by others as an evidence of weakness. We doubt not 
that this very suggestion is the prime cause of much of the division 
which arises among saints; and that it is the special danger of those 
who having escaped from the confusion of Babylon, are seeking 
independently to prove what is truth. Let us beware of this little 
root of bitterness, so small at first as scarcely to be discerned in our 
hearts; yet if not plucked up, it will soon grow and crowd out the 
truth, as well as the love of it. 

Christian Union is a possibility. The same Spirit is promised for 
the guidance of the entire church-every member of it, and it is 
impossible to conceive that the Spirit would lead some into truth, 
and others into the exact contradiction of it. One member is not set 
to building up the body, and another to tearing it down; and where 
such work is being done, it behooves each one to see to it that he is 
not of the latter class, nor in the slightest sympathy with it. With 
such opposing sentiments we find the various denominations of the 
great Nominal Church attempting to form a certain kind of union, 
and then calling it "Christian Union." This union is effected not in 
the manner Paul indicates -through a common faith, hope, and 
experience; but by ignoring doctrine, agreeing to disagree and that 
each one shall speak well of and advance his own denominational 
interests without opposing what he believes to be error in the other, 
and so each one tells the world that the other is all right, that 
somehow, in some way, (inconceivable) these different roads are all 
so many different pathways to heaven, and they may please 
themselves as to which one they take; and though the most extreme 
discord exists among them, they claim that it is of utmost 
importance to be identified with some one of them. But this is not 
the kind of union of which Paul speaks. 

If as Paul teaches true christian unity is a possibility, let us note the 
conditions under which it may be attained:-First, he suggests that 
in all so united there must be lowliness of mind, meekness, a 
mutual bearing with one another's weaknesses and frailties covering 
all such things with the mantle of love; and then a constant 
watchfulness lest we grow weary in so doing. But the one Lord, 



one faith, one immersion, and one hope must be there as the primal 
basis of union. 

The plan which the Lord has adopted for building up and cementing 
the body of Christ, is by the appointment of various members to 
various offices for the general good of all: He gave some apostles, 
and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and 
teachers, not that the other members should receive their teaching 
without investigation, but in order to aid them in that work. Every 
thought suggested and every exposition of Scripture advanced by 
these must be brought to the test of the Word; and the testing may 
be of great service, if the assemblings of the saints be largely 
devoted to this important work, not in the spirit which so often 
marks controversy, each more anxious to maintain and establish his 
own opinions than to discover truth, but in the spirit of meekness 
which totally ignores such base considerations, in an all-absorbing 
desire to discover the Lord's will and plan. 

Controversy, and the closest scrutiny and criticism, under such 
circumstances and in such a frame of mind on the part of each 
cannot fail, under the promised guidance, to bring all such into a 
blessed unity, into oneness of faith; and to strongly cement the 
uniting bond of love and peace. He whose privilege it is to teach, 
will not be offended by such criticism if filled with this meekness 
and lowliness of mind, but will desire and encourage it so long as it 
will be satisfied by a Thus saith the Lord, as proof. But vain 
babblings and strife about matters of no importance should be 
avoided. A realization of the importance of truth, and a hungering 
for it, will find no time for "babbling." 

Those so united and harmoniously working together for the 
upbuilding of the body, must of necessity advance, and that rapidly 
in knowledge and fitness for the work of ministry. We should not 
forget that every member of the anointed body is anointed to preach 
(Isa. 61:1), called to the ministry [to the service of Christ, head and 
body,] and all our assemblings together, either personally or by 
means of the press and mails, are so many ministerial conferences 

R769 : page 8 for the purpose of enabling each to do more efficient 
service for the upbuilding of the body itself, fortifying the various 
members against the attacks of error and strengthening in each the 
comprehension and love of the truth. 

Thus all the members of the anointed body in communion with the 
Lord, filled with the same spirit, and being baptized with the same 
baptism [See article "Baptism" in TOWER of October, 1884,] may 
together advance into the oneness of the faith and of the full 
knowledge of the Son of God," being firmly bound together by the 
uniting bond of peace love. 

Let us then no longer hinder our oneness of faith by the vain and 
sinful idea that we must not see things exactly as others do, but 
must be "independent." He that is independent of the body is 
independent of its head also, and is not a member of the body, for in 



it each member is made dependent on others. So surely as we are 
living in the "Day of the Lord," so surely as the bringing back of 
Zion is in progress, so surely we are living in the time when the 
"watchmen shall see eye to eye," with clearness and harmony of 
vision; all should be of one faith and enabled to point out the 
waymarks and bulwarks so clearly that every earnest member of the 
body may see light in God's light. 



R769 : page 1 



VOL. VI. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JULY AND AUGUST, 1885. 

NOS. 11 & 12. 



page 1 



ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 40 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 
TAKE NOTICE. 



This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



page 1 

VOLUME VI. closes with this number. We revise our list every 
August and February, so that we may not continue sending the 
TOWER where it is not wanted. If your subscription commenced 
with the first of the volume, do not neglect, but advise us at once of 
your desires. Should mistakes occur, please advise us. Some from 
whom we have not heard for a long time, will find a blue mark 
opposite this paragraph. 



R770 : page 1 

THE TABERNACLE pamphlet being out of print, this issue will 
hereafter supply its place. As our usual sized paper would not 
contain it complete, we have issued a double number. A thorough 
study of the subjects herein presented, will require not less than two 
months. May these solemn lessons be as strengthening to your 
hearts as to ours. 



R769 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

"I will stand upon my watch, and fix my foot upon the Tower, and 
I will watch to see what will be said to me." Habakkuk 2:1. 

Human judgment in its fallen condition is very much inclined to 
take extreme views on whichever side of a question it looks. Like 
the pendulum of a clock, men go from one to an opposite extreme. 
The way to steady and settle our judgment is to conclude that we 
can know only what God has revealed, and come to the Bible as His 
revelation; and leaving our own opinions, make new ones strictly 
and entirely therefrom. 

This disposition to fly to opposite extremes frequently manifests 
itself in those who for years have believed that ninety-nine out of 
every hundred of the human family were en-route to everlasting 
torture. When they come to realize that the love of God would 
sanction no such thing, but that the extreme penalty of sin is 
destruction of being; and that from the destruction (death) which 



came upon the entire race through Adam's sin, a full ransom has 
been made by Jesus, and that a full RESTITUTION of all the 
forfeited rights, privileges and enjoyments of perfect life is to come 
to all in God's DUE TIME-when they see this, they become so 
overjoyed that they go to an opposite extreme and conclude that 
God is so loving that he would never be happy unless ultimately 
every human being shall be everlastingly saved. From the extreme 
view that God was all JUSTICE and without LOVE, they 
unintentionally run to the opposite extreme that He is all LOVE and 
destitute of justice. 

Beloved, let us BALANCE our warped and perverted and 
unbalanced judgments by the testimonies of God's Word. Let us 
remember that EXISTENCE is a boon from heaven, to be forced 
upon none. It is a favor, a blessing, designed only for those who 
shall appreciate it; and who will use it in harmony with the LAW 
OF RIGHT, the law of God; others cannot have it, and must cease 
to exist; not only for their own good, but for the good of all and the 
everlasting purity of God's kingdom in earth and heaven. 

Surely God has stated to us plainly that justice and equity are the 
very foundations of his throne (Psa. 89:14); and not only so, but for 
over four thousand years he illustrated the penalty of sin and the 
unrelenting, positive character of his justice, which not only 
condemned Adam (and all the race as represented in him) to death, 
destruction, but refused to FORGIVE that wilful sin, because God 
could not do so and be JUST. Rom. 3:26. 

Surely such a demonstration of justice, as God manifested in giving 
His Son to be a ransom ["corresponding price"] for all, before that 
sin could be blotted out, evidences a firmness and a justice on God's 
part that is simply sublime. It should not only be an assurance to us 
that those once justified from Adamic guilt have nothing further to 
fear therefrom (1 John 1:9), but should also assure us beyond 
question, that all who are fully released from Adamic penalty and 
guilt when on trial individually, would be dealt with in the same 
inflexibly just manner that Adam was. If obedient, life will be sure, 
as the reward; if disobedient, death [this time a second death], as 
surely as in Adam's case. And the conditions would be the same, in 
that Justice could no more forgive the personal wilful sins which 
invoked the second death, than it did the Adamic sin which invoked 
the first death. 

But, some one inquires: Will God's love every change? And if not, 
will not the same love which planned the ransom through Christ 
and the coming restitution as a result, prompt God to again redeem 
with another ransom those who go into the second death? 

We reply: God is the same yesterday, today and forever, and will 
always pity and love any of His creatures who unwillingly or 
without their own will or choice, are under the penalty of His law; 
but from the very nature of things He can have neither sympathy 
nor pity for those who with a full knowledge of the heinousness of 



sin, a full experience with its penalty, and a full knowledge of what 
it cost for their redemption from it once, and full ability to resist it, 
shall, notwithstanding all this wilfully, and designedly, despise His 
goodness and love, and violate the laws which they know divine 
wisdom enacted for the lasting good of all: with such, God cannot 
be pleased. As God hates sin because it is wrong and works evil, so 
he must "abhor" and be "angry" with such WILFUL sinners as we 
have just described. 

No; another redemption will never take place! Another ransom 
price will never be given! We confidently and strongly state this, 
because supported both by Scripture and reason, as follows: 

It is declared that Christ shall reign until he has subdued all 
enemies. Sinners are enemies through wicked works; and such as 
will not be RECONCILED to God's laws and arrangements must be 
destroyed, as it is written: "All the WICKED [wilfully so] will He 
[God] destroy." (Psa. 145:20.) The wicked shall be [re]turned 
[Heb., Shub, turned back, returned;] into hell [sheol-death; hence 
SECOND DEATH]. (Psa. 9:17.) This agrees also with the 
statements of Revelation regarding the results and termination of 
that Millennial reign: Satan and all who in that time of trial, shall 
willingly and persistently follow his example, and be thereby his 
co-workers in evil (his messengers) shall together be cast into the 
"Lake of fire," symbol of destruction-the second death. Rev. 
20:14,15. 

Nor can any one consistently claim that the second death is to be 
destroyed by a resurrection of its captives out of it, BECAUSE it is 
stated that present death- the first (the death which resulted from 
Adam's sin) is to be destroyed by resurrecting ALL who went into 
it; because redeemed from its power by the precious blood of 
Christ. These two deaths are not the same; hence the first can and 
will be destroyed, while the other everlastingly blots out of 
existence, and thus everlastingly punishes all who go into it. Those 
who cannot see more, should at least recognize the difference by 
the fact that the one is cast into and destroyed in the other. (Rev. 
20:14.) That this destruction of all willful evil doers who, under the 
favorable opportunities of the Millennium refuse to hear [heed] that 
Prophet (Acts 3:23), will take place, is evident, from the statement 
that this is at the close of that reign (Rev. 20:7-9), and that 
immediately following it everything is described as pure, holy and 
happy -no sin, and hence none of its results. Rev. 21:4,22. 

The only one of Jesus' parables which furnishes a clear outline of 
that age (Matt. 25:31-46), shows the same termination of that age, 
in which "the Son of Man shall sit on the throne of his glory" and 
judge the world. It shows that those who at the end of that trial are 
of the "goat" class, having refused to become his sheep, will be 
delivered into everlasting punishment [DEATH being the 
punishment or wages of sin] prepared or designed [only] for the 
Devil and [those who wilfully and persistently follow his precepts 
and example] his angels. 



To claim another redemption and another chance beyond that which 
the Millennium brings, as a result of the ransom given by Christ, is 
not only to add to God's Word, but to contradict it; for it declares 
that those who sin WILFULLY after knowing the truth, show that 
they despise the ransom-sacrifice and do despite to the spirit of 
FAVOR which God therein manifested toward them; and that for 
such, there remaineth no more a sacrifice for sins, but a fearful 
looking for of judgment and fiery indignation which shall 
DEVOUR these adversaries of God and his law. "Christ dieth no 
more"; and even if he did, it is declared that such put themselves in 
such a condition by opposing and despising God's 

R770 : page 1 

once manifested goodness, that it is IMPOSSIBLE TO RENEW 
THEM AGAIN UNTO REPENTANCE. See Heb. 6:4-8; 10:26-31 
and Rom. 6:9. 

The results of the Millennial Age will be so complete and perfect, 
that not one being who appreciates God's favors, and desires to 
please him, will be destroyed in the Second death; and not one will 
escape it who is not, at heart, as well as outwardly, in fullest 
sympathy with God's government and its beneficent laws in support 
of righteousness, peace and love. Christ will do this work so 
thoroughly that when the kingdom is delivered up to God even the 
Father, nothing by way of making it more perfect will remain to be 
done in the successive ages. He must reign until he has put all 
enemies under his feet. He shall not fail nor be discouraged till he 
have ESTABLISHED righteousness in the earth on a lasting basis. 
1 Cor. 15:26, and Isa. 42:4. 

Besides, suppose a case: Suppose a being to have lived through the 
Millennium under the full light and teaching of the Christ, with all 
of its lessons fully impressed upon him, who yet cherished such 
love for evil doing, that when evil is given greater liberty of action 
in the end of that age as a test of the heart sentiments he would 
follow that evil willingly, and knowingly and eagerly, and as a 
result of resisting Christ is "cut off from among the people," in the 
second death. (Acts 3:22.) Suppose for the moment, such an one 
resurrected from that Second death and tried again; what assurance 
could there be that with the SAME knowledge and liberty again at 
his command he would not do the same again? And if some one 
suggests that God COULD coerce his will, and thus compel his 
everlasting obedience, we answer, Yes; but God declares that such 
is not his design. He seeketh not such as he can compel, for he 
could compel all; but, "The Father seeketh such to worship Him" as 
"worship Him in spirit and in truth." (John 4:23,24.) Besides, if 
God is going to compel their acquiescence to his laws, why not do 
so at first without having a "second death;" and without marring the 
perfectness and bliss of future ages by trying over and over again to 
get some to consent and worship him in spirit and truth whom in 
the end he must compel? This is unanswerable. 



Again, if such were to be compelled to obedience would it not be 
degrading them below the level of manhood? Is not manhood's 
chief glory his will, his power of moral choice? And would not 
such a change as would deprive him of this freedom of choice, 
deprive him of manhood and make him merely a machine? and if so 
would it not be far more to God's glory to blot out such unworthy 
beings and create such "new machines" as he wanted if he wants 
mere machines? which evidently he does not. 

The mistake of those who fall into this error is that they do not fully 
appreciate the opportunities of the Millennial Age, and the 
abundant arrangement there, provided by divine wisdom. They 
think of it as though the sin of disobedience might possibly be one 
act, and it perhaps induced by a measure of ignorance or lack of 
experience or weakness. But no; God's provision has been 
complete: Man will not be suddenly brought to perfection and then 
suddenly exposed to trials which might sweep away his judgment, 
and over-riding his past experiences, sweep him into evil; but he 
will be brought gradually to it during that age, as in a 

R770 : page 2 

school. He will be helped to surmount the weaknesses of the fall, 
and to regain the summit of manhood's estate; helped by the 
Redeemer who purchased for him the right to return to that estate. 
Christ, in restoring to man "that which was lost" (Luke 19:10, and 
Acts 3:21) will do it in such a manner as will do the man most 
good. He will make known to him its advantages and opportunities 
[bring him to "a knowledge of the truth"] while saving him out of 
Adamic death (1 Tim. 2:4). He shall in that schooling learn what 
wilful sin is and the sureness of its punishment, and be fully 
acquainted with the fact that at the close of the age all must be in 
heart, in will, holy, and in harmony with the holy God, else they 
will be condemned to death destruction everlasting as wilful 
transgressors unworthy of God's blessings, and unfit for the ages of 
perfectness then to be introduced. 

We cannot suppose, judging from our own feelings, that MANY 
would thus sin WILFULLY and despise God's favors; nevertheless 
the fact that Satan has done so for the past six thousand years, and 
that he will when "loosed," at the end of the next age, be of the 
same disposition, notwithstanding all that he shall have witnessed 
of God's love, etc., (as God's Word positively declares;) proves that 
some are not affected to repentance by a knowledge of God's 
goodness, and reasonably leads us to conclude that there may be 
some of mankind whom it will be as "impossible to renew ...unto 
repentance" as Satan. And this conclusion Scripture sustains by 
positive declarations. 

Out of the billions of the race who have lived and will there have 
trial, it would not be many if ONE MILLION should prove 
incorrigible and be returned to sheol-destroyed in the everlasting 
destruction of the second death; but for the sake of an argument let 



us suppose that only one thousand would be of this incorrigible 
class. Let us suppose the suggested theory of some, that these who 
go into the second death will be redeemed out of it by a "ransom" 
[corresponding price] as all the race were redeemed out of the 
Adamic death. In that case it would be necessary that one thousand 
perfect beings should die to "ransom" this thousand wilful sinners. 
One Saviour could not give a ransom [a corresponding price] for all 
these, as Jesus did for the entire Adamic race numbering millions; 
because this thousand were each one, WILFUL sinners, while in the 
case of the Adamic race, there was but ONE perfect person tried; 
ONE only sinned wilfully; and hence ONE perfect being freely 
offered, was a full ransom a corresponding price. See Rom. 5:17- 
19 and 11:32. 

But to continue the supposed case and show its further 
inconsistency: Suppose that at the close of the Millennium one 
thousand of the perfected race were to present themselves as 
ransoms for the one thousand incorrigible, what a scene it would 
be a thousand Calvarys at once. And who would put them to 
death? Not the holy and righteous; they should and could no more 
slay their brethren than could the Apostles have crucified Jesus. 
Then we must suppose to carry out this incredible supposition that 
the ONE THOUSAND INCORRIGIBLES would add this to their 
wilful sins; that they would kill their redeemers: And surely no 
better proof of their incorrigibility could be imagined than a 
willingness to shed innocent blood. Jesus could pray for his 
murderers, "Father forgive them, they know not what they do," 
because they were blinded by the devil, and depraved by the fall; 
but no such prayer could be made for this class brought to a full 
knowledge of the truth. 

But some may want still further to suppose: Suppose after all this, 
they come to realize the great sacrifice these redeemers have made 
for them, would it not melt them to love and obedience? We 
answer, No; "it is impossible to renew" SUCH "to repentance." In 
the first place they could not "come to realize it," because if perfect 
and doing it wilfully, they must have realized their offence all 
along. In the second place, if the love and sufferings of Christ did 
not move them, no love and sufferings would; for "GREATER love 
hath no man than this." If with a perfect knowledge of the love of 
God for men, manifested in him who was rich yet for our sakes, 
became poor that we through his poverty might be made rich, if this 
love of Christ does not constrain them nothing would: And it is 
perfectly absurd for us to think of God trying to outdo his own 
superlatively grand exhibition of love. John 15:13. 

So far from mourning for their loss, the balance of the race will be 
so ashamed of them, that they will be relieved by their utter blotting 
out of existence. Yea, all the righteous, from Jehovah to his 
humblest intelligent creature, must rejoice, when after full 
opportunity for reformation, the Universe shall be cleansed of the 



incorrigible. Their destruction will be a mercy to themselves, as 
well as for the lasting happiness of all the righteous. 

Let us balance our judgments by the testimony of God's Word, and 
be careful to make straight paths for our FEET, lest that which is 
lame be turned out of the way-rather let it be healed. 



page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Williamsburg, Ohio. 

MY DEAR BRO.:-It is sometime since I have written you a letter, 
yet I am not forgetful of you. I am busy, preparing and reading a 
series of papers before a considerable congregation. The manner in 
which these meetings are conducted is like this: I spend from 
twenty to thirty minutes in reading an essay; after the reading is 
done each hearer is permitted to present a written query concerning 
the subject. These I answer as best I can at the next meeting. I think 
they will get quite interesting as we proceed. Why evil was 
permitted is our present theme. When we are fully under headway I 
will write you and let you know how we are coming on. I am 
preparing manuscripts from Z.W.T. in the shape of lectures which I 
intend to deliver whenever opportunity presents. I was a little slow 
to accept the doctrines held forth by the TOWER, but I wanted to 
be sure they were correct before I embraced them. I was hungering 
for something like it for some time, and it seemed a mere accident 
that I got possession of it; but I thank God that I have found the 
truth. Here is a dollar to pay for my paper, and to send some back 
numbers if you have any to spare. Send me anything that I can use 
in the lecture field. I will send more for the work by and by. I am 
happy now, since I have the truth, let come what may. 

Your Brother in Christ, . 

R771 : page 2 



London, June 29, 1885. 

DEAR MR. and MRS. RUSSELL: -Although it is so long since I 
wrote to you last, it is not decrease of interest in glad tidings which 
has kept me silent. The Z.W. TOWERS you so kindly sent are a 
source of great refreshment to me and to those to whom I make 
their contents known. Some point which has been exercising me in 
the Scriptures is touched upon in the next number that arrives. One 
of these happened to be the Baptism, about which having only been 
sprinkled and confirmed by the Church of England, I have felt 
dissatisfied in proportion as I have become more enlightened. 
Before separating from the Church of England I saw the error of 
infant baptism and I perceived that it was open to me to decide 
whether I would be immersed or not according to my conscience; 



then I endeavored to find a set of christians who would perform the 
office for me without seeking by enrollment with their special 
tenets, but I did not succeed. I am not satisfied without fulfilling 
this outward symbol, simply because the Lord enjoined it so hope 
to be given the opportunity very shortly of taking this step together 
with some I have been teaching. 

I am extremely obliged to you for sending all that you have sent, 
but if you knew how many more copies of the "Food" and 
"Tabernacle" I could use you would try to spare me some more; ere 
long I trust you will receive some money from me to pay for your 
supply of them to me and my friends. It is so strange that where 
ever I have lent the books they are almost invariably lost or mislaid 
so long that one would be tempted to think it had been done on 
purpose; on the other hand I have friends craving to read them. On 
two occasions, an opportunity has been given to me to speak of the 
glad tidings; but Satan tried to hinder. At one place, having found a 
quiet earnest body of believers on a retired street belonging to no 
particular sect, I offered to lay before them all that I myself had 
learned. They received me cordially, and requested me three times 
to meet them, once at a general assembly. Having made a large wall 
copy from your Chart of the Ages I hung it up on the wall and sat 
amidst those earnest thirsty people to tell them the good news, 
inviting them to question me afterwards, which they did; some very 
sharply, and as if to trip me; but let the Lord receive all praise! it 
was given me to answer quietly, and one of the most arrogant of my 
opponents came up afterwards wrung my hand and thanked me 
begging I would return again. But the Salvation Army, it seems had 
begun to influence these christians so that my teachings offering to 
go further than it's teachings made them afraid, I think, to give ear 
beyond the time I was with them. I left a copy of "Food" which 
they promised to meet together and study with the Scriptures; but 
curiously enough so soon as I had left for London the book was 
lost. However, many men and women have become interested in 
the teachings, to whom I distributed the sample TOWERS. My 
work lies chiefly at the present time among detached individuals; 
and in writing to the absent. Only one, truly enlightened, lives near 
me, a police constable, who is too poor to send the money he 
would, to you, having a large family. He longs for a Diaglott of his 
own: I have lent him mine occasionally. Before long I could buy 
him one I think, and if so, will send the money to you; but can you 
supply him with regular TOWERS and some of the books? he has a 
wide means of working; at present, he has my papers to read and 
that is all. He and I only were able to keep the anniversary of our 
Lord's marvelous sacrifice as units.... 

I am, dear friends, yours affectionately, 
page 2 



Riddlesburg, Pa. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I now enclose my subscription for '85, 
together with a small sum for the Tract Fund. 

I have been a reader of the TOWER for three years and I thank God 
that it was sent to me, as I believe through Divine providence. 
When I first received the paper I was a Class-leader in the 
Methodist Church and also Sunday School superintendent. Since 
that time I have withdrawn from the church (?) and am walking the 
narrow way. I was about to say alone, but, thank God, I am 
accompanied by my Leader and Guide. 

My name has been cast out, and I am no longer an "influential" 
person, but I am doing what I can to bring others to a knowledge of 
the truth as it is in Christ Jesus. The TOWER comes to me monthly 
like a gentle shower to a thirsty land, and I am refreshed and 
invigorated, and am enabled through the grace of Him who loved 
us, to withstand the wiles of the adversary. 

May God bless your efforts to extend the tidings of salvation to all 
men. 

Your brother in the work, . 

R771 : page 2 

Argentine Republic, South America. 

TO EDITOR ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

Respected Sir: I again write you for a repetition of your favor. I 
previously wrote you from city of Callao, Peru, giving you 
information of how a fragment of your "Food for Hungry 
Christians" accidentally fell into my hands from an Italian sailor, 
and asking you for a complete copy of the same, to which you at 
once made reply by forwarding me the copy and also several copies 
of your WATCH TOWER. Before, however, I had time for the full 
examination I could have wished, my friend, C.W.H., then in 
Callas, carried them off from me, and as I embarked in a ship 
making the round trip to Valparaiso, Lobus Island, and finally to 
England, I lost the run of the book. 

I am much pleased with the annual celebration of the Lord's 
Supper, as noticed in one of the numbers of WATCH TOWER you 
sent me. Now, I want you to send me the September sample number 
of WATCH TOWER, also, "Teachings of the Tabernacle," and one 
other copy of "Food for Christians." 

It is needless for me to inform you how very much interested I am 
in this movement, and to give you my promise of earnest support. 

I now leave you, in the hope of future pleasant correspondence, 
with the good old Spanish parting of "May God be with you." I 
remain, therefore, 

Yours sincerely, 



page 2 



Philadelphia, Pa. 

DEAR MR. RUSSELL:-I cannot sufficiently express my gratitude 
for ZION'S WATCH TOWER. Each paper has created a longing 
for more which seems to increase every time I read it. I have not 
been altogether silent respecting its contents either. The relics of 
early training twine tenaciously about me, but it seems to me they 
are loosening and must finally be cast aside, for the old dogmas 
quake before the simple truth, and some of them shiver to pieces 
and decay before the light that has dawned on my vision. 

Thank God, for the light; it shall shine on and on until the world 
shall see the "castles in the air" -the fabrications of men- lying in 
ruins; the "houses built upon the sand" swept away and the true 
Church having for its foundation "The Rock of Ages," shall raise 
her meek and lowly head above the tumult of falling systems, and 
bid defiance to the storm which shall sweep the world of its 
calumnious teachings and lay waste the fabulous constructions of 
the world's praised ones. 

I remain yours in Christian love, 
R771 : page 2 

Dover, 111. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Since I accidently found your 
paper, "Food for Thinking Christians" more than three years ago, a 
flood of light has been pouring in upon me. How inexpressibly 
grand the whole plan of salvation appears, and yet how plain and 
simple. Strange it is that so few will believe it, and hate those who 
do; but that was the way they treated our Master. I can afford to 
have my name cast out as evil if I can be of the number that shall 
overcome. The more closely I compare the Word of God with the 
present state of the Nominal Church and the world, the more clearly 
I see the truth of your position that the Lord is really present and 
has commenced his harvest work. 

Your brother in Christ. . 



Halifax, England. 

TO THE EDITOR OF ZION'S WATCH TOWER.-Sir:-A 

pamphlet has been lately put into my hands entitled, "Food for 
Thinking Christians." It has greatly instructed and interested me, 
and led me into a new region of biblical teaching, presenting many 
aspects of truth altogether overlooked, the importance and 



scripturalness of which appear to me most clear and well founded. I 
have a strong desire to receive further teaching in the same 
direction; and I find a note appended on the cover which applies 
unmistakably to my case, therefore I eagerly avail myself of the 
suggestion to write to you. I should like to read and study "The 
Tabernacle and its Teachings" in the light which God has given you 
on the matter. 

If ZION'S WATCH TOWER is a periodical publication, I should 
like to see a copy of it, and should be glad to know where it may 
regularly be obtained. I desire also that others also may be made 
acquainted with the like precious truths. 

Yours gratefully and respectfully, 



R770 : page 2 

CONSIDER yourself the guardian of the character of those who 
may be absent, as you would wish others to guard your character in 
your absence. 



LITTLE pains and little annoyances and little discomforts are as 
much a part of our discipline as are the formidable adversities that 
occasionally smite us like hurricanes. T. L. Cuyler. 



R771 : page 3 



EARTH'S JUBILEE 

FOLLOWS THE 

GREAT DAY OF ATONEMENT. 

Blow ye the trumpet blow 
The gladly solemn sound; 
Let all the nations know, 
To earth's remotest bound: 

The year of Jubilee is come; 
Return ye ransomed sinners home. 
Jesus, our Great High Priest 
Hath full atonement made: 

Ye weary spirits, rest; 
Ye mournful souls, be glad. 
The year of Jubilee is come; 
Return, ye ransomed sinners, home. 

Extol the Lamb of God, 
The all-atoning Lamb; 
Redemption through His blood, 
To all the world proclaim. 



The year of Jubilee is come; 
Return, ye ransomed sinners, home. 
Ye who were sold for naught, 
Whose heritage was lost, 

Shall have it back for naught, 
A gift at Jesus' cost. 
The year of Jubilee is come; 
Return, ye ransomed sinners, home. 

The Seventh Trumpet hear, 
The news of heavenly grace; 
And, saved from death, appear 
Before the Saviour's face. 

The year of Jubilee is come; 
Return, ye ransomed sinners, home. 



page 3 



THE TYPICAL TABERNACLE AND ITS 
TEACHINGS. 



ITS FURNITURE-ITS APARTMENTS-ITS PEOPLE. 

The Tabernacle which God commanded Israel to construct in the 
Wilderness, in connection with which all their religious services 
and ceremonies were instituted, was, Paul assures us, a shadow of 
good things to come. (Heb. 8:5; 10:1; Col. 2:17.) In fact the whole 
nation of Israel, with their laws and their religious services and 
ceremonies, was typical. This being true, our understanding of the 
plan and work of salvation now in progress, as well as their future 
development, cannot fail to be greatly enlightened by a careful 
study of that Jewish shadow, which was repeated year by year 
continually for the edification of the saints during the Christian 
Age. 1 Pet. 1:12. 

It is not simply to gain a historical knowledge of the Jewish forms, 
ceremonies and worship, that we come to the investigation of this 
subject, but that we may be edified by understanding the substance 
from an examination of the shadow, as God designed in arranging 
it. 

We will fail to attach sufficient weight and importance to the 
shadow, unless we realize how carefully God guided and directed 
all of its details: First, He took Moses up into the mount and gave 
him an illustration of just how things were to be made; Secondly, 
He charged him to be very careful-"See, saith He, that thou make 
all things after the pattern showed to thee in the mount." (Heb. 8:5; 
Exod. 25:40.) So too, with all the minutia of the service; every jot 



and tittle must be performed in the type, because it illustrated 
something great and grand coming after. And in order that these 
shadows might all be exactly performed, and that the people might 
not become careless, the usual penalty for any violation was death: 
For instance-2 Sam. 6:6,7; Lev. 10:1,2; Ex. 28:43; Num. 4:15,20; 
and 17:13. 

Realizing God's care in making the "shadow," should not only give 
us confidence in its correctness, that not one jot or tittle of it shall 
fail until all shall be fulfilled (Matt. 5:18.) but, it should also 
awaken in us so great an interest in God's plan, as would lead us to 
examine closely, and search carefully, for the meaning of those 
shadows: And this, with God's promised blessing we now propose 
to do, assured that among those who are truly God's consecrated 
ones- children begotten of the Spirit-"He that seeketh findeth; and 
to him that knocketh, it shall be opened." 

The directions given to Moses for the construction of the 
Tabernacle may be found in Exod. 25 to 27, and the account of the 
performance of the work, in Exod. 35 to 40. Briefly stated, the 
Tabernacle was a house constructed of a series of boards "overlaid" 
or plated with gold, and set on end into sockets of silver, and firmly 
fastened together by bars of the same wood (Shittim) also covered 
with gold. 

This structure was 15 feet wide, 15 feet high, and 45 feet long, open 
at the front or east end. It was covered by a large linen cloth, with 
figures of cherubim woven into it, in blue, purple and scarlet colors. 
The open end, or front of the structure was closed by a curtain of 
similar material to the covering cloth, called the "door," or first vail. 
Another cloth of the same materials and colors, and similarly 
woven with figures of cherubim called the "Vail" (or second vail) 
was hung under the taches, and divided the Tabernacle into two 
apartments. The first or larger apartment 15 feet wide and 30 feet 
long was called "The Holy."* The second or rear-most apartment 
15 feet wide and 15 feet long was called "The Most Holy." Over 
this Tabernacle proper, was a tent to shelter it and protect it from 
the weather. It was made of a covering of cashmere cloth or goat's 
hair, another of ram skins dyed red, and another of seal skins, 
translated badger skins. 

The Tabernacle was surrounded by a yard or "court" toward the rear 
of which, it stood. This court 75 feet wide and 150 feet long was 
formed by a fence of linen curtains suspended from silver hooks, 
set in the tops of wooden posts 7-1/2 feet high, which were set in 
heavy sockets of copper, (translated brass,) and braced like the tent 
with cords and pins. This enclosure was all holy ground, and was 
therefore called the "holy place" also the "Court of the 
Tabernacle." Its opening, like the door of the Tabernacle, was 
towards the east, and was called the "gate." The "gate" was of linen 
embroidered with blue, purple and scarlet. It will be noticed that the 
three entrance passages, viz: "the gate" to the Court or "holy place"- 



-"the door" to the "Holy" and "the vail" to the "Most Holy" were of 
the same material and colors. 

The furniture of the court consisted of but two pieces: the "Brazen 
Altar" and the "Laver." 

THE BRAZEN ALTAR. 

First on entering the gate and immediately in front of it, stood the 
Brazen Altar. This altar was made of wood and covered with 
copper, it was 7-1/2 feet square, 4-1/2 feet high. It had various 
utensils belonging to its service-fire pans, called Censers, for 
carrying the fire to the Incense Altar; basins to receive the blood; 
flesh-hooks, shovels, etc. 

THE LAVER. 

Next, between the Brazen Altar and the door of the Tabernacle, 
was the Laver. It was made of polished copper and was a receptacle 
for water for the washing of the priests before entering the 
Tabernacle. 

The furniture of the Tabernacle consisted of a Table, a Candlestick 
and an Incense Altar in the Holy, and the Ark of the Testimony in 
the Most Holy. 

THE TABLE OF SHEW BREAD. 

Within the Tabernacle on the right (north) stood the wooden 
"Table" overlaid with gold, and upon it were placed twelve cakes of 
unleavened bread in two rows or piles, with frankincense on top of 
each pile. (Lev. 24:6) The bread was for the priests; it was holy, and 
was renewed on the seventh or Sabbath day. 

THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK. 

Opposite the Table was the "Candlestick" made of pure gold, 
beaten work (hammered out) having seven branches and in each 
branch a lamp. It was the only light in "The Holy," for as we have 
seen, the natural light was obscured by the walls and curtains, and 
there were no windows. 

Further on, close up to "the Vail" stood a small altar of wood, 
covered with gold, called the "Golden Altar" or "Incense Altar." It 
had no fire upon it except as the priests brought it in the censers, 
which they set in the top of this golden altar, and then crumbled the 
incense upon it, giving forth fragrant perfume. 

THE ARK OF THE TESTIMONY. 

Beyond the vail, in the Most Holy, there was but one piece of 
furniture the Ark. It was a rectangular box made of wood overlaid 
with gold, having a lid or cover of pure gold called the Propitiatory, 
improperly translated "Mercy Seat." Upon it (and of the same 



piece) were two cherubs of gold-beaten work. Within this Ark 
(under the Propitiatory) were placed the golden bowl of manna, and 
Aaron's rod that budded, and the two tables of the law. (Heb. 9:4) 
Upon the Propitiatory, a supernatural light appeared, shining out 
between the cherubim: This was the only light in the Most Holy. 

It is noticeable that everything inside the Tabernacle was of gold, 
while in the court everything was of copper. Wood, which was used 
as the basis, and was covered by these metals was used, we believe, 
to make the articles lighter of weight, than if of solid metal. This 
would be an important consideration when they traveled. The 
vessels of the Temple, representative of the same things were of the 
solid metals. (1 Kings 7:23,48.) These two metals, gold and copper, 
were used, we think, to represent two different natures-copper, 
representing the human nature in its perfection; and gold 
representing the divine nature-much alike in their appearance, yet 
different in quality, as the human is an image of the Divine nature. 

It will be noticed that the arrangement of the structure formed three 
general parts the 

CAMP, COURT, AND TABERNACLE. 

The Camp represented the condition of the world of mankind in 
sin, typified by all Israel. These were separated from all holy things 
by the curtain of white linen, which to those within represents a 
wall of faith, but to those without, a wall of unbelief which 
hindered their view of, and access to, the holy things within. The 
only way to enter the "Holy Place" or "Court" was to come through 
the "gate" Jesus. "I am the way.. .no man cometh unto the Father 
but by me." John 14:6. 

The Court represented the condition of Justification, entered 
through faith in Christ, the "gate." Into this court, only Levites 
(typical of justified believers) were allowed to come. These have 
access to the Brazen Altar and Laver, and do service in the Court, 
but have no right as Levites (believers) to go into the Tabernacle; 
no, nor even to look into it. (Num. 4:19,20.) Here in the "Court" all 
things were of copper. 

The Tabernacle represented the condition of all who have changed 
their nature; that is, those who have consecrated their human nature 
to death, and have become partakers of the Divine nature by being 
begotten of the Spirit. And no human being, be he ever so full of 
faith, be he washed from every sin, and in God's sight justified 
freely from all things, reckoned perfect, can have any place or 
privilege in Divine things unless he fully consecrate or sacrifice 
himself. He cannot even look into spiritual things in the sense of 
appreciating them. "The natural man receiveth not the things of the 
Spirit,. ..neither can he know them, because they are spiritually 
discerned." 1 Cor. 2:14,12. 

All things in the Tabernacle were of gold representing the Divine 
nature, and only those of the Levites who were consecrated to the 



work of sacrifice (the Priests) had access to the Tabernacle. So only 
those of the household of faith, who are consecrated to sacrifice, 
enter the Divine conditions represented in the Tabernacle. 

The "Court" or justified human condition was entered by faith only; 
but while we must retain the faith that justifies, we must do more, if 
we would change our nature and become "new creatures" 
partakers of the Divine nature. If we would enter the Tabernacle or 
Divine condition, we must crucify the justified flesh, presenting our 
human wills and bodies a living sacrifice to God; no longer to seek 
for human pleasure, honor, praise, etc., but to be dead to these and 
alive to the heavenly ones. Yet into this condition also, we come 
through Christ Jesus our Lord, who not only opened for us the 
"gate," but also opened to us the "door" into the Tabernacle "a new" 
way of life through and beyond the vail. Heb. 10:20. 

The two apartments of the Tabernacle, the Holy and the Most Holy, 
represented two phases or stages of the Divine life. The "Holy" 
represented the present condition of those begotten of God through 
the Word, these are Divine minded, "new creatures," who though 
still "in the flesh" have their real life and walk with God within the 
vail and beyond the sight of the world, and the unconsecrated 
believers. These enjoy the light of the candlestick, eat of the special 
food, and offer at the golden altar. 

The "Most Holy" represented our perfected condition as new 
creatures, when born from the dead in the resurrection. Then being 
beyond both vails the fleshly mind and fleshly body, we shall be 
glorious spiritual bodies, as well 



*Frequently this in the English translation is improperly called the 
"holy place;" and in such instances the word place will be found in 
italics, indicating that it has been supplied by the translators, as for 
instance in Exod. 26:33. This error is quite confusing as "the court" 
was properly called "the holy place." When place, is not in italics, 
"the court" is always meant. See Lev. 14:13 and 6:27. In some 
instances "The Holy," is termed "The Tabernacle of the 
congregation" and the "Most Holy," the "Sanctuary" is also 
sometimes called "the Holy place" [place in italics.] instances, Lev. 
16:17,20,33. In our mention of them we will call those apartments 
severally, "The Camp," "The Court," "The Holy," and "Most Holy." 

A lack of appreciation of the necessity of uniform exactness, and of 
our interest in these typical pictures, on the part of the translators of 
Leviticus, must have been the cause of the varied translations which 
have so aided in confusing the student. 

page 4 

as spiritually minded. We shall be like our Leader, our forerunner 
beyond the vail, who, having entered, hath consecrated for us this 
new and living way. The spiritual minded creature in the "Holy," by 
faith looks forward through the rent Vail into the "Most Holy" 



catching glimpses of the glory, honor and immortality beyond the 
flesh; which hope is an anchor entering into that beyond the vail. 
Heb. 6:19; and 10:20. 

We see, then, that justification by faith, brings us into a condition of 
peace with God. Our sins being forgiven, we are a step nearer to 
God, but still humanin the Court. If we would attain to the prize 
of our high calling which is OF GOD in Christ Jesus, and enter in 
through the "Holy" to the "Most Holy," we must follow 

IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF JESUS 

our Leader and Head-"the High Priest of our profession." By faith 
in his ransom we have entered the "gate" to the Courtthe Vail of 
unbelief and sin is passed. By renouncing our human will and all 
our human aspiration and hopes, we pass the first vail, or vail of 
human mindedness, counting our human will as dead; henceforth 
not consulting it, but the will of God only. 

We now find ourselves as "new creatures" in the "Holy"-in the first 
of "the Heavenlies" or Holies (Eph. 2:6. -Diaglott); and here we 
are enlightened by the Golden Candlestick, (God's Word) refreshed 
and strengthened daily with the truth as bread lawful only for the 
Priests to eat. (Matt. 12:4.) And thus enlightened and strengthened, 
we are daily offering up sacrifices at the "Golden Altar," acceptable 
to God by Jesus Christ-a sweet perfume to our Father. 1 Pet. 2:5.* 

Thus, all the saints, the consecrated, are in a "heavenly" or "holy" 
condition now "seated (at rest and communion) with Christ in (the 
first of these) heavenly places," but not yet in the Holiest of all. No; 
another vail must first be passed: As the passing of the preceding 
vail was the death of the human will, so the passing of the second 
vail is the death of the human body; and it requires both to 
complete our sacrifice: Both fleshly mind and fleshly body must 
first be passed before we shall be in the "Holiest of all"-perfected 
as partakers of the Divine nature and conditions. 

With these thoughts as to the three conditions represented by these 
three places-Camp, Court and Tabernacle, let us notice particularly 
the three classes occupying these conditions, viz.: the Unbelieving 
World, Justified Believers and the Saints or Consecrated Believers; 
typified respectively by 

ISRAELITES, LEVITES AND THE PRIESTHOOD. 

In understanding the significance of the Tabernacle service, it is 
necessary not only to get a clear idea of the structure, its furniture 
and their typical signification, but also of the actors and their 
significance as types. 

Israel is used in many instances to typify the Christian Church. For 
instance: When they left Egyptian bondage, they were a type of 
God's children who hear his call to come out from the world and 
engage in his worship. 



The wilderness journey represents the tedious pilgrimage through 
which many pass, seeking the promised Canaan rest "Come unto 
me and I will give you rest." As in the type, so in reality, the 
promised Canaan of rest is not far off, if God's children had faith 
enough to go up and enter in. God has made abundant provision for 
them: Yet they journey through the wilderness of sin seeking rest 
but finding none, because they lack faith in God's promises. Some 
wander thus a long time; some never enter the Canaan rest because 
of unbelief. But while Israel, according to the flesh, is thus and in 
other ways used to typify the spiritual Israel, yet, it is a totally 
different type, as we are now examining it, in its relation to the 
Tabernacle. Here, Israel unquestionably typifies the whole world of 
mankind. The sin-offerings, sacrifices, atonement, etc., made 
typically for them, (and them only) were typical of better sacrifices 
and atonement, made on behalf of the whole world; for, "He is a 
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins 
of the whole world." 1 John 2:2. 

In a word, Israel, as well as the Tabernacle, Priests, Levites and 
Sacrifices, was a type. And that which was there done in symbol, is, 
since the first advent of Christ, being carried out on a higher plane, 
and on a larger scale; the latter being the reality, of which that was 
the type or shadow. 

As Israel typified the world, so the tribe of Levites typified the 
"Household of faith," or all believers in Jesus and his ransom. The 
Priesthood, one body under one chief or High Priest, was typical of 
the "little flock" who with their "Head" or High Priest are to be 
Kings and Priests to reign on the earth. Rev. 5:10. Thus viewed we 
see Jesus the High Priest not of the Aaronic order which was but 
the type of our profession or order, the real priesthood of which 
others were but figures. Heb. 3:1; 4:14. 

But before these members of the body of Christ, the priesthood, 
shall be united to their Head and begin their reign, they must first 
"suffer with him" in making the sacrifices, as we shall shortly see. 2 
Tim. 2:12. 

Peter shows who were typified by the priests, when, addressing 
those who are sanctified, he says: (1 Pet. 1:2 and 2:5,9.) "Ye 
are.. .an holy priesthood to offer up sacrifices acceptable to God by 
Jesus Christ." "Ye are.. .a royal priesthood." 

That the head or chief of this priesthood, this "little flock," is Jesus, 
is repeatedly mentioned by the apostles. We give but one quotation: 
"Holy brethren (the Royal Priesthood) partakers of the Heavenly 
calling, consider the apostle and High Priest of our profession, 
Christ Jesus. Heb. 3:1. 

As we now pass to the consideration of the inauguration of the 
typical priesthood, we notice that the tribe of the Levites (typical of 
believers or the Justified) existed for a long time before the 
Priesthood was instituted. So in the antitype, the "Royal 
Priesthood" began with the anointing of Jesus the High Priest (at 



baptism, Luke 3:22; Acts 10:38.) but believers, justified by faith in 
Christ, had lived long before that. For instance- Abraham believed 
God, and was justified by his faith. (Rom. 4:2,3.) Though even the 
type had not yet come in his day, yet Abraham as a justified 
believer was a member of the "household of faith," typified by the 
Levites. But none of the "Royal Priesthood" were selected until 
after the Chief or High Priest of this order was first initiated and 
installed in office; since then the initiation and installment of the 
under priests has been the special work of this Christian 
dispensation. Thus, the priests now being installed and now 
sacrificing, are being prepared as God's instruments for the blessing 
of the world. 

THE PRIESTHOOD. 

THEIR ANOINTING AND CONSECRATION. 

In this ceremony, as in every other, relating to the ordination and 
work of the priesthood, it will be well to notice that Jesus was the 
first-the Leader, Captain, Forerunner-teaching clearly that none 
preceded him, hence that none of the Patriarchs or Prophets are of 
the "little flock," "the royal priesthood," "the Bride, the Lamb's 
wife. " Though they will be greatly blessed as the Lord's servants, 
their service will not be so grandly high as that of the priests, nor 
their honor so great; though, as represented in the Levites, both 
their service and honor are great. "The narrow way to life" 
(Immortality) was not opened up until Jesus came. He was the first 
to walk in it. He "brought life and immortality to light. " (2 Tim. 
1:10.) And though all believers (Levites) shall become possessors 
of everlasting life, and the world (Israel) also, if they will accept it 
during the Millennial age; yet, only the priesthood, who overcome 
and follow their Leader in the narrow way to life-sacrificing the 
human-thus seeking Glory, Honor and Immortality, will ever 
become the possessors of that unlimited degree of life called 
Immortality, as yet possessed only by Jehovah and our Lord Jesus. 
(See "Food for Thinking Christians," page 134, "The narrow way to 
life.") 

Under the Law, the ANOINTING was the ceremony by which the 
Priests were installed in God's service. The Priests were anointed to 
their office with a peculiar ointment, called the Holy Anointing Oil, 
used upon none but the Priests, and unlawful for any one else to 
have or to make. (Exod. 30:25-33.) This oil typified the Holy Spirit 
of adoption whereby we the real, "Royal Priesthood" are sealed. 
Only the consecrated ones are ever to be anointed thus. Aaron, the 
typical High Priest, represented Jesus the head, and the church, as 
members of the body of the great High Priest. Being but a sinful 
man like others, he had to be washed in order to fitly represent the 
purity of the antitype. Aaron was then clothed with the holy 
garments of "glory and beauty," (Exod. 28.) and then the anointing 
oil was poured on his head. Each article of this glorious apparel was 



typical of qualities and powers of the Great Deliverer head and 
body, which Jehovah discerned looking down into the future to the 
time for "the manifestation of the Sons of God," and the fulfillment 
in them of his promises. 

THE HIGH PRIEST IN GARMENTS OF TYPICAL 
"GLORY AND BEAUTY." 

And these are the garments. ..a breastplate, and an ephod, and an 
upper robe, and a broidered coat, a mitre and a girdle. Exod. 28:4. 

The linen "coat" represented the High Priest's purity, while its 
embroidery showed the outgrowth of that character in works. The 
"mitre," a strip of fine linen, (typical of righteousness) worn around 
the forehead, to which was fastened with a blue lacer, the golden 
plate or "crown" shows that the crown is righteously his. Upon the 
golden plate was inscribed, "Holiness to the Lord," thus 
proclaiming: This High Priest is entirely devoted to the 
accomplishment of Jehovah's purposes. The golden crown 
proclaims his royalty: He is to be "a priest upon his throne"-"a 
priest forever after the order of Melchizedek. " (Psa. 1 10:4.) The 
linen "girdle" indicates a righteous servant; linen -righteousness; 
girdle servitude. 

The "upper robe," of blue, represents his faithfulness. The fringe of 
it was made of golden bells and pomegranates. The pomegranate, 
being a choice fruit, showed that the faithful performance of his 
work of sacrifice had borne rich fruit- the redemption of the 
forfeited life of the human race. The golden bells signified that 
when the High Priest appears in glory and beauty, the fruit of the 
sacrificial work shall be made manifest to all proclaimed to all the 
world, as in the type, the bells proclaimed it to all Israel. This is 
indicated by the close proximity; the bells drawing attention to the 
fruit. 

The "ephod" was made of a cloth of purple, blue, scarlet, white and 
gold threads; interwoven skillfully and beautifully. It was of two 
parts, one hanging in front and the other over the back. These two 
parts were fastened together by two gold clasps which rested on the 
shoulders. This ephod, we believe, typified two covenants: the 
Abrahamic represented by the front part, and the New Covenant 
represented by the back part, both of which are thus shown to be 
dependent on this High Priest. They are laid on him; if he fails to 
support them they must fall to the ground. But, thank God, they are 
firmly clasped on him by the Gold clasps, (Divine power) as well as 
bound to him by the "Curious Girdle" a cord made of the same 
materials as the ephod. This girdle seems to say, this is a servant; 
and as this is the girdle of the ephod it tells us that this one is- "The 
messenger (servant) of the Covenant whom ye delight in." Mai. 3:1. 

True the Abrahamic Covenant is partially fulfilled in the person of 
the High Priest-who is the Seed, the spiritual seed, which is to 
bless all. But as we have seen, the Abrahamic covenant has two 



phases; the heavenly, or spiritual seed, and the fleshly seed, the 
literal descendents of Abraham; the latter the only one recognized 
by Abraham, the spiritual being hid. During the Gospel Age the 
spiritual seed develops, becoming members of the body of the High 
Priest; growing up into the head. After this spiritual seed has been 
developed, then that phase of the covenant, understood by Abraham 
and all his descendants to this day, will be fulfilled; its fulfilment 
hangs on the great spiritual High Priest. So says Paul: "As 
concerning the Gospel [the spiritual part of the covenant] they [the 
literal seed] are enemies for your sakes; but as touching the election 
they are [still] beloved for the fathers' sakes. For the gifts and 
callings of God are not things he will repent of. For this is my 
covenant TO THEM. There shall come out of Zion [the spiritual] 
the deliverer, [this great High Priest, the servant of the Covenant - 
Jesus the head and the "little flock" his body] and shall turn away 
ungodliness from Jacob. Rom. 11:26-29. 

So then, after the body of Christ, the spiritual "seed" is complete, 
the Abrahamic covenant must have a fulfillment to the fleshly seed; 
that fleshly seed must become great "as the sand by the sea shore" 
as the heavenly seed is likened to "the stars of heaven." They must 
first be turned to righteousness and truth, and then become an 
agency through which the spiritual seed will operate, to bless all 
mankind with truth and knowledge. 

Thus the earthly phase of the Abrahamic covenant is seen still to 
depend on and to be upheld by the Great High Priest, who is also 
the mediator of the "New Covenant" which Jesus sealed or ratified 
with his own blood, in which sacrifice, the members of his BODY 
have been privileged to join with him; and they will be also 
privileged to share with him in conferring upon mankind the 
blessings of that "New Covenant" when the day of sacrifice is 
ended and the reign of glory begins. (Jer. 31:31; Ezek. 11:19 and 
36:24; Rom. 11:27.) This New Covenant is typified by the back 
part of the ephod. 

The scarlet, blue, purple, etc., which composed the ephod, indicated 
the conditions of the covenant; the scarlet showed how God 
provides redemption from the Adamic curse through the blood of 
the ransom; the white linen indicated the restoration of man to his 
original purity; the blue vouchsafes to him the ability to faithfully 
maintain his righteous character; the purple proclaims the 
restoration of the royalty of earth as possessed by Adam, earth's 
first monarch. All of these blessings are woven together made 
sure, by the Divine power of the anointed Priest, as shown by the 
interwoven thread of gold. That part of the Abrahamic covenant 
referring to the spiritual seed, is represented as complete in God's 
sight. They all, as God sees them, are born of the Spirit to the 
completeness of the Divine nature, represented in the person of the 
Priest. Thus Jehovah has laid all these covenants upon one who is 
both mighty and willing to execute these glorious covenanted 
blessings-"in due time." 



The Breastplate of Judgment was placed on the front of the ephod. 
It was suspended by a gold chain from the clasps on the shoulder, 
and was fastened to the ephod by a lacer, through golden rings 
this fastening being so concealed underneath, that to the casual 
observer it might appear to be a part of the ephod. (Exod. 28:26- 
28.) This breast-plate represents beautifully the Law: It was not a 
part of the Abrahamic covenant (Ephod) but "it was added" to it. 
(Gal. 3:19.) As the 



*The word spiritual in this text is omitted by the Sinaitic MS. with 
evident propriety, as not spiritual but human rights, privileges, life, 
etc., are sacrificed. 

page 5 

Israelite regarded them, not seeing the hidden connection, the 
covenant to Abraham and "the law which was 430 years after," 
were all one: But Paul shows us that there are two parts two seeds- 
-to this covenant: the spiritual, and the natural; and that the 
Covenant and the Law were distinct "to the end that the promise 
might be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of the Law, 
but to that also which is of the Faith." Rom. 4:16. 

This Law emblem (the Breast-plate) was one of the most beautiful 
of the High Priest's garments; it was made of the same materials as 
the ephod. It had in it, set in gold, twelve precious jewels, in which 
were engraved the names of the twelve tribes. It was bound on his 
heart, indicating that it was precious to him. As a "breast-plate of 
righteousness" it covered him. That which condemned all imperfect 
ones was his pleasure "I delight to do thy will O my God; yea, thy 
law is within my heart." Psa. 40:8. 

The breast-plate was two spans long and one wide, folded in the 
middle, i.e., a span long and a span wide double. The size, a span, 
indicates that the Law of God is the full measure of a perfect man's 
ability. Jesus, being perfect, was the only one who ever kept it fully, 
while his BODY has his righteousness imputed. 

Its being double, of the same size and measure, represents the letter 
and the spirit of the law. The front part contained the jewels and 
was hung by the gold chain to the gold clasps of the ephod; the 
under part was fastened to the ephod. This latter, tied to the ephod 
(covenant) seems to represent the law in letter as presented to 
fleshly Israel. The former, or front part seems to illustrate the spirit 
of the law fulfilled in us, "who walk not after the flesh but after the 
spirit." (Rom. 8:4.) The two are really ONE when rightly seen, yet 
the front part only, bears the precious jewels. Pure gold being a 
symbol of divine things, the dependence of this part of the Law by a 
gold chain, from the gold clasps, seems to teach that the Law is 
kept by divine power; and so we know, it is by divine strength that 
we walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. It is this phase of the 
Law which bears the "jewels" set in gold representative of the true 



Israel. "They shall be mine in the day that I come to make up my 
jewels." Thus embedded in gold (the divine nature) and upheld by 
the golden chain of divine promises, what wonder that "the 
righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us." 

As Aaron stood there clothed in these typically glorious and 
beautiful robes and anointed with the holy oil, his head representing 
Jesus-the head of the priesthood, and his body representing the 
Church complete in him, how impressive his significance, as a type 
of the World's High Priest, undefiled, and clothed with power and 
authority to carry out Jehovah's covenants. We see the BODY again 
typified individually by the under priests who wore bonnets 
covering their own heads to indicate that they were not the head of 
the Priesthood, but members of his body. God gave Jesus "to be the 
head over all things to the church which is his body." Eph. 1:22,23. 

It is for this reason that Paul insists that a woman's head should be 
covered as indicating that she is not the head; the husband and wife 
being typical of Jesus and his Bride-the Church of the first-born. 
These under priests were robed in linen garments, the imputed 
righteousness of Jesus, and girdled, showing that they also were 
servants. 

As Aaron had the Holy Oil poured upon his head, so our Head, 
Jesus, was anointed with the antitypical oil-the Holy Spirit-when 
he was thirty years of age, on the banks of Jordan, at the time of his 
consecration. There he was "anointed with the oil of gladness above 
his fellows"-as head over all the joint-heirs. A measure of the 
Spirit is given to every man who thus consecrates; but Jehovah 
gave "not the Spirit by measure unto Him." (John 3:34.) John saw 
and bare record that our High Priest was thus anointed (John 1:32; 
Luke 4:1), and Peter adds his testimony (Acts 10:38), "How God 
anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power." 

The anointing oil was poured only upon the head. The under priests 
were not anointed individually: Since they were recognized as 
members of the High Priest's body, they received their anointing 
through the head. 

The oil "ran down even unto the skirts of his garments" (Psa. 
133:2), thus representing how the members of his body are all to be 
partakers of the same anointing after their head. "The anointing 
which ye have received of him abideth in you." (1 John 2:27.) This 
oil began to reach the body on the day of Pentecost and flows on, 
down through this Gospel Age, anointing all who are truly baptized 
into Christ, to be with their Head, kings and priests unto God; to 
reign a thousand years. Rev. 20:6. 

We thus see that Aaron robed and anointed represented the entire 
Christ- "the seed," in which God is about to bless all the families 
of the earth. But let us not forget that we have been viewing the 
Great Deliverer from God's standpoint, and with him looking down 
to the time of his manifestation- the dawn of the Millennial Day- 
when all the members have come into the body and when the "holy 



oil" has run down "even to the skirts of his garments," anointing 
every member. Then he will begin the work of blessing mankind. 
For the glorious reign of this Kingly Priest, we constantly pray- 
"Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth." 

CONSECRATING THE PRIESTHOOD. 

The consecration of the Priesthood (Lev. 8:14,33), was typical of 
the entire consecration of the human nature of Jesus and his body, 
to the will of Jehovah Jesus' obedience even unto death, and the 
obedience of the members of his body suffering the same with him. 
The whole body represented by Aaron's sons, as well as the Head 
represented by Aaron himself, are by the antitypical sacrifices being 
made, during the Christian Age, CONSECRATED for their future 
work as kings and priests, to restore and rule and bless mankind. 
When this consecration is made, they have given ALL they had. 
But their extremity is Jehovah's opportunity, and when they have 
consecrated all they had to destruction and become joint- sacrificers 
with Jesus their Redeemer, for the sins of the world, they are 
begotten of God to a new nature- spiritual; and not only so, but to 
the highest order of spiritual existence-the Divine nature; and as 
such they are owned as spiritual sons of God. Gal. 4:4,7, and 2 Pet. 
1:4. 

This type shows these two natures: the higher is represented by 
Aaron and his sons, while the human is represented by a bullock. 
The bullock for the sin offering was brought "and Aaron and his 
sons laid their hands upon the head" of it, thus saying, This 
sacrifice represents us. From that moment all that happened to the 
bullock, represents what was to be done to Jesus and to his body, 
the Church, as human beings. The bullock is delivered up to "the 
Law" (represented by Moses) to meet its demands. To meet the 
demands of the law, it must be slain "And Moses slew it." He then 
applied the blood to the horns of the altar. The "finger" of the 
"Law" thus pointed out that the altar of earthly sacrifices was 
acceptable to God by reason of the shed blood (the life given), and 
that all who realize the power of the altar (horns are symbols of 
power) must recognize first the blood which sanctified it. The blood 
poured at the bottom of the altar, shows that through the blood of 
the sacrifice (life given) even the earth was purchased back from 
the curse which sin brought upon it. See Eph. 1:14: "Unto the 
redemption of the purchased possession." 

And Moses took the bullock, his hide, flesh, etc., and burned them 
with fire without the camp. (v. 17.) Thus the humanity of the Christ 
complete head and body-is made "a sin offering," suffering the 
destruction to which the world was doomed, and from which, by 
this sacrifice, they shall ultimately be delivered. But while the 
human being is destroyed, as a vile thing, as represented by the 
burning of the bullock without the camp, God accepts the heart 
devotion which prompts the sacrifice, which says, "Lo, I come to 
do thy will O God;" "I delight to do thy will, O my God." This is 



represented by the offering on the altar, of the fat and parts of the 
inward life-producing organism, as a "sweet savor" unto the Lord. 

Other features of the same consecration are shown by the two rams 
mentioned in verses 1 8 and 22. The first mentioned is the ram for 
the Burnt-offering. Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon its 
head, thus indicating that it represented them. It was killed; its 
blood sprinkled the altar; and Moses "cut the ram into pieces, and 
washed the inwards and legs in water" and "burnt the head and 
pieces, and the fat." Thus Jesus and his body, the Church, are being 
presented before God on the altar, during the entire Gospel Age. 
The head was laid there first, and since, all who are "dead with 
him," and cleansed, as in the type, by the washing of water- 
through the Word. Its burning on the altar shows how God accepts 
this sacrifice. It is "a sweet smelling savor." 

The second ram, "the ram of consecration," shows what effect the 
sacrifice will have upon us, as the first showed how God received 
it. Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon its head-it represented 
them. And Moses slew it and took its blood (consecrated life) and 
put it upon each separately, thus showing that consecration is an 
individual work. And he put it upon the tip of the right ear, thumb 
of right hand, and great toe of right foot. Thus, by our consecration, 
we are enabled to have the "hearing of faith" and to appreciate 
God's promises as none but the consecrated can. Our hands are 
consecrated, so that whatsoever our hands find to do, we do it with 
our might as unto the Lord. Our feet are consecrated, so that 
henceforth "we walk not as other Gentiles," but "walk in newness 
of life," "walk by faith," "walk in the spirit," "walk in the light," and 
even "as ye received Christ, so walk in him." Vs. 23,24. 

The choice portions of the ram, its "inwards" and "fat," representing 
our best powers, were taken in the hands of the priests and waved; 
passed to and fro, before the Lord, representing the fact that a 
consecrated offering is not given the Lord for the moment, or day, 
or year, but continually we keep our affections and powers uplifted 
before our Father, never ceasing until accepted of him as having 
finished our course. And Moses took them off their hands, God's 
acceptance being shown by fire. So we may not lay down or cease 
to offer our every power in God's service while we have them, and 
until all are consumed in His service. When the love ("fat") of our 
inmost being is laid upon the altar, it helps to increase the fire of 
God's acceptance. The more love there is connected with our 
consecration to God, the more quickly will it be accepted by him. 

Upon this "wave offering," while in their hands, were laid three 
cakes from a basketful. This offering was laid by Moses upon the 
hands of both high and under priests. 

The first unleavened cake, represented the actual purity of Jesus as 
a man, and the imputed purity of the Church as men, as attested by 
the Law (Moses). The second unleavened cake mingled with oil, 
represented the indwelling spirit of God-Sanctification. The third a 



wafer was mingled with honey, and represented our faith in the 
exceeding sweet and precious promises of Glory, Honor and 
Immortality. 

Without these three elements, it is impossible for our consecration 
to be complete, and hence acceptable, viz.: Justification, (purity), 
Sanctification by the Spirit through the belief of the truth, and faith 
in the promised Glorification. 

This consecration is in progress during the entire Gospel Age; even 
when as individuals our offering has been waived and accepted, we 
are to abide in the Tabernacle, eating of the cakes, growing in grace 
and knowledge continually, by partaking of the assurances and 
promises of God's Word-for we shall live by the words (promises) 
which proceed from the mouth of God. 

The anointing oil mingled with the blood of consecration was 
sprinkled over them (vs. 30), showing how we may know that our 
consecration is accepted -the Holy Spirit of God (the oil) blending 
with and witnessing to the spirit of sacrifice in the consecrated man 
(the blood), that he is a son of God. Rom. 8:16. 

The boiling of the flesh of consecration (vs. 31) was no part of the 
sacrifice; it was merely the preparing of the portion which they ate. 
It was all to be disposed of (v. 32), showing how we are to be 
entirely consecrated and none of our time or powers wasted. 

The seven days of consecration (vs. 33 and 35) show again, that we 
are consecrated to God's service, not a part of our time only, but all 
of it. Seven is a complete number in Scripture, and signifies all or 
the whole of whatever it is applied to. ("Seven Seals," "Trumpets," 
"Plagues," etc.) Ver. 36 shows the completion of the work of 
consecration. 

There never was a time when it was more necessary than now, that 
all who are consecrated as priests should see to it that we "be dead 
with him" and our every ability waived before God, that he may 
accept and make use of our talents to his glory. Especially is it of 
interest to those who believe that very soon all the members of the 
body will be accepted with the head, a sweet savor to God, and the 
work of self-sacrifice finished. And if we fail to be among the 
priests now, during the time of consecration, we cannot expect to be 
one of them when they begin their service for the people in the 
"ages to come" when these same priests (now despised of men but 
a "sweet savor to God,") shall have the title of King added, and with 
their head, Jesus, rule and bless all nations. Do we earnestly desire 
to be among those who will sing to the praise of our great High 
Priest, "Thou hast made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we 
shall reign on the earth?" If so, let us be fully consecrated now, for 
"If we suffer with him we shall also reign with him." 2 Tim. 2:12. 



THE GREA T "DA Y OF A TONEMENT. " 

LEV. 16:3-33. 

In considering these types we must, to appreciate them, remember 
that each is a picture by itself, of one particular part, of the work of 
the World's High Priest; and so with the various ceremonies of the 
Day of Atonement. To understand it clearly, we must realize that 
while Jesus is our (the Church's) High Priest, yet in the more full 
and complete sense he is the Head and we the members of the body, 
of the World's High Priest, just as Aaron was High Priest or chief of 
the under priests, while in a general sense, the whole priesthood 
was one, designed to minister for Israel who typified the world. 
These Levitical pictures primarily referring to the Head, when fully 
considered refer to the body complete. For instance, the ceremony 
of anointing commenced with the "Head," but the anointing applied 
to all the body during the entire Gospel Age, as we have seen. As 
the consecrating of the priesthood includes all the members of his 
body, and requires all of the Gospel Age to complete it, so also with 
the "Sin-offering" or the sacrifice of Atonement: it commenced 
with the Head, and we the members of his body "fill up the measure 
of the sufferings of Christ which are behind," and this suffering 
requires all of the Gospel Age. The Day of Atonement, which in the 
type, was but a twenty-four hour day, we see then in the antitype, to 
be the entire Gospel Age. And with its close the sacrificing ceases 
and the glory and blessing commences, and the Great High Priest of 
the world (Jesus and His bride, made ONE, Head and members 
complete), shall stand forth crowned a King and Priest after the 
Melchizedek order: King of Peace-a Priest upon his throne. 

There he will stand before the world (manifest, recognized but 
unseen) not only as King and Priest, but also as the Great Prophet- 
" A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your 
brethren, like unto me [Moses], ...and it shall come to pass that the 
soul that shall not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among 
the people." When brought to perfect knowledge and ability, perfect 
obedience will be required, and all who will not render it will be cut 
off from life-the second death. Acts 3:22,23. 

page 6 

In the end of the Jewish Age, Jesus offered himself individually to 
Israel as Prophet, Priest and King, typical or illustrative of the 
whole Body. As Prophet, he taught them; as Priest "he offered up 
Himself," (Heb. 7:27), as King he rode into their city at the close of 
his ministry. But they did not receive him in any of these offices. 
During the Gospel Age, his church or body has acknowledged him 
as "a teacher sent from God"-the great Prophet; as the "High Priest 
of our profession;" and as the rightful King. The Word teaches, 
however, that it is not by the Church only that he is to be accepted, 
but he (together with us, His Body) shall be the Prophet for the 
people, the Priest for all the people, and the King over all people, 



nations and languages; "Lord of all," Priest of all, Prophet or 
teacher of all. 

In the type of the Priest's consecration, we saw Aaron and his sons 
representing Jesus and his body as "new creatures," and a bullock 
representing their humanity; but in the type now to be considered, 
we find Aaron alone representing the entire Anointed One (head 
and body), and two different sacrifices, a bullock and a goat, are 
here used to represent the separateness, yet similarity in suffering of 
the Body and its Head, as the "Sin-offering." The bullock 
represented Jesus at the age of thirty years-the PERFECT MAN 
who gave himself and died on our behalf. The High Priest, as we 
have already seen, represents the "new" nature of Jesus, the 
anointed head, and also all whom God foreknew as members of his 
body. The distinction which is here made between the human and 
the "new creature" should be clearly understood and remembered. 
"The man Christ Jesus who gave himself" at thirty years of age, 
was he who was previously rich (of a higher nature), but who for 
our sakes became poor; that is, became a man, that he might give 
the ransom for men -a perfect man's life. 1 Cor. 15:21. 

Since the penalty of man's sin was death, he must become a man, be 
"made flesh," or he never could redeem man. A man had sinned, 
and the penalty was death, and if Jesus would pay the penalty he 
must be of the same nature, (but undefiled, separate from sin,) and 
die, that mankind might in due time be liberated from death. To do 
this, the man Jesus made sacrifice "of all that he had" glory as a 
perfect man, honor as a perfect man could claim it, and finally life 
as a man. And this was all he had, (except God's promises of a new 
nature and the hopes which those promises generated) having 
exchanged his spiritual being or existence for the human which he 
made "a Sin-offering" as typified by the bullock. 

But since to be our ransom his humanity must take our place in 
death, that humanity can never again be restored. If it were, we the 
redeemed would again come under the dominion of death. But 
thanks be to God, it remains a sacrifice forever, and we are forever 
free from Adamic guilt and death. If then, the Father would ever 
confer upon Jesus any honor, glory or life as a reward for his 
obedience even unto death, it must be a glory, honor and life on 
some other plane of being than the human, so as not to interfere 
with our ransom. 

Such was the promise of Jehovah to him, viz., that he would highly 
exalt him above the human plane, and above his pre-human 
condition; above all angels, principalities and powers, to his own 
right hand, (condition of chief favor, next to Jehovah,) a partaker of 
immortality -the Divine nature. For these and other joys set before 
him, Jesus endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down 
at the right hand of the Majesty on high. Heb. 1:3. 

The new nature which was received instead of the human, and as a 
reward for its sacrifice, is what is here typified by the Priest. While 



it is true that the sacrifice of the human was not finished until the 
cross, and that the Divine nature was not fully received until the 
resurrection, three days later, yet, in God's reckoning-and as shown 
in this type, the death of Jesus (the bullock) was complete when 
Jesus presented himself a living sacrifice at baptism the type of his 
covenant of sacrificial death. There he reckoned himself dead dead 
to all human aims or hopes of human glory, honor or life, in the 
same sense that we are exhorted to reckon ourselves dead indeed to 
the world, but alive as new creatures unto God. Rom. 6:11. 

This acceptance of Jesus by Jehovah at the time of consecration, as 
though dead indeed, was indicated by the anointing with the Holy 
Spirit-the earnest or guarantee of what he should receive when 
death had actually taken place. 

Thus considered, we see that the death of the bullock typifies the 
offering by Jesus of himself when he consecrated himself. This is in 
harmony with Paul's statement, that when Jesus consecrated saying- 
-"Lo I come [as in the volume of the Scriptures it is written of me] 
to do thy will, O God"-to die, and redeem many. There he took 
away the first [or set aside, the typical sacrifices] that he might 
establish [or fulfill] the real sacrifice for sin. (Heb. 10:7,9,14.) Yes, 
there the slaying of the bullock occurred, and the three years of 
Jesus' ministry show that all human will was dead, and the body 
reckoned so, from the moment of consecration. 

Jesus the Anointed-filled with the Spirit, was the new, divine 
creature (though not perfected as divine-until the resurrection) and 
that relationship he always claimed, saying, The works that I do are 
not mine [as a man] but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the 
works; The word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's which 
sent me. (John 14:10,24.) Not my will [as a man] but thine [Father- 
the divine] be done, [in and to this earthen vessel consecrated to 
death.] Mark 15:36. 

When the bullock was slain [Jesus consecrated], the work was done 
in "the Court," which we have seen typified the plane of human 
perfection or justification: the condition of faith in and harmony 
with God; the highest attainment of the flesh. Jesus was in this 
condition, a perfect man when he offered himself (the bullock in the 
type) to God. 

Bearing in mind these distinctions, let us examine carefully the 
work of the typical Atonement Day, that we may more clearly 
understand the reality. Aaron was washed, in order to fitly represent 
the sinlessness of the "new creature." ("No one who has been 
begotten of God practices sin; because his seed abides in him and 
he cannot sin, because he has been begotten by God." 1 John 3:9. - 
Diaglott.) The new nature cannot sin, and it keeps a constant watch 
over the old nature reckoned dead lest it come to life again. Aaron 
was clothed for the service of the Day of Atonement not in his 
usual garments of glory and beauty, but in garments of sacrifice, 
with the "linen garments," emblems of purity-the righteousness of 



saints. The robe of linen was an earnest of the glorious robe to 
follow; the "linen girdle" represented him as a servant, though not 
so powerful as when at the close of the Day of Atonement he 
should be girdled with the "curious girdle" of the ephod; the mitre 
of linen being the same as that belonging to the glorious apparel, 
proclaims his perfect righteousness now, as then. 

So the High Priest, the Divine minded, spirit-begotten one, though 
not yet born of the Spirit, is able to accomplish the sacrifice of the 
atonement. Aaron now brings his typical sacrifice as we read: 
"Thus shall Aaron come into the Holy Place [the Most Holy] with a 
young bullock for a sin-offering and a ram for a burnt-offering." 
"And Aaron shall offer his bullock of the sin-offering which is for 
[represents] himself, and make an atonement for himself [the 
members of his body-the under priests] and for his house" [all 
believers, the entire "household of faith" the Levites]. "And he 
shall kill the bullock of the sin-offering which is for [represents] 
himself." "And he shall take a censer full of burning coals of fire 
from off the altar before the Lord, and his hands full of sweet 
incense beaten small [powdered] and bring it within the vail [the 
first vail or "door"]. "And he shall put the incense upon the fire 
before the Lord, [The censer of coals of fire was set into the top of 
the golden altar in the "Holy" and the incense crumbled over it, 
gradually yielded a smoke of sweet perfume] that the cloud of the 
incense [penetrating beyond the second vail] may cover the mercy 
seat that is upon the testimony [or which covers the Law] that he 
die not." Vs. 3,6,11-13. 

Looking through the type to the antitype, let us now, step by step, 
compare the doings of Jesus with the prophetic picture. When Jesus 
had consecrated, he immediately took the sacrificed human life 
[blood of the bullock] to present it before God as the ransom of 
ours. But first, before entering the "Most Holy" [perfect spiritual 
condition] he must tarry in the "Holy" [spirit begotten condition] 
where the offering of his perfect humanity is acceptable a sweet 
perfume before Jehovah. The High Priest took with him, along with 
the blood, fire from off the altar, and his two hands full of sweet 
incense to cause the perfume. 

This illustrates how Jesus' fulfillment of his vow of consecration 
during the three and a half years of his ministry, was a sweet and 
acceptable perfume to the Father, attesting at once to the 
completeness of the consecration and the perfection of the sacrifice. 
The sweet incense beaten small, represented the perfection of the 
man Jesus. The fire from the Brazen Altar represented the trials to 
which he was subject; and when the perfections of his being 
(incense) came in contact with the trials of life, he yielded perfect 
obedience to the Divine will a sweet perfume. Thus is shown his 
temptation in all points, yet without sin. It was all consumed in the 
fire; so he yielded all in obedience. It was his "two hands full" 
which he offered, thus representing his full capacity and ability as 
being tested and required and yielded. 



But while Jesus as a "new creature" was thus within the "Holy," 
enjoying the light of the golden candlestick, fed by the bread of 
truth, and offering acceptable incense to Jehovah, let us look out 
into the "Court," and yet further out, beyond the Camp, and see 
another work progressing simultaneously. We last saw the bullock 
dead, in the Court; now the fat of it has been placed upon the 
Brazen Altar and with it the kidneys and various life -producing 
organs. They are burning furiously, for a bullock has much fat. A 
cloud of smoke, called "a sweet savor to God" rises in the sight of 
all who are in the "Court," viz.: Levites-believers. 

This represents how Jesus' sacrifice appeared to believing men. 
They saw the devotion, the self-sacrifice, the loving zeal (fat) 
ascending to God as a sweet and acceptable sacrifice. They well 
knew that with him God was ever well pleased. They knew from 
what they saw in the "Court" (in the flesh) that he was acceptable, 
though they could not see the sacrifice in its full grandeur and 
perfection as it appeared in Jehovah's sight (in the "Holy") a sweet 
incense on the Golden Altar. 

And while these two fires are burning -in the "Court" the "fat" and 
in the "Holy," the "incense" and their perfumes ascending at the 
same time, there is another fire "outside the camp." There the body 
of flesh is being destroyed. (Ver. 27.) This represents Jesus' work as 
viewed by the world; to them it seemed foolish to spend his life in 
sacrifice. They saw not the spirit of obedience which prompted, as 
the Father saw it; they saw not the loving perfections as the 
believers (in the "Court" condition) saw them. No, nor did they see 
in him their ideal hero and leader; they saw only those elements of 
his character which condemned them, not being in condition to love 
and admire him. To them he was odious an outcast despised and 
rejected; they hid their faces from him, as the Israelites turned from 
the burning carcass in the type. 

We see, then, how Jesus' life for three-and-a-half years fills all three 
of these pictures: His sacrifice of perfect manhood was in the sight 
of the world, foolishness and detestable; in the sight of believers, a 
sacrifice acceptable to God; in the sight of Jehovah, "a sweet 
incense." They all ended at once at the cross. The bullock was 
entirely disposed of, the incense all offered, when Jesus cried, "It is 
finished"-and died. Thus the man Christ Jesus, gave himself a 
ransom for all. 

The incense from the Golden Altar having preceded him and been 
satisfactory, the High Priest passed under the second "Vail" into the 
"Most Holy." So with Jesus; having for three and a half years 
offered acceptable incense, in the Holy or consecrated condition, he 
passed beyond "the Vail, that is to say, his flesh." For three days he 
was under the Vail, in death; then he arose in the perfection of the 
Divine nature beyond the flesh, "the express image of the Father's 
person:" "Put to death in the flesh, but quickened (made alive) in 
Spirit:" "sown a natural (human) body, raised a spiritual body." He 



was then in the "Most Holy," condition; the perfection of spiritual 
being. 

The next step was to present the blood (ver. 14)-the evidence of 
the redemption for "ye were redeemed... with the precious blood 
(sacrificed life) of Christ." (1 Pet. 1:19.) This going into the 
presence of the Mercy Seat and sprinkling, or presenting the blood, 
was evidently fulfilled by Jesus, when he, after forty days, ascended 
up on high, "there to appear in the presence of God FOR US, 
presenting on our behalf and as the price of our redemption the 
value and merit of the sacrifice just finished. 

We now leave the High Priest before the "Mercy Seat" while we go 
out to "the court" to witness another work. We quote: "And he shall 
take of the congregation of the children of Israel two kids of the 
goats for a sin-offering. And he shall take the two goats and present 
them before the Lord at the "door" of the Tabernacle. And Aaron 
shall cast lots upon the two goats; one lot for the Lord and the other 
for the scape-goat. And Aaron shall bring the goat upon which the 
Lord's lot fell and offer him for a Sin-offering. But the goat on 
which the lot fell to be the scape-goat, shall be presented alive 
before the Lord to make an atonement with him, to let him go for a 
scape-goat into the wilderness." (Vs. 5-10.) 

These two goats taken from Israel and brought into the "Court," 
typified or represented all who coming from the world and 
accepting of Jesus' redemption consecrate their lives to God's 
service. First, taken from the "Camp" or world condition, they are 
brought into the "Court" or justified condition. There they present 
themselves before the Lord (represented by the goats at the door of 
the Tabernacle) desiring to become dead with Christ as human 
beings, and to enter the heavenly or spiritual conditions as Jesus 
did; first, the spiritual mind, and secondly, the spiritual body; the 
"Holy" and "Most Holy." 

But, as not all who say, Lord! Lord! shall enter the kingdom, so too, 
some of those who say, "Lord, here I consecrate my all" promise 
more than they ever perform. They know not what they promise or 
what it costs of denial of self, to take up the cross daily and follow 
the bullock-to "go to him without the camp [to the utter disregard 
and destruction of the human hopes, etc.,] bearing the reproach with 
him." (Heb. 13:13). In this type, both classes of those who covenant 
to become dead with Christ are represented: those who do really 
follow in his footsteps as he hath set us an example, and those who 
"through fear of [this] death, are all their lifetime subject to 
bondage." (Heb. 2:15). The first class is the "Lord's goat," the 
second the "Scapegoat." Both of these classes [goats] as we shall 
see, will have a part in the atonement work; in bringing the world 
into complete harmony with God and his Law, when this "Day of 
Atonement" the Christian Age is ended. But only the first class (the 
"Lord's goat") who follow the Leader, are a part of the "Sin- 
offering." 



The casting of lots to see which goat would be the "Lord's" and 
which the "Scapegoat," indicates that God has no choice as to 
which of them shall win the prize. It shows that God does not 
arbitrarily select which shall become partakers of the divine nature 
and joint-heirs with Christ our Lord. Every believer who presents 
himself is acceptable, and he who keeps his covenant and performs 
the sacrifice is represented in the 

page 7 

"Lord's goat." Those who draw back are represented in the 
"Scapegoat." 

To return to the High Priest: After having sprinkled the "Mercy 
Seat" [literally, the Propitiatory, or place of satisfaction] with the 
blood of the bullock seven times (perfectly), "Then, shall he kill the 
goat of the sin-offering, that is for the people, and bring his blood 
within the Vail, and do with that blood as he did with the blood of 
the bullock, and sprinkle it upon the Mercy Seat and before the 
Mercy Seat." (Vss. 14-15.) In a word, that which was done with the 
bullock was repeated with the "Lord's goat." It was killed by the 
same High Priest; its blood sprinkled just the same; its fat, etc., 
burned on the altar in the Court also. [It is worthy of notice that a 
prime bullock is always very fat, while a goat is a very lean animal. 
So Jesus as represented by the bullock had a great abundance of 
zeal and love for his sacrifice, while his followers, represented by 
the goat, are lean in comparison.] The body of the "Lord's goat" 
was burned in like manner as that of the bullock- "without the 
camp." Paul tells us that only those animals which were Sin- 
offerings were burned without (outside) the "Camp" (Heb. 13:11.) 
and then he tells us to go to him without the camp bearing the 
reproach with him. (Heb. 13:13.) Thus is furnished us 
unquestionable evidence not only that the followers of Jesus are 
represented by this "Lord's goat" but also that their sacrifice 
reckoned with that of their Head, Jesus, constitutes part of the Sin- 
offering. "The reproaches of them that reproached thee, are fallen 
upon me." Psa. 69:9. 

The "Lord's goat" represented all of the "little flock;" they are all 
alike; they all came by the same "narrow way:" so what is true of 
the company as a whole, is true of each one in it. Therefore the 
"Lord's goat" typifies each one and his sacrifice, except that the 
whole must be complete and the sacrifice of all ended, before the 
"blood" of the goat (representative of all the Body) will be 
presented on the Mercy Seat. 

The blood sprinkled on and before the Mercy Seat, was in the 
design of a cross, with the top or head of the cross on the Mercy 
Seat. This is shown by the description: "He shall sprinkle it with his 
finger upon the Mercy Seat eastward (toward the "door") and 
before (across in front of) the Mercy Seat." This is the full end of 
the Sin-offerings for the sins of the world. The bullock, as we have 
seen, was a sin offering for the "Household of faith" (the under 



Priests and Levites), and the goat, was the sin offering "for the 
people," Israel type of the (at present) unbelieving world. 

Thus we see that this entire Christian Age is an age of suffering and 
death, to those who sacrifice the human nature, to become partakers 
of the divine. Just as soon as the sacrifice of Jesus on behalf of his 
"body" and "house" was complete and presented before the Father, 
came the evidence of its acceptance in the Pentecostal baptism. And 
this anointing (symbolized by the oil) which came upon the church 
continues ever since on all the living members of the High Priest's 
body. This impartation of the divine mind to those consecrated 
ones, was the energy in them which killed each, as the "Lord's 
goat." This coming of the Holy Spirit, the Lord's power or "hand" at 
Pentecost is shown in the type (vs. 15) by the High Priest coming to 
the door of the Tabernacle and laying hands upon the "Lord's goat" 
and killing it. Just as the Spirit of the Father enabled Jesus to kill 
the bullock, so it is the same spirit-the Spirit of God and of Christ 
IN the Lord's goat class, which enables them to crucify themselves 
as men-to kill the goat-in hope of the promised Glory, Honor and 
Immortality of the divine nature. 

It was thus, for instance, that Paul when possessed of this spirit of 
the Leader and Head, could reckon all things but loss and dross that 
he might win [a membership in] Christ and be found in Him. 
Inspired by this hope and spirit he could say: "I (the new creature) 
live, yet, not I" the old creature the goat it is being consumed 
with the reproach and contempt of the world outside the camp. His 
earthly affections and powers had all been presented an offering to 
God, a living sacrifice; thereafter it was Christ living in him, the 
hope of glory-Christ's mind, crucifying and keeping under the 
human nature. 

While actually in the world, he was not of it; to such an extent was 
this true that he could say: "The life which I now live, I live by the 
faith of the Son of God." Yes, by faith he had become a partaker of 
the Divine nature, and was in the "Holy," feeding by faith on the 
"holy bread," enlightened continually by the light from the "Golden 
Candlestick." 

Thus furnished with knowledge and strength, he was able to offer 
"Incense" acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, i.e., Paul's sacrifice 
because of Jesus' merit imputed to it was acceptable to God. Thus 
he kept the goat nature always sacrificed. So, too, the same thing 
has been done by the other members of this "Lord's goat" company 
since, though none have been so widely known: Paul's sacrifice sent 
up a very rich perfume. 

As the goat filled up that which was behind of the Sin-offering after 
the bullock, so does the "little flock" following after Jesus "fill up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ." Col. 1 :24. 

The moment must sometime come when the last member of this 
"Lord's goat" class shall have consecrated, then no more can thus 
consecrate. The moment must also come, when the sacrifice of the 



last one will be consumed and the Sin-offering forever ended. That 
we are now in the close of the "Day of Atonement," and that the last 
members of the Lord's goat are now on the altar we firmly believe 
from evidences elsewhere given. We understand that the door of 
opportunity to consecrate for this sacrifice has closed, though there 
is still time to carry out the consecration already made. Soon, when 
their sacrifice is consumed, the last members of His Body shall pass 
beyond the second Vail-beyond the flesh into the perfection of the 
Divine nature, already commenced in this mortal body. The passing 
of the second Vail means to the body what it meant to the head; it 
means in the presenting of the "blood" of the goat, what it meant in 
the presenting of the blood of the bullock. The body of the Priest 
passing the second Vail, bearing the blood of the Goat represents 
the passing of the Body of Christ entirely beyond human conditions 
into the perfection of the divine nature when we shall be made like 
Christ Jesus who now is the express image of the Father's person. 
Oh blessed hope! "I shall be satisfied when I awake in Thy 
likeness," was spoken prophetically for Jesus; and how sublime the 
promise that "we shall be like Him." If we may but win this prize 
for which we run, then,- 

Perish every fond ambition, 
All we've sought of earth or known; 
Yet how rich is our condition, 
Heavenly prospects now our own. 

The Most Holy reached, the evidence of the sacrifice of the BODY 
for the people will be presented: as typified by the blood of the goat 
sprinkled on the Mercy Seat. 

It will be accepted for "the people" as was that of our glorious 
Leader accepted for Himself [his Body] and house; and then the 
reconciling work is accomplished; sin and condemnation is fully 
covered for all. The sprinkling of all shows that the "blood" is full 
satisfaction, and that the work with the Scape-goat which followed 
was not part of the Sin-offering and was not needful to complete the 
"reconciling." Hence in it we must see some other object and 
significance. We read:- 

"And when he had made an end of reconciling the Holy ["Most 
Holy"] and the Tabernacle of the congregation [the "Holy"] and the 
Altar [in the "Court"] he shall bring the live goat: and Aaron shall 
lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat [Scape-goat] and 
confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel [typical 
of the world], and all their transgressions in all their sins, putting 
them upon the head of the goat, and shall send him away by the 
hand of a fit man [any one convenient] into the wilderness. " (Vs. 
20-22.) 

As before expressed, we understand that this "Scape-goat" which 
presented itself for sacrifice with the other, but failed to perform it, 
and to walk in the steps of the bullock, represents a very large class 
of God's children who have made the same covenant as the others, 



viz.: to become dead to the world, and to sacrifice their justified 
human nature, but have failed to actually do so. 

While this "Scape-goat" class has existed throughout this Gospel 
Age, the one goat and the work done with it, at the close of the 
"Day of Atonement" is representative in a general sense of the 
dealing with each individual of that company during the age, 
though it specially illustrates the scape-goat class in the end of the 
age of sacrifice. 

Let us look first at God's proposed dealing with members of this 
company who will be living when the work of Sin-offering is 
complete the last members of the scape-goat company; and then 
see how it will apply to the preceding members of the same class. 

But let us remind you that we are now dealing with things future; 
after the "Sin-offering." The Lord's goat is not yet wholly 
consumed, consequently the "little flock," represented by the body 
of the Priest, has not yet gone beyond the second "Vail" into the 
condition of spirit perfection; and the special work with the living 
"Scape-goat" is after this. 

Other scriptures show us (Rev. 7:9,13-17 and 1 Cor. 3:15) that there 
will be a "great company" who during this age have entered the 
race for the grand prize of joint-heirship with Jesus, who fail to "so 
run" as to obtain it; and that they, though "castaways" as regards the 
prize (1 Cor. 9:27), are nevertheless objects of the Lord's affection 
and love, who, by his providences in the circumstances of life will 
cause them to come through "great tribulation" thus accomplishing 
for them "the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in 
the day of the Lord Jesus." (1 Cor. 5:5.) Notice, that they 
consecrated their justified human life, and God accepted of the 
consecration and reckoned them, according to their covenant, dead 
as human beings and alive as new spiritual creatures. But, by 
their failure to carry out the contract, they are cut off from the 
Priesthood, from membership in the Body of Christ-"Every branch 
in me that beareth not fruit, he taketh it away." John 15:2. 

These are in a pitiable condition; they have failed to win the prize, 
therefore cannot have the divine nature; nor can they have 
restitution to perfect humanity with the world, for in their 
consecration, all human rights and privileges were exchanged for 
divine hopes, -for the opportunity to run for the divine nature. But 
though not faithful and not overcomers, the Lord loves them, and 
will deliver those who through fear of death, (fear of contempt-fear 
of the reproach borne by the bullock and goat, beyond the Camp-in 
the Wilderness, the separated, or dead condition) were all their life 
time subject to bondage bondage of fear of men and men's 
traditions and opinions which always bring a snare, and keep back 
from full obedience to God-even unto death. Heb. 2:15. 

Through the favor of the High Priest, this great company are to go 
into "great tribulations" and have the flesh destroyed. This will not 
make of them "overcomers" nor give them membership in the 



Bride-the Body of Christ. It will not give them a place on the 
throne as Kings and Priests, but in a position "before the throne," as 
perfect spiritual beings though not of the highest order of the 
spiritual-the Divine; not possessed of the Crown of life, 
Immortality, yet "like unto the angels." These shall serve God in 
His Temple, though they will not be members of that symbolic 
Temple which is the Christ. Rev. 7:14,15. 

This class will be sent to the Wilderness condition, of separation 
from the world; forced thither by "the man of opportunity "-adverse 
circumstances- there to be buffeted by adversity until they learn 
the vanity, deceitfulness and utter worthlessness of the World's 
approval and until all human hopes and ambitions die, and they are 
ready to say God's will, not mine, be done. The world is ever ready 
to scorn and cast out the chastened and afflicted ones, though they 
earnestly covet its deceiving smile and its empty honors. The body 
of the scape-goat was not burned in the wilderness; only the sin- 
offering (bullock and Lord's goat) were burned. (Heb. 13:11.) The 
burning of the sin-offering represented the steady continuous 
submission of that class to the fiery ordeal of suffering-"faithful 
(willing sacrifices) unto death." Both classes, suffer even unto death 
of the human will and body; but the first class die willingly, 
destroyed by continual crucifying of the flesh as shown in the 
symbol by fire, burning continuously until there is nothing more to 
burn. The second class is simply sent to the wilderness and there 
left to die unwillingly. Their love of the World's approval perishes 
with the World's neglect and scorn and reproach; and their spiritual 
nature ripens and blooms into life. Not only will this be true 
markedly with the last or closing members of this Scape-goat class 
shortly, but the same has been fulfilled to some extent all along; for 
there has always been a class, and a large one, which yielded to 
death only by compulsion; who instead of willingly sacrificing, 
suffered "destruction of the flesh." 1 Cor. 5:5. The classes 
represented by both goats have been developing side by side 
throughout the age. 

When the "little flock" have all gone beyond the Vail, the hand of 
the Lord will set free those bound ones "who, through fear of death 
[to the world], are all their lifetime subject to bondage," by 
overthrowing the many theories, creeds and traditions of men and 
great nominal Church organizations, in and to and by which, they 
are held and hindered from hearing and obeying the Lord's voice. 

Forced into freedom by "Babylon's" fall, while realizing that the 
great prize has been lost, they will then hear the High Priest's voice 
and find themselves forced into the Wilderness condition of 
separation and flesh destruction. At no other time perhaps have 
there been so many consecrated ones bound as at present; but 
through all the age, there have been some. 

All the consecrated ones, of both classes, pass through great trials 
and afflictions, yet by one class they are esteemed light afflictions, 
taken joyfully, which they rejoice to be accounted worthy to suffer; 



a willing sacrifice, like that of the Head. To the other class, they are 
burdensome, great afflictions, almost without joy an enforced 
destruction of the flesh. And proportionately different are their 
positions and rewards at the end of the race. 

"And Aaron shall come into the Tabernacle of the congregation 
["the Holy"] and shall put off the linen garments which he put on 
when he went into the Holy place ["Most Holy"] and he shall leave 
them there; and he shall wash his flesh with water in the holy place 
[the "Court"] and put on his [usual] garments [the garments of glory 
and beauty] and come forth and offer his Burnt-offering and the 
Burnt-offering of the people, and make another illustration of the 
atonement for himself [the body-the church-the "little flock"] and 
for the people. Vss. 23 and 24. 

The Burnt-offerings consisted of two rams (vs. 3 and 5.): one 
representing the Bullock and the other the Lord's goat. These being 
alike, show the harmony and oneness of the sacrifices made by 
Jesus and his footstep-followers; that in God's sight they are all one 
sacrifice. "For both he that sanctifieth [Jesus] and they who are 
sanctified [the little flock] are all one; for which cause he is not 
ashamed to call them brethren." Heb. 2:11. 

This is further shown in the treatment of each of these sacrifices. 
The rams of "burnt offering" were cut in pieces and washed and the 
pieces laid unto the head upon the altar and burned, making sweet 
perfume-a burnt offering of sweet savor unto Jehovah. Since both 
rams were thus treated, it shows that in Jehovah's estimation, they 
are all part of one sacrifice; the members joined to the head, 
acceptable as a whole, as the atonement for the sins of the World 
thus satisfying the claims of justice and purchasing the whole world 
of sinners. 

page 8 

As the Sin-offerings illustrate the necessary crucifixion and death 
of the Redeemer, so the Burnt-offering illustrates God's manifested 
acceptance of the same sacrifice. Let us not forget that God does 
not manifest his acceptance of the "better sacrifices" than bulls and 
goats, until that Sin-offering is complete and the High Priest is 
robed in the honor and glory of his office represented in the change 
of garments. During the time of making the Sin-offering he wore 
only the white linen garments; afterward and usually he wore the 
glorious garments illustrative of the honor and glory conferred on 
him. During the Christian age the Sin-offerings progress and no 
honor is bestowed upon the Priests, but at its close comes the 
outward manifestation of God's approval and acceptance of it in the 
putting of glory and honor upon the Priests who made the sacrifice, 
and in the blessing of the people for whose sins he atoned. 

The Burnt-offering must be burned on the Altar in "the Court," thus 
teaching that God will manifest His acceptance of the sacrifice of 
the whole body (head and pieces or members) in the sight of all in 
"the Court" condition, viz: all believers. But before this 



manifestation to believers, of God's acceptance of the work, is 
accomplished the "scapegoat company" are sent away, and the 
robes of the Priest changed. As the white robes worn throughout the 
work of sacrifice- which covered the body and represented the 
justification of the body, their purity in God's sight through Christ, 
so now the garments of glory and beauty represent the glories of 
position and work in the future, after the new creatures have been 
perfected-gone beyond the "Vail." The washing with water seems 
to show that though the white garments are laid aside the body 
now clothed in majesty of power is still pure and that the sins of the 
people for which atonement had been made do not attach to or 
contaminate the purity of the Priest. Thus ends this type of the 
development of the Priesthood and satisfaction of the World's sins. 

We tarry to glance at a few verses of this chapter (Lev. 16) not 
directly connected with the narrative. 

Vs. 17. "There shall be no man in the tabernacle of the 
congregation when he goeth in to make an atonement in the holy 
place [Most Holy] until he come out, and have made an atonement 
for himself, and for his household, and for all the congregation of 
Israel. " This limitation applies only to this special day, for the 
Apostle says-"The priests went always into the first tabernacle (the 
"Holy") accomplishing the service, but into the second (tabernacle- 
the "Most Holy,") went the high priest alone, once every year" [on 
this "Day of Atonement," which was repeated annually.] Heb. 9:7. 

The privileges of the Tabernacle are only for those who are priests- 
members of the body of the Head Priest so that whether as now, in 
the first of these heavenly conditions (spiritual minded, new 
creatures in Christ Jesus); or whether as we hope to be soon, in the 
second or perfected spiritual condition; it will in either or both 
cases be because we are in Christ Jesus, new creatures no longer 
men. "For ye are not in the flesh [human], but in the spirit [spiritual, 
new creatures], if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you." Rom. 
8:9. 

Vs. 28. "And he that burnetii them [the bullock and goat of sin 
offering] shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and 
afterward he shall come into the camp. " This seems to teach that 
those principally instrumental in reproaching, reviling and 
destroying the humanity both of Jesus [bullock] and his "little 
flock" [goat], will have no special punishment for it, as they did it 
ignorantly-at the same time accomplishing God's plan. "Father, 
forgive them, they know not what they do," was a truthful prayer 
and from one whom the Father heard always. They wash and are 
clean and come into the camp i.e., come into the same condition as 
the balance of the world, all of whom are sinners, and all of whom 
are ransomed from Adamic depravity and sin. 

Vs. 26. "And he that let go the goat for the Scape-goat, shall wash 
his clothes and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward come into the 
camp. " This teaches the same lesson relative to those who shall be 



instrumental in bringing the trouble, and consequent destruction of 
the flesh, upon the "great company" represented by the Scapegoat. 

In the type, the Day of Atonement thus ended; and typically 
cleansed from sin, Israel was reckoned no longer defiled and 
separated from God, but now made at-one with God. Justice no 
longer condemned, but bade them realize God's reconciled presence 
in their midst, to bless and protect and direct into the Canaan of rest 
and peace. 

THE ANTITYPE. 

In the Antitype, the "Day of Atonement" is this Gospel Age, 
during which, Jesus and his body, the Church, make sacrifice to 
justice, in full satisfaction of the Adamic sin. When the work of 
reconciliation is complete, God will recognize mankind and place 
his sanctuary among men. Then, will be fulfilled that which was 
written: "The Tabernacle of God (the glorified Church) is with men, 
and he will dwell with them, and they shall be [become] his people, 
and God himself shall be with them and be their God. And God 
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more 
death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more 
pain, for the former things [reign of Satan, sin and death] are passed 
away. And he that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make all 
things new." Rev. 21:3-5. 

But while all these blessings shall result from the establishment of 
God's residence, or sanctuary among men ["I will make the place of 
my feet glorious" -"Earth is my footstool,"] yet its blessing will be 
a gradual work, requiring the Millennial Age for its full 
accomplishment; i.e., death, pain, and tears will be in process of 
destruction (wiping away), but not completed until the end of the 
Millennial Age. 

The gradual process by which man will be brought into perfection 
of being and fullness of harmony with Jehovah, is well illustrated in 
the typical sacrifices of Israel, made after the Day of Atonement, 
the antitypes of which will be fulfilled during the next age. 

To rightly divide and understand these typical sacrifices, it must be 
recognized, that the present Gospel Age is the day of atonement 
toward God for the general sin of mankind; and that all sacrifices 
coming after the Day of Atonement in type, represents fulfillments 
or antitypes due after the Gospel Age is ended-during the 
Millennial Age- when the world of sinners may become reconciled 
to, or at one with God. 

Thus we may see that at-one-ment has two parts first, Justice at 
one with, and not any longer condemning and killing Adam and his 
children on account of his sin; and secondly, the sinner being 
brought to at-one-ment with God's righteous laws recognizing them 
and obeying them. The first of these phases of at-one-ment or 
reconciliation is brought about entirely by the Priest's sacrifice in 
the "Day of Atonement sacrifices."* 



The other-The reconciling of the World to God or the bringing of 
them into full at-one-ment and harmony with God, will be 
accomplished during the next age by the "Royal Priesthood" who, 
typified by Moses will be the Great Prophet whom the Lord will 
raise up to teach the people, to whom if they will not give heed, 
they shall be cut off from life-die the second death. Acts 3:23. 

Be it clearly seen that though the saints of Jesus' followers, be 
permitted as represented in the Lord's goat to share in and be 
members of the Sin-offering on behalf of the World, it is not 
because of their being by nature purer or better than the World for 
the entire race of Adam was condemned in him; and of them "There 
is none righteous, no not one" (Rom. 3:10) and none could give 
ransom for his brother. Psa. 4:97. 

They share in the sacrifice for sins as a favor in order that by so 
doing they might share with Jesus the promised Divine nature and 
be his companions and joint heirs. To permit and enable them to 
offer themselves acceptable sacrifices the benefits of Jesus' death 
were applied to these first, justifying or cleansing them, and his 
death blesses the World through his body the Church. 



SUBSEQUENT SACRIFICES. 

Those sacrifices which do not belong to the class we denominate 
the "Day of Atonement sacrifices," illustrate offering and sacrifices 
which belong to the Millennial Age. 

As in the type, the Day of Atonement sacrifices preceded all others, 
and were a basis of general forgiveness and acceptance with God 
for all Israel, but were followed by other sacrifices after that day, 
for individual sins, termed "Sin offering," "Trespass offerings," etc., 
so in the antitype. After the sacrifices of this Gospel Age shall have 
brought the world in a justified condition, there will still be sins and 
trespasses committed, which will require confession and 
reconciliation, making these after sacrifices necessary. 

The Atonement Day sacrifices represent the cancellation of Adamic 
sin by the sacrifice of the Christ, but during the Millennium errors 
will be committed by the not yet perfected world, for which they 
will be in some measure responsible. For such they must make 
some amend, accompanied by repentance, before they can be again 
at harmony with God and Christ. 

And consecration will be in order in the next Age, though owing to 
the changed condition of the world consecration will no longer, as 
now, mean unto death, but on the contrary it will be unto life, for 
with the close of Satan's reign comes the end of pain, sorrow and 
death, except upon evildoers. Consecration must always be a 
voluntary presentation of one's powers, and hence this is 
represented in some of the sacrifices after Atonement Day. 



As the basis of all forgiveness of sins in the next age will be the 
"Day of Atonement sacrifices," it would be appropriate in the type 
for the sinner to bring some sacrifice, which would indicate a 
recognition of those sacrifices, as the ground for forgiveness anew. 
And so we find that all offerings of the people after the Day of 
Atonement, were of a kind which pointed back to, or recognized the 
sacrifices of that day. These offerings might be of cattle, or sheep, 
or fowl (turtle doves or young pigeons), or of fine flour, the article 
offered depending on the ability of the offerer. 

During the Millennial Age all men "will come to a knowledge of 
the truth" and be saved from the curse of Adamic death. (1 Tim. 
2:4.) When we remember that this death includes all the sickness, 
pain and imperfection to which humanity is now subject, we see 
that God's plan includes a full restoration to human perfection; but 
perfection will come gradually, and it will require the co-operation 
of the sinner's WILL to ever reach it. He must do what he can to 
climb up again to perfection, and will have all the assistance 
necessary. This is shown by these sacrifices in general; they were to 
be according to every man's ability. If very much degraded by sin 
and very imperfect, he must, when he comes to a knowledge of the 
truth, present himself to God. If thus poor and degraded he may 
bring a dove, or pigeon; when less degraded a goat; and when 
perfect as man his offering may be a bullock; just as a bullock was 
used to typify the perfect humanity (much fat) of Jesus' sacrifice, 
and as a goat (wayward and lean) was used to represent our 
imperfect human nature in the sacrifices of this Atonement Day, so 
those animals similarly represent the offerers (Israel-the world) in 
their consecrations. 

When the whole world has been brought to perfection there will be 
no longer any who are poor in this sense- all will be perfect men 
and their offerings will be their perfect selves; typified by bullocks. 
David speaking of this says: "Then shalt thou be pleased with the 
sacrifices of righteousness (of right doing), with burnt offering and 
whole burnt offering; then shall they offer bullocks (perfect 
sacrifices) upon thine altar." (Psa. 51:19.) Yet that David's language 
should not be understood to teach the restoration of the literal 
bloody, typical sacrifices, is evident, for in the same connection he 
says, "Thou desirest not sacrifice," (the typical)... "The sacrifices of 
God are a broken spirit; and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not 
despise." All these sacrifices must be of the free will and desire of 
the offerer. Lev. 1:3. 

The completeness of consecration is shown by the death of the 
animal; that is, each member of the race must consecrate his will; 
but it will neither be followed by the destruction of the human 
nature (burning of the flesh outside the camp) nor by the taking of 
the life into a new nature,-into the Most Holy-only the High Priest 
enters there, as shown in the case of the Atonement sacrifices. No; 
when consecrated, they are accepted as human beings, their right to 
life as such having been purchased by the Priesthood. Their 



consecration represents their appreciation of their ransom and their 
acquiescence to the law of God as the condition upon which they 
shall continue to live everlastingly in harmony and favor with Him. 

THEIR BURNT OFFERINGS. 

The burnt offerings of the Priests was to be kept up continually on 
the Altar, and the fire never suffered to die out. "This is the law of 
the Burnt Offering; it is the Burnt Offering because of the burning 
upon the Altar all night unto the morning, and the fire of the Altar 
shall be burning in it.... It shall not be put out, and the Priest shall 
burn wood on it every morning, and lay the burnt offering in order 
upon it.... The fire shall ever be burning upon the Altar; it shall 
never go out." Lev. 6:9,12,13. 

Thus is presented to the mind of each offerer the fact that the Altar 
was already sanctified or set apart, and their offerings acceptable 
because of God's acceptance of the Atonement Day sacrifices. To 
this Altar the Israelite brought his free will offering as narrated in 
Lev. 1. It was made in the usual way; the animal cut in pieces and 
washed, was laid, the pieces to the head, on the altar, and wholly 
burnt, a sacrifice of sweet savor unto the Lord. This would serve to 
typify a thankful prayer to Jehovah-an acknowledgment of His 
Mercy, Wisdom, and Love, as manifested in the broken body of the 
Christ-their ransom. 

THEIR TRESPASS OR SIN OFFERINGS. 

"If a soul (being) commit a trespass and sin through ignorance in 
the holy things of the Lord;. ..if he sin and commit any of these 
things which are forbidden to be done by the Commandments of the 
Lord, though he wist it not, yet is he guilty, and shall bear his 
iniquity." "And he shall bring a ram without blemish out of the 
flock," and money according to the Priest's estimation of the 
trespass, with a FIFTH MORE, and this shall be their offering. And 
the priest shall make an atonement for him. And if any sin 
knowingly and damage or defraud his neighbor, He shall restore it 
in the principal, and shall add the fifth part more thereto (twenty per 
cent interest) and give it to the wronged one. And he shall bring a 
ram for the trespass offering unto the Lord. Lev. 5:15-19; and 6:1-7. 

This teaches that for every wrong, restoration must be made with 
interest, and a repentance or asking forgiveness of the Lord through 
the Church (Priesthood); their recognition of their own imperfection 
and the value of their ransom, being shown by the ram presented. 

But notice the difference between the treatment of this Sin-offering 
and the Sin-offerings of the Day of Atonement: The latter were 
offered to God (Justice) in the Holy as the ransom or purchase -price 
of sinners; the former were offered to the Priests who had on the 
Atonement Day purchased the people; the acknowledgement of the 
people was made to their Redeemer. The Priest took a part and 
offered it to the Lord as a memorial, 



*The sacrifices relative to the consecration of the priests and parts 
of two types yet to be considered, we regard of course, as being the 
same sacrifices as those above mentioned as taking place on the 
Day of Atonement they all being merely different views or 
pictures of the same sacrifices. 

page 9 

or a recognition that the whole plan of redemption as executed on 
the Atonement Day [Gospel Age] was His, appropriating to himself 
(eating) the balance. 

The offerings of the Atonement Day, we have seen, were always 
burned (Lev. 6:30, Heb. 13:1 1), but these Sin-offerings are not to 
be burned, but eaten by the Priests. -"This is the law of the sin 
offering:... The priest that offereth it for sin shall eat it:. ..All the 
males among the priests shall eat thereof." Lev. 6:25-29. 

The whole world, purchased with the precious blood (human life) 
of Christ, will present themselves, for forgiveness of trespass, to the 
Royal Priesthood who paid their ransom price; and their acceptance 
of it will be the forgiveness. To this agree Jesus' words to his 
disciples: "He breathed on them and saith unto them, Receive ye 
the Holy Spirit. Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto 
them; and whosesoever sins ye retain [to them] they are retained." 
John 20:23. 

While this "ministry of reconciliation" belongs in its fullest sense in 
the next age, when all the sacrifices of Atonement will have been 
completed, yet even now, any member of the "Royal Priesthood" 
may say to those who believe and repent, "Thy sins are forgiven 
thee"-as did our Head, by faith looking forward to the completion 
of the sacrifice for sins, which sacrifice he had begun. 

THEIR PEACE OFFERINGS. 

This offering must be of the herd or flock, and it might be made in 
fulfillment either of a vow (covenant), or as a willing "thank 
offering." Part of it was to be brought to Jehovah by the offerer- 
"His own hands shall bring the offerings of the Lord made by fire; 
the fat with the breast; it shall he bring," and the priest shall burn 
the fat on the altar, and wave the breast before the Lord. But the 
breast shall be the priest's, also the shoulder. The offerer must eat 
the sacrifice. Lev. 3 and 7:11-18,30-34. 

This seems to show, that if any man would come into a condition of 
full peace and harmony (as all are to do or be cut off in the second 
death), they must eat or fulfill a covenant before God, of entire 
consecration to him. If, after being thus perfected, they again 
become defiled with sin, they must die, (second death) as shown by 
the touching of unclean things. Lev. 7:19-21. 



With this sacrifice there was presented an offering of unleavened 
cakes mingled with oil, and anointed wafers, representing the 
offerer's faith in Christ's character, which he will copy; and 
leavened bread indicating his acknowledgment of his own present 
imperfection at time of consecration leaven being a type of sin. 
Lev. 7:11-13. 

MEATOFFERINGS. 

These, of fine flour, unleavened cakes, with oil, etc., were 
presented to the Lord through the priest. They probably represent 
praises and worship offered to the Lord by the world, through his 
Church. "Unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus 
throughout all ages." (Eph. 3:21.) These were accepted by the 
priests: A sample being offered on the altar shows that it is 
acceptable to Jehovah. 



ANOTHER TYPE OF CHRIST'S SACRIFICES. 

LEVITICUS 9. 

This chapter seems to give a more condensed picture of the work 
and sacrifices of the Day of Atonement than the one already 
examined (16.), and in addition, it furnishes certain features which, 
after the consideration of the sixteenth, will be of interest to us. It is 
another picture of the Atonement. 

"And Moses said, This is the thing which the Lord commanded that 
ye should do: and the glory of the Lord shall appear unto you. And 
Moses said unto Aaron, Go unto the Altar and offer thy Sin- 
offering and thy Burnt-offering and make an atonement for thyself 
[the members of his body required it] and for the people" [the 
World]. 

This shows how Jesus [the bullock sacrifice for sins] was sufficient 
both to redeem his body, the "little flock," and also the whole world 
of mankind. Our share in the Sin-offering could have been 
dispensed with entirely; we might have been saved from death and 
just as all mankind will be, restored to perfection of human nature. 
But it pleased Jehovah not only to choose Jesus to this great work 
of sacrifice, but also to make him the Captain or Head of his 
"Church which is his Body," who, as well as their Captain, should 
be made perfect as SPIRITUAL beings, by suffering as Sin- 
offerings, in the flesh. 

Paul, referring to our intimate relationship to our Head, says: 
"Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath 
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places [the 
"Holy" and "Most Holy"] in Christ; according as he hath CHOSEN 
US in him before the foundation of the world... to the praise of the 
glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the 
beloved." (Eph. 1:4,6.) God "called you by our gospel to the 



obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ," (2 Thes. 2: 14,) so 
that "if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him." 2 Tim. 
2:12. 

To continue- After offering his own sacrifice once for all, he was to 
"offer the offering of the people [the goat], and make an atonement 
for them as the Lord [Jehovah] commanded. " [The arrangement for 
our having part in the sacrifice of atonement, was a part of our 
Father's original plan as Paul also attests.] 

"Aaron therefore went unto the altar and slew the calf of the Sin- 
offering which was for himself. And the sons of Aaron brought the 
blood unto him, and he dipped his finger in the blood and put it on 
the horns of the altar; but the fat, [etc.] ...he burnt upon the 
altar,. ..and the flesh and the hide he burned with fire without the 
camp. And he slew the Burnt-offering [a ram,] and Aaron's sons 
presented unto him the blood, which he sprinkled round about upon 
the altar. And they presented the Burnt-offering unto him; and he 
did wash the inwards and the legs, and burnt them upon the Burnt- 
offering on the altar, with the pieces thereof and the head." [Much 
the same account as in the 16th chapter, and having the same 
significance.] 

Thus the Burnt-offering of Jesus has been burning all through the 
Gospel Age, giving evidence to all in the "Court" of God's 
acceptance of him and the acceptance of all the members of the 
body- laid to the head, on the altar. 

"And he brought the people's offering, and took the goat which was 
the Sin-offering for the people [not for the Priests and Levites] and 
slew it and offered it for sin as the first," i.e., treated it exactly as he 
treated the bullock. This goat is the same as the "Lord's goat" in the 
other picture, the scapegoat and the other features being omitted in 
this more general view. It is, however, confirmatory of the teaching, 
that only those who follow the Lord's footsteps are participants in 
the Sin-offering. Who could take exception to this? 

"And he brought the Burnt-offering and offered it according to the 
[usual] manner. And he brought the Meat offering, and took a 
handful of it and offered it upon the altar beside the Burnt-sacrifice 
of the morning." 

"He also slew the bullock and the ram for a sacrifice of peace 
offerings which was for the people." The Peace-offering, as already 
described, represents a vow or covenant. By this peace offering, 
made in connection with the Sin-offering of the High Priest, is 
signified the covenants and promises based on the Sin-offering. In 
the type, the peace was established between Jehovah and Israel 
because their former Adamic sin was typically removed; and they 
were obligated to now live obedient to a covenant based on their 
forgiveness i.e., they were to keep the Law that he that doeth 
those things should live by (or as a reward for keeping) them. But 
as our Sin-sacrifices are better than the typical ones, so with the 
Peace-offering or covenant established by those sacrifices; it is a 



better covenant. Thus in this sacrifice of peace or covenant offering, 
the Priest is seen to serve unto the example and shadow of spiritual 
things-the mediator of a better covenant, (Heb. 8:6-13), under 
which all people shall be blessed with RESTITUTION and thus 
enabled to obey the perfect law and live forever. 

"And Aaron lifted up his hand toward the people and blessed them 
and came down from offering of the Sin-offering, and the Burnt- 
offering and Peace-offerings." Thus in the type we see illustrated 
the fact that though the blessing is not fully due to come upon the 
people until all sacrifices are finished, yet a measure of blessing 
comes upon mankind from the members of the Priest, even now 
during the age of sacrifice, before we all go into the "Most Holy" or 
perfected spiritual condition. 

"And Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle of the 
congregation, and came out and blessed the people." 

When this DAY of sacrifice is over, the Priest (head and body) 
appears before God, giving evidence of having met all the claims of 
the Law against the people (world). Moses' going in also, seems to 
say, The Law was fully satisfied and its righteousness vindicated in 
the sacrifice of Christ. The Law (represented in the type by Moses) 
will testify on behalf of the world that it is justified to life through 
the sacrifices of the Priest who "offered up himself." 

When presented, the sacrifices were "holy, acceptable to God," and 
Moses and Aaron came out, and together they blessed the people. 
So in the incoming age, the Christ will bless all the families of the 
earth (Gal. 3:8,16,29; Gen. 12:3), yet not by setting aside or 
ignoring the Law of God and excusing sin, but by restoring men to 
the perfection of humanity, in which condition they will be able to 
keep the perfect Law of God, and be blessed by it. Now, by reason 
of our inherited imperfection, though the Law says, "He that doeth 
these things (obeys) shall live by them," (shall have a right to 
continuous life) yet none of the imperfect race can now have this 
everlasting life, because of inability to keep the Law. But, then, 
blessed by the Priest, made perfect and able to keep the Law, its 
condition of "do and live" will be a great blessing to all men; for 
whosoever will, may then obey and live forever in happiness and 
communion with Jehovah. 

"And the glory of the Lord appeared unto all the people. " As the 
blessing progresses (restoring and elevating the race mentally and 
physically) the results will become manifest. The people-the world 
in general will recognize God's gracious love, more and more each 
day. Thus it will be, that "the GLORY of the Lord will be revealed, 
and all flesh shall see it together." (Isa. 40:5.) They will come to see 
gradually, the length and breadth, and height and depth of the love 
of God which surpasseth all understanding. 

It is worthy of note that the blessing here mentioned was not a 
blessing to the under-priests; no; they were represented in the 
blesser in Aaron. The blessing came on all the people, who, as we 



have seen, represented the world. It is this blessing of the world by 
the "SEED"- the entire Christ, after all the afflictions are filled up 
by the Body, (Col. 1:24) that Paul refers to, saying, that "The whole 
creation [humanity] groaneth and travaileth in pain 
together... waiting for the manifestation of the Sons of God" before 
they can experience deliverance from the bondage of corruption 
and restoration to the liberty of sons of God, as enjoyed by God's 
first human son, Adam. Luke 3:38. 

It is doubtless this same blessing of all the people salvation from 
death and its sting, sin, that Paul refers to, saying: "UNTO THEM 
THAT LOOK FOR HIM SHALL HE APPEAR THE SECOND 
TIME WITHOUT [a Sin-offering], unto salvation." (Heb. 9:28.) 
The world has seen the Priest-head and body-suffer as a Sin- 
offering during this age: Jesus was manifested to the Jews in the 
flesh (as a Sin-offering); and, as Paul could say, so can all the 
followers in his footsteps, viz.: "Christ is manifest in our mortal 
flesh." (2 Cor. 4:11.) As the whole Christ has thus been manifest 
and suffered in the flesh, so they shall also be "glorified together" 
before the world; for the glory [and Blessing and Salvation] of the 
Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together." When he 
shall appear, we also shall appear with him in glory. Col. 3:4. 

But this great High Priest of the world, will be recognized only by 
them that look for him. If he were to appear in the flesh -or appear 
in the sky, it would be an appearance to all, whether looking for 
him or not; but we have already seen that the Scriptures teach that 
the Head has been perfected as a spiritual being, and that his "little 
flock" shall be made "like him." We have seen that the way in 
which the world will see the glorified Church will be by mental 
perception, in the same sense that a blind person may properly be 
said to see. In the same sense we now see the prize, the "crown of 
life," while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the 
things which are unseen [by physical sight]; for the things which 
are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. 
(2 Cor. 4:18.) It is in this way that the entire Church of this age has 
been "looking unto Jesus"; thus "we see Jesus," Heb. 2:9 and 12:2. 

This is the only way in which the human can see or recognize 
things on the spiritual plane. Jesus expresses this same idea to the 
disciples-they who recognized his spirit or mind and thus knew 
him, would be acquainted with the Father also in the same way. "If 
ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also; and from 
henceforth ye know him and have seen him." This is the only sense 
in which the world will ever see God, for "no man hath seen God at 
any time," ["whom no man hath seen nor can see"]-"the only 
begotten Son he hath DECLARED him." (1 Tim. 6:16; John 1:18.) 
Jesus revealed or caused the disciples to see him by making known 
his character revealing him as a God of Love. 

It was in the same way that the Papal system was shown by Luther 
and others, and seen by many as the ANTI-CHRIST, or as Paul had 
foretold, that wicked system the man of sin, was then revealed. 



Thus it is, that Jesus the head (now present to gather the Jewels) is 
being now revealed to the living members of the "little flock," 
though others continue to plant, build, etc., and know not of his 
presence. Luke 17:26-30. 

Thus also it will be in the Millennial Day, when the complete 
Christ-the Priest is revealed; it will be only to those that look for 
him only those shall see him. They will see him, not by organic 
sight, but as we now see all spiritual things Jesus, the Father, the 
prize, etc.-by faith. Men will not see the Christ by physical sight, 
for the same reason that they will never see Jehovah; because on a 
different plane of being-one spirit, the other flesh. But we (the 
little flock) shall see him as he is, for we shall be like him. 1 John 
3:2. 

But, though only those who look shall be able to recognize the 
Christ as the deliverer who will save them from the dominion of 
death; yet this will embrace all the world, for the manner of 
revelation will be such that ultimately all must see. Every eye shall 
see him; and all in their graves, being raised to life-they that 
pierced him will realize that they crucified the Lord of Glory. He 
shall be revealed (In the sky? No;) in flaming fire, (judgments) 
taking vengeance on those that know (recognize) not God, and obey 
not (accept not) the gospel (good news the deliverance). It will not 
take long for all mankind to recognize him under such 
circumstances. Now the good suffer; then shall ye discern between 
him that serveth the Lord, and him that serveth him not; for in that 
day the distinction will be manifested. (Mai. 3:15-18.) Then all, 
seeing clearly, may accept of him and have everlasting life; for "We 
trust in the Living God, who is the Saviour of all men, specially 
those that believe." 1 Tim. 4:10. 

This the types illustrate- "And as it is appointed unto men [Aaron 
and his successors who were only types of the High Priest of the 
new creation] once to die [typically, as represented in the animals 
slain] and after this, [following as a result of those sacrifices] the 
judgment [of God; manifesting approval or disapproval of the 
sacrifice.] So Christ [head and body, the true, the Royal Priesthood] 
was once offered [never will it be repeated] to bear the sins 

page 10 

of many ["every man"] and unto them that look for HIM, he shall 
appear the second time, without sin [not as a Sin-offering] unto 
salvation." (Not again to be sacrificed for the sins of the people, but 
to bless them.) Heb. 9:27,28. 

Every time a Priest went into the Most Holy on the Atonement Day 
he risked his life; for if his sacrifice had been imperfect he would 
have died as he passed the Second Vail, and he would neither have 
been accepted into the Most Holy himself, nor would his imperfect 
sacrifice have been acceptable as an atonement for the sins of the 
people. Hence any failure meant his death and the continuance of 
the people in sin and death whose sins he attempted to cover or 



propitiate. This was the "judgment. " Jesus our Priest passed this 
"judgment" successfully; his sacrifice was acceptable, as evidenced 
in his sending the blessing at Pentecost, which was a guarantee or 
assurance that ultimately He [and we in him] would come forth to 
bless the people the world, for whose sins He has acceptably 
atoned. 

Many have been looking in an indefinite way for a good time to 
come, and the removal in some way of the curse, of whom Paul 
says: "The whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together 
until now, waiting for the MANIFESTATIONS of the SONS OF 
GOD"- Jesus the Head or Chief, and all the BODY complete in 
him. Rom. 8:19,22. 

"And there came a fire out from before the Lord, and consumed 
upon the altar the Burnt-offering and the fat, which, when all the 
people saw, they shouted and fell on their faces "-worshiped. This 
is the same thought expressed in another form. The fire symbolizes 
God's acceptance; its recognition by the people, shows that the 
world will realize the sacrifice and its value in God's estimation as 
the price of their liberty from death and the grave; and when they 
realize it, they will worship Jehovah and His representative the 
Priest. 

How beautifully these types teach of a restitution, and a full ransom 
for all the people, and a blessing to come upon all. Nothing in the 
types seems to make a distinction between the living and the dead, 
and some may be inclined to infer that when the sacrifices of the 
High Priest are over, and the blessing commences, those who are 
then living will be greatly benefited and not the dead. But we 
answer, nay, in God's estimation the living and dead are alike; He 
speaks of them all as dead; all died in Adam, and all the little spark 
of life which any man possesses is really but one stage of dying. It 
is a dead race because of the sin of Adam, and it will be a race 
justified to the same life he enjoyed and forfeited; and all who will, 
may have it back, whether they have gone all the way down into 
death, or whether they still linger on the brink- in "the valley of the 
shadow of death." 

This is the object of the sin-offerings to release mankind from the 
dominion of death, to the perfection of being which is essential to 
perfect happiness and atonement with his Creator. This is the 
blessing which comes to all the families of the earth through The 
Seed of Abraham. This is the good news which was preached to 
Abraham, as we read: "God foreseeing that he would justify the 
heathen (all mankind-Gentiles) through faith, preached before the 
gospel [good tidings] to Abraham, saying, In thee, and in thy seed 
shall all nations be blessed [justified]... which Seed is Christ 
[primarily the head, and secondarily the body] for if ye be Christ's 
[members] then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the 
promises," referred to viz.: that we may bless all the families of the 
earth. (Gal. 3:16,19.) But the Seed must be complete before the 
blessing comes, as shown in the type just considered: -The Sin- 



offerings must be ended before all the blessings resulting can flow 
out. 

While the sacrifices of the people (Israel -the world) belong to the 
next age, and will then be presented to the Priests, yet in a certain 
sense this has a very slight beginning now. Thus it is, that the 
worldly man possessed of wealth, is in that sense a steward of 
God's things, and can use that "mammon" and with it make for 
himself friends; that when this age of Satan's rule is ended, and the 
reign of Christ commences, in which he shall no longer be a 
Steward, then, those whom he thus favored will bless him. If the 
worldly Stewards of wealth (the mammon or God of this age) were 
wise, they would use their means thus. For whosoever shall give a 
cup of cold water even, unto one of the least of these (Priests) shall 
by no means lose his reward when the kingdom of Christ is 
organized and its rule begins. Luke 16:1-8, and Matt. 10:42. 

It should be remembered that the restriction that the High Priest 
alone, went into the Most Holy once a year to make an atonement, 
should not be misunderstood to mean that he and the underpriests 
never went in thither during succeeding days-after the Atonement 
Day had made full reconciliation for sins. 

On the contrary, the High Priest went in there often in after days. It 
was into the Most Holy that the High Priest went whenever he 
would inquire for Israel, using the breast-plate of Judgment and 
Urim and Thumim. Again, whenever they broke camp, which was 
often, the Priests went in and took down the Vails and wrapped up 
the Ark, and all the holy vessels, before the Levites could carry 
them. Num. 4:5-16. 

Again, whenever an Israelite offered a sin offering unto the priests 
(after the "Day of Atonement" sacrifices were (over) they all ate it 
in the Most Holy. (Num. 18:10.) So with the antitype, after the 
present "Day of Atonement", is over the "Royal Priesthood" shall 
be in the Most Holy or perfect spiritual condition, and there accept 
(eat) the sacrifices for sin, brought by the world for their own 
transgressions not the Adamic sins which were canceled on the 
Day of Atonement. There in the perfect spiritual condition, the 
priesthood shall instruct in every matter represented in the Urim 
and Thumim. 



OTHER SIGNIFICANT TYPES. 

In the preceding description we have purposely omitted an 
explanation of some interesting details which can now be better 
understood by those who have, through careful study, obtained a 
clear understanding of the general plan of the Tabernacle, its 
services, and their typical signification. 

THE POSTS which stood in the court and held up the white 
curtains, represent justified believers. They are in the "Court," the 



proper place for such, as we have already seen. They are of wood, a 
corruptible material. This shows that they are not actually perfect as 
human beings; for since human perfection is represented by copper, 
those posts should either be made of copper, or covered with copper 
to represent actually perfect human beings. They were made of 
wood, but were set into sockets of copper, which teaches us that, 
though actually imperfect, their standing is that of perfect human 
beings. It would be impossible to more clearly represent 
Justification by faith. 

THE WHITE CURTAIN, well illustrates the same justification or 
purity. These justified ones should continually hold up to the view 
of the world (the camp) the pure linen representing Christ's 
righteousness, as their covering. 

THE SILVER HOOKS by which the posts hold up the curtain, are 
symbolic of TRUTH; (Silver is a general symbol of truth.) they can 
really and truthfully claim that Christ's righteousness covers all 
their imperfections. (Lev. 27:1 1-17.) and it is only by the aid of the 
TRUTH that they are able to hold to their justification. 

The Posts at the entrance of the Tabernacle -at the "door" of the 
Holy were covered by the first vail. They were totally different 
from the posts in the court, and represent the consecrated saints. 
The difference between these and the posts in the "Court" shows the 
difference between the justified and sanctified conditions. The 
consecration to death of a justified man, we have seen to be the way 
into the "Holy"-passing through, the death of the human will, the 
fleshly mind, the first vail. Hence these posts should illustrate this 
change; and so they do; they were covered with gold, symbol of the 
divine nature. Being set in sockets of copper, represents how "we 
have this treasure (divine nature) in earthen vessels" (2 Cor. 4:7) - 
i.e., our new nature is still based upon and rests in, our justified 
humanity. This, it will be remembered, corresponds exactly with 
what we found the "Holy" to symbolize, viz.: our place or standing 
as new creatures, not yet perfected. Exod. 26:37. 

THE POSTS in the "Most Holy," were just inside the second vail, 
and represent those who pass beyond the flesh (Vail) entirely, into 
the perfection of the spiritual condition. These posts were so 
constructed as to fully illustrate this covered with gold, 
representing divine nature, but no longer set in sockets of brass-no 
longer dependent on any human condition; they were set in sockets 
of silver (reality and truth), which seems to say to us: When you 
come inside this vail you will be perfect really and fully New 
Creatures. Exod. 26:32. 

THE GOLDEN TABLE bearing the shew bread, represents the 
church as a whole, including Jesus and the Apostles -all "Holding 
forth the word of life." (Phil. 2:16.) The great work of the true 
church during this age, is to feed and strengthen and enlighten all 
who enter the covenanted spiritual condition -The bride of Christ is 
to make herself ready. (Rev. 19:7.) The witnessing to the WORLD 



during the present age is quite secondary and incidental. The full 
BLESSING of the World will follow in God's "DUE TIME." 

THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK was all of one piece, hammered 
out; there was one central shaft with a lamp on top, and three 
branches on each side of it, each bearing a lamp, making seven 
lamps in all-a perfect or complete number. Does not this represent 
the complete Church from the Head, Jesus, to and including the last 
member of the "little flock," He is taking out from among men, to 
be partakers of the divine (gold) nature? Jesus says, "The seven 
candlesticks which thou sawest are the seven churches." Rev. 1:20. 
Yes, that candlestick represented the entire Church of the first-born. 
Not the nominal but the true Church is here meant however- the 
Royal Priesthood. 

The form of workmanship was beautiful a fruit and a flower, a 
fruit and a flower following successively, shows us that the true 
church ["whose names are written in heaven"] is both beautiful and 
fruitful from first to last. The lamp part on top of each branch was 
shaped like an almond, the significance of which we will see when 
considering Aaron's rod. 

The oil for this lamp was Olive oil- beaten or refined; and the 
lamps were kept lighted always. Oil is a symbol of the Holy Spirit. 
It was for the benefit of the priest class only, and represents the 
spirit or mind of God given to enlighten the church, in the deep 
things of God, which are entirely hidden from the natural man (1 
Cor. 2:14), even though he be a believer-a justified man (a Levite). 
None were permitted to go, or even to see, into this deeper light, 
hidden in the "Holy," but the true church, the consecrated ones-the 
Royal Priesthood. These always had access to the "Holy;" it was 
their right and privilege; it was intended for them. (Heb. 9:6.) The 
Levites could not see in, because of the vail of human-mindedness 
which came between them and the Sacred things; and the only way 
to set it aside was to consecrate and sacrifice wholly the human 
nature. 

The lights were to be trimmed and replenished every morning and 
evening, by the High Priest-Aaron and his sons who succeeded 
him in office. (Exod. 27:20-21; and 30:8.) So our High Priest, is 
daily filling us more and more with the mind of Christ, and 
trimming off the dross of the old nature. 

Are we sometimes puzzled to know why some who are in the 
church cannot see any but natural things-cannot discern the deeper 
spiritual truths of the Word? They can see Restitution for natural 
men, but cannot see our heavenly calling. These Tabernacle lessons 
show us why this is: They are brethren, of the household of faith, 
but Levites-in the Court; they never consecrated as priests, 
consequently cannot enter the "Holy," nor see the things prepared 
for the priests only. The natural "eye hath not seen, nor ear heard- 
neither have entered into the heart of man the things which God 
hath prepared for them that love Him. But God hath revealed them 



unto us who through consecration have become 'partakers of the 
divine nature' by His Spirit [light of the lamp], for the Spirit 
searcheth [revealeth] all things -yea, the deep [hidden] things of 
God." 1 Cor. 2:9,10. 

The church nominal has always included both the justified and 
sanctified classes-Levites and Priests. In Paul's letters certain parts 
were addressed to the justified class (Levites), who had not 
consecrated. Thus, after exhorting in Gal. 5, he winds up by 
assuring them, that the things he complains of, are evidences that 
they do not belong to the body of Christ, the Priesthood: for, he 
says, "They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the 
affections and lusts." Verse 24. 

In the same way he addresses the Romans (Ch. 12:1): "I beseech 
you therefore brethren [believers justified by faith in Christ- 
Levites], by the mercies of God [manifest through Christ in our 
justification], that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice; [that 
you consecrate wholly thus becoming Priests] holy, acceptable 
unto God." Being justified freely by faith in Jesus, God reckons you 
as sinless or holy; and He has agreed to accept every such sacrifice- 
- "With such sacrifice he is ever well pleased." By so doing, you 
become Priests-members in particular of the High Priest's body. 

The succeeding verse tells them what will result from so 
consecrating-viz. ; The transformation of their minds. Their wills 
being renewed, they will be priests new creatures possessing the 
spirit of Christ. The fact that at this time they have not the spirit of 
sacrifice is an evidence that they were not members of Christ for 
"if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of His." (Rom. 
8:9) and it seems evident to us, that by far the larger proportion of 
the early churches (much more so of the modern worldly mixture, 
the confused "Babylon" of the present day) were not 
CONSECRATED, consequently not Priests, but merely Levites, 
doing the SERVICE of the Sanctuary, but not sacrificing. 

Looking back at the type in the Law, we find that there were 8,580 
Levites appointed in the shadowy SERVICE, while only five 
Priests were appointed for the shadowy SACRIFICING. (Num. 
4:36,40,44,48; Ex. 28:1.) It may be that this, as much as the other 
features of that shadow, was designed to illustrate the proportion of 
justified believers to self-sacrificing, consecrated ones. Though 
now the nominal church numbers millions, yet when a fair 
allowance is made for hypocrites and one in every seventeen 
hundred of the balance supposed to be living sacrifices, (a correct 
proportion according to the type,) it seems quite evident that the 
Lord did not make a mis-statement when He said, that they who 
would receive the kingdom (the Royal Priesthood) would be a 
"little flock." Luke 12:32. 

The fact that we see believers who are trying to put away their sins, 
is not of itself evidence of their being Priests, for Levites, as well as 
Priests, should practice "CIRCUMCISION" of the heart -"putting 



away the filth (sins) of the flesh." Nor is a spirit of meekness, 
gentleness, benevolence and morality, always a result of 
consecration to God. These qualities belong to a perfect natural 
man- (the image of God), and occasionally partially survive the 
wreck of the "Fall." But such people when in the nominal church, 
not unfrequently pass for the cream of Christianity. 

Nor yet, when we see believers practicing self-denial in some good 
work of political or moral reform, is that an evidence of 
consecration to God, though it is an evidence of consecration to a 
WORK. Consecration to God says, any work, any where; Lo, "I 
delight to do THY will, O, God"-THY will in THY way be done. 
CONSECRATION TO GOD, THEN, WILL INSURE A 
SEARCHING OF HIS REVEALED PLAN IN HIS WORD, that 
we 

page 11 

may be able to spend and be spent, for Him and in His service 
according to His arranged plan. 

Marvel not, then, that so few have ever seen the glorious beauties 
within the Tabernacle; only Priests can see them. The Levites may 
know of them only as they hear them described. They have never 
seen the hidden light and beauty; never eaten of the "bread of 
presence;" never offered the acceptable incense at the Golden Altar. 
No; for these, they must pass the Vail-in entire consecration to 
God in sacrifice during the Atonement Day. 

THE GOLDEN ALTAR seems also to represent the entire 
(consecrated) church in the present sacrificing condition. From this 
altar ascends the sweet incense, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. 
Here is offered to God the willing services of the Priests; their 
praises, their willing obedience; all things whatsoever they do, to 
the glory of God. Those who thus offer incense acceptable to God 
by Jesus Christ (1 Pet. 2:5), come very close to their Father close 
up to the Vail; and if they have requests to make they may be 
presented with the incense "much Incense with the prayer of 
saints." (Rev. 8:3.) The prayers of such Priests of God are effectual. 
Jesus kept the incense continually burning and could say, "I knew 
that thou hearest me always." (John 11:42.) So we will be heard 
always, if we continually offer the incense of obedience to God: 
and none should expect to have requests recognized who do not 
thus keep their covenant-"If ye abide in me and my words 
[teachings] abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will and it shall be 
done unto you."* John 15:7. 

We have learned through types previously considered, something of 
the glory of the "Most Holy" (the perfect, divine condition) which 
no man can approach unto (1 Tim. 6:16), but to which the "NEW 
creatures" in Christ Jesus partakers of the Divine nature, will 
finally come, when the incense offering on the part of the BODY is 
finished and the cloud of perfume goes before us to Jehovah's 



presence that we may live beyond the vail acceptable to God by 
Jesus Christ our Lord. 

THE ARK. We would now endeavor to learn what God designed to 
symbolize by the "Ark of the Testimony," the only article of 
furniture in the "Most Holy. " Its name suggests that it illustrates the 
embodiment of Jehovah's plan, which he had purposed in himself, 
before even the head of the Christ had been created the beginning 
of the creation of God, or the minutest development of his plan 
taken place. It represented the purpose of God to develop a little 
flock, to be partakers of the Divine nature and to be imbued with 
power and great glory-the prize of our high-calling; the joy set 
before our Lord, and all the members of his body. 

As before stated, it was a rectangular box overlaid with gold which 
represents the Divine nature. It contained the Law showing how the 
Christ should meet in full, all the requirements of God's perfect 
Law, and also that legal authority should be vested in him as the 
Law executor. 

The righteousness of the Law was actually fulfilled in our head, and 
it is also fulfilled actually in us as new creatures who walk not after 
the flesh, but after the Spirit; that is, who walk in obedience to the 
new mind. The infirmities of the old nature which we are daily 
crucifying, are not charged to us as new creatures. 

When it is written that "the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in 
us" the end of our race perfection is reckoned to us, because we 
are walking toward, or after the spiritual perfection, which, when 
we reach the Ark condition in the "Most Holy" will be complete. 

AARON'S ROD that budded, shows the elect character of all the 
body of Christ, as members of the royal priesthood. By reading 
Num. 17, the meaning of the budded rod will be seen to be 
Jehovah's acceptance of Aaron and his sons-the head and 
underpriests-as the only ones who might perform the priest's office 
of Mediator. That rod, therefore represented the acceptableness of 
the "Royal Priesthood" -the Christ, Head and Body. The rod 
budded and brought forth almonds. A peculiarity about the almond 
tree, is, that the fruit appears before the leaves; so with the "royal 
priesthood;" they sacrifice or bring forth fruit, before the leaves, or 
professions are made. 

THE GOLDEN POT OF MANNA represents Immortality as being 
one of the possessions of the Christ of God. Jesus doubtless refers 
to this, when he says: "To him that overcometh will I give to eat of 
the hidden manna." (Rev. 2:17.) Manna was the bread which came 
down from heaven-a life sustainer; so God through Christ provides 
life for all Israel (the world) that they may live forever -continually 
eating of it; but he offers to those who become joint heirs, members 
of the Anointed Body, that they shall have a peculiar sort of manna, 
or life principal, the "hidden manna." One peculiarity of this pot of 
manna was, that it was incorruptible; hence, it well illustrates the 
immortal and incorruptible condition promised to all members of 



the "Seed" -which is Christ. The manna fed to Israel was not 
incorruptible and must be gathered daily. So all except the "little 
flock" of Priests will be provided with life everlasting, but 
conditional, while the little flock who under present unfavorable 
conditions are faithful overcomers, will be given incorruptible life, 
Immortality. See "FOOD" page 134. 

Here then in the golden Ark, is represented the glory to be revealed 
in the Divine Christ; in the budded rod, God's chosen priesthood; in 
the tables of the Law, the righteous Judge; in the incorruptible 
manna in the golden bowl, Immortality in divinity. 

Above this Ark, and constituting a lid, or head over it, was the 
Mercy Seat a slab of solid gold, on the two ends of which, and of 
the same piece of metal, were formed two cherubim, with wings 
uplifted as if ready to fly-their faces looking inward toward the 
centre of the plate on which they stood. Here, between the 
cherubim on the Mercy Seat, a bright light, indicated Jehovah's 
presence. 

To our understanding that Mercy Seat, Glory-light, and Cherubim, 
together represented Jehovah God. As with the Christ, so with 
Jehovah, He is here represented by things which illustrate attributes 
of his character. The light reminds us of Paul's words: (1 Tim. 6:16) 
God "only hath immortality, dwelling in light, which no man can 
approach unto." Humanity cannot enter his presence; hence, the 
priesthood, head and body, represented by Aaron, must become 
new creatures, "partakers of the divine nature" (having crucified 
and buried the human) before they can appear before that excellent 
glory. 

The slab of gold called the Mercy Seat, or more properly the 
Propitiatory, because on it the Priests offered the blood of the 
sacrifices which propitiated or satisfied God's just demands, 
represents the underlying principle of Jehovah's character - 
JUSTICE. His throne is established upon JUSTICE. "Judgment and 
justice are the habitation of thy throne." Psa. 89:14; Rev. 15:3; Job 
36:17 and 37:23; Isa. 56:1. 

The TWO CHERUBIM represent two elements of our Father's 
character as revealed in his Word, viz.: Love and Power. These 
attributes, Justice the foundation principle and Love, and Power of 
the same quality and lifted up out of it, are in perfect harmony with 
each other. They are all made of one piece; they are thoroughly one. 
Neither Love nor Power can be exercised until Justice is fully 
satisfied: Then they fly to help, to lift up and to bless. They were on 
the wing ready but waiting; looking inward toward the Mercy Seat, 
toward Justice, to know when to act. 

See the High Priest as he approaches with the blood of the 
Atonement sacrifices. Will he put it upon the Cherubim? No, 
neither the Power nor the Love of God independently require the 
sacrifice; he need not, therefore, sprinkle the Cherubim. It is the 
Justice of God that will by no means clear the guilty It was Justice 



that said: The wages of sin is death. When, therefore, the High 
Priest would give a ransom for sinners, it is to Justice that it must 
be paid. Hence the appropriateness of the ceremony of sprinkling 
the blood upon the Mercy Seat-upon the PROPITIATORY. 

Love led to the whole redemptive plan. It was because God so 
loved the world that he sent his only begotten Son to redeem it, by 
paying to Justice the ransom. So Love has been active, preparing 
for the redemption ever since sin entered-yes "from before the 
foundation of the world." 1 Pet. 1:20. 

"Love first contrived the way 
To save rebellious man." 

When the Atonement Day sacrifices (bullock and goat) are 
complete, Love tarries to see the results of its plan. As the blood is 
sprinkled, JUSTICE cries, it is enough. It is finished. Then comes 
the moment when Love and Power may act and swift they wing 
their flight to bless the ransomed race. When Justice is satisfied, 
Power starts upon his errand which is co-extensive with that of 
Love, using the same agency Christ. 

The relationship and oneness of that divine family the Son and 
Bride, represented by the Ark in harmony and oneness with the 
Father represented by the Cover, is shown in the fact that the Mercy 
Seat was the lid of the Ark, and hence a part-the top or head of it. 
As the head of the Church is Christ Jesus, so the head of the entire 
Christ is God. (1 Cor. 11:3.) This is the oneness for which Jesus 
prayed, saying: Father "I pray not for the world, but for those thou 
hast given me"-"that they all may be one; as thou Father art in me, 
and I in thee, that they also may be in us-that the world may [then] 
believe." John 17:9,21. 

UNBLEMISHED. 

It is significant also, that any member of the priesthood that had a 
blemish of eye, hand, nose, foot, or in any way, could not fill the 
office of Priest [High Priest]; neither any man having any 
superfluity, such as an extra finger, or toe. This seems to teach us of 
the perfection of every member of that body they are all 
"overcomers:" and furthermore, it shows that when the body of 
Christ is complete, there will be no additions permitted-no 
superfluity. If then, we are called, if we here heard the invitation to 
become members in particular of his Body, and have accepted it, let 
us seek to make our calling and election (as members of that "little 
flock") sure, by so running as to obtain the prize. If we miss the 
prize some one else will win in our place, for the body will be 
complete; not one member lacking, not one superfluous. Take heed 
"that no man take thy crown." Rev. 3:11. 

It has been a matter of surprise to some that the glories and beauty 
of the Tabernacle-its golden walls, its golden and beautifully 
engraved furniture, and vails of curious work were so completely 
covered and hidden from view of the people; no sunlight from 



without even, to illuminate its glorious beauty. But this is all in 
keeping with the lessons we have received from its services. As 
God covered the type and hid its beauty under curtains and rough 
unsightly skins so the glories and beauties of spiritual things are 
seen only when within, by those who enter-the Royal Priesthood. 
These, too, enter a hidden glory which the world and all outside fail 
to appreciate. Their glory and also their standing as new creatures 
are hidden from their fellowmen. 

Ah, these are of a royal line, 
All children of a King, 
Heirs of immortal crowns divine, 
And lo, for joy they sing! 

Why do they, then, appear so mean? 
And why so much despised? 
Because of their rich robes unseen 
The world is not apprised." 



:,: The importance of a clear apprehension of Christ's teachings as a 
guide to our requests and expectations; that we may not "ask amiss" 
and out of harmony with that teaching of God's plan; is clearly 
shown by this Scripture but seldom noticed. 



WALL CHARTS.-We have no more. 



R747 :page 11 

GOD gives to his children blessings without measure, but their 
trials he measures carefully. Every burden which he permits to rest 
on any of his loved ones is weighed with exactness. It is just 
enough to do its needful work. No portion of it could be spared. 



R772:page 11 

THE "LITTLE FLOCK" AND THE "GREAT 
COMPANY." 

Two distinct companies of spiritual children of God have been 
developing side by side throughout the Christian Age. One class is 
designated a "little flock," and the other "a great multitude." (Luke 
12:32; Rev. 7:9.) Not that one is called to be a member of the little 
flock, and another a member of the great company, but all are 
called to be of the little flock to whom it is the Father's good 
pleasure to give the kingdom, and to be joined in heirship with 
Jesus Christ, as his Bride. As Paul declares, "Ye are all called in 
one hope of your calling." Eph. 4:4. 



All these start on the same narrow way, and being fully consecrated 
to God are begotten of the Spirit through the word of truth. Hence 
all are "new creatures" -spiritual-their old nature (the human) 
being doomed to certain destruction by their own free will and 
covenant. Therefore if these ever develop it must be as spiritual 
beings. The human perfection, physical, mental, and moral, to 
which the world may attain in the next age, is now out of the 
question to these consecrated ones; that having been presented by 
them and accepted by God as their sacrifice. If these fail to develop 
as "new creatures"-spiritual-there is no other hope for them: Death 
is the only alternative. 

To be developed as new creatures, the old nature with all its hopes, 
ambitions, etc., must die. But to steadily put it to death, of our own 
continuous free will, is no light task, and this becomes more and 
more difficult, as the way narrows down to its end. Only a minority 
of all who in good faith make the consecration, run with patience to 
the end-in all only a "little flock." With many, courage begins to 
fail, and they need to be spurred onward by the chastening rod of 
him who has become our surety (Heb. 7:22) to guarantee that we 
fulfill our covenant, though our own efforts should fail; otherwise, 
the end of such must be death. In love, therefore, special afflictions 
are sent upon the consecrated, when needed, to wean the affections 
from earthly things, and to draw the heart again into closer 
sympathy and communion with God in fulfillment of its covenant 
of sacrifice. A few only run patiently in the way of sacrifice, 
rejoicing at the privilege of winning so great a prize at such small 
comparative cost. The great company, we read, come up through 
great tribulation, which the "little flock" escapes (Rev. 7:14; Luke 
21:36), and yet some in each company may have come through the 
very same experiences. To one it is great tribulation because he 
looks at the things that are behind, and weighs their value in the 
scales of this world; to the other it is but a light and easy yoke, 
because forgetting the things that are behind, he presses toward the 
prize of our high calling. 

"To him that overcometh," rendering a cheerful and willing 
sacrifice, even unto death, our Lord says, "will I grant to sit with 
me in my throne" (Rev. 3:21). And of the "great company" also 
beloved of the Lord, and rightly exercised by his chastening rod, it 
is said, "Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him 
day and night in his temple." 

Both companies are developed as spiritual beings, but the little 
flock to the highest order of spiritual being-the divine nature. Let 
us, therefore, seek to render unto the Lord that which is well 
pleasing to him, a cheerful, constant, willing sacrifice. "God loveth 
a cheerful giver." "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with 
thy might." Would the bridegroom want for his bride one who 
would come with any other spirit? No, faithfulness under 
difficulties is the test of her love and devotedness. 



At first sight Heb. 12:5,8, may appear to be out of harmony with 
this thought, but the Greek words "paideuo" and "paideias" in the 
King James translation rendered chastened and chastening, signify, 
to discipline, to instruct, to teach, to chasten. But chastening 
becomes a part of discipline only when the subject is an unwilling 
one. The Diaglott very clearly expresses the Apostle's thought. It 
reads, "My son, slight not the discipline of the Lord, neither be 
discouraged when reproved by him; for 

R772 : page 12 

whom the Lord loves he disciplines, and he scourges every son 
whom he receives. If you endure discipline, God deals with you as 
with sons; for is there any son whom a father does not discipline? 
But if you are without discipline of which all have become 
partakers, then truly you are spurious and not sons. Have we then 
received discipline from our natural father, and we reverenced 
them; shall we not much rather be submissive to the Father of 
spirits and live? For they indeed for a few days disciplined us 
according as it seemed right to them; but he for our advantage in 
order that we may partake of his holiness. 

Yes, we all need the disciplining, training and scourgings to which 
our heavenly Father is now subjecting all his spiritual sons, that we 
may be prepared for the responsible positions to which we shall 
shortly be assigned. If we never have received, and know nothing 
of, this discipline, this training, then we may be sure we are not 
sons. Even Jesus, the perfect man, received it, shall we then hope to 
escape it? Not unless we despise it, refuse to receive it, and turn our 
backs upon it, ignoring our covenant entirely, which open rebellion 
verse 9 implies and Heb. 10:26,27, clearly states, must end in death. 

The discipline which all the spiritual sons receive is the same which 
Jesus received the buffetings of the world, the neglect, the cold 
indifference, the misunderstanding, the unbelief, being despised, 
persecuted, and cast out as evil, even by some or all of those of our 
own household; Lawful and proper human desires which conflict 
with our covenant, as well as all sinful besetments which must be 
constantly curbed and crucified, however they may clamor with our 
new nature for their rights, are all elements of our discipline. Then 
again the peculiar and subtle temptations of the Adversary which 
must be met and overcome through faith in the divine promises, 
which must be diligently searched for, and stored in mind, as the 
defense against sudden and unlooked-for attacks. Such trials of 
faithfulness Jesus endured, and overcame, and we, by his aid, "in 
every time of need," may also overcome; though not like him, 
perfect, yet his grace is sufficient for us, and we can overcome as 
he overcame the world and its spirit (influence); yea, we can do all 
tilings through Christ's strength freely given unto us for the seeking. 
Phil. 4:13. 

All discipline is severe and painful, yet necessary, both as training 
for our future office as Priests unto God, and as filling up the 



measure of the afflictions of Christ now. It was experienced by our 
Head unto the bitter end-death, and that without a murmur. He was 
oppressed and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is 
brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her 
shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth. Isa. 53:7. 

He was led, not driven to death. He willingly permitted the sick and 
afflicted to partake of his vitality, his strength, and himself bore 
their infirmities to the extent necessary for their healing. In 
Gethsemane, knowing that his hour was come, he gave himself into 
the hands of his betrayers. He willingly endured the disapproval of 
men and denied himself the blessing of men that he might spend his 
time and talents according to his Father's will, esteeming it his meat 
and drink to do that will at any cost. All his sacrifice from the 
beginning to the end was rendered cheerfully, without a murmur, 
and even with delight. Why? Because he looked not at the things 
behind, which he had given up, but to the things before. He never 
even mentioned the things behind, but he had much to say of the 
things to come. 

To follow in his footsteps then is to sacrifice ourselves as he did, 
with the same uncomplaining cheerful submission, delighting to do 
the Father's will. To obey grudgingly, reluctantly, with slow and 
halting step, with much complaining and frequent lookings back to 
lament over the loss of the things behind, holding back, loving the 
world, its ways and its things, and driven forward mainly by the 
scourge of tribulation and fear, are marks of those developing for 
the "great company," and to such there is danger of not only being 
"cast away" from the anointed body, but also of not even gaining a 
position in the "great company." To gain a position in the latter 
even, they must give heed to the discipline, and in it, must wash 
their robes and make them white. The robe given to each saint is at 
first pure and spotless-Christ's righteousness is imputed to them. 
Those who fail to overcome and to keep their garments unspotted 
from the world must have the tribulation of washing them, and must 
rightly appreciate and use it, else they are unfit for either company. 

In the case of Jesus and all who joyfully surrender themselves, it is 
called "SACRIFICE" of the flesh or human nature, and such are 
called "OVERCOMERS." In the case of those who hold back and 
wait for tribulation before rendering obedience, it is called 
"DESTRUCTION of the flesh" or human nature. The one class of 
which Jesus is the head, overcome the world; the other is overcome 
by the world, but finally delivered by the Lord through tribulations. 
And the rewards of these two classes, as stated by the Lord, will 
differ. The "overcomers," a "little flock," as members of His body, 
will sit with him in the throne, and be members of the spiritual 
temple, and wear the crown. The others-a "great company" will 
serve God in or 

R773 : page 12 



through his temple (the Body of Christ) and praise him before his 
throne and have "palms" of victory at last, though they failed to win 
the crowns. 

In what a precarious situation we stand. O that all may be fully 
awake to the solemn responsibilities and issues of this, the 
Judgment Day of the Church -of all who have put on the name of 
Christ. All discipline indeed, as it respects the present, seems not to 
be of joy, but of grief; yet afterwards it returns the peaceful fruit of 
righteousness to those who have been trained by it. Hold fast. Let 
no man take thy crown. Do not let the gratification of the present 
moment rob you of the great prize of our high calling which God 
desires to bestow upon you. Lay aside every weight and hindrance 
and count present sacrifices all joy, and by cheerful, prompt 
sacrifice, work out, make your calling and election sure; work out 
your salvation while God by his truth and his providence shall work 
in you. 

"Therefore brace up the wearied hands and the enfeebled knees," 
make a desperate and continuous effort to render such a sacrifice as 
will be acceptable and well pleasing to God through Jesus; and 
"Make level paths for your feet" i.e., arrange your circumstances, 
etc., as far as possible, so as to help and not hinder you, "lest that 
which is lame be turned out of the way, but let it rather be healed" 
(Heb. 12:13.)-lameness or likings for certain things which as 
consecrated ones we have no right to. Make your circumstances 
favor self-denial in this way as much as possible, that you may not 
be severely tempted on this weak or lame point of your character. 

What great advantage accrues to the willing sacrificers the little 
flock? They run with joy, realizing the Father's approval, and 
inspired by the glory of the prize kept constantly in view, while the 
great company of consecrated ones limp painfully along, many of 
them through the very same outward experiences, harassed by 
fears, worried by doubts, saddened by the loss of the things behind 
which they cannot now enjoy, yet failing to clearly discern the 
glory before, and driven by circumstances, fear, etc., to the 
fulfillment of their covenant. 

And then this great company shall not be esteemed worthy to be of 
the Bride of Christ. That intimate relationship and communion is 
reserved only for those who have proved their devotedness by 
prompt, cheerful, willing sacrifices, even unto death. But the great 
company chastened, refined, purified shall be beloved and honored 
also with the next most favored position, because they were rightly 
exercised by the chastening rod. 

In view of the momentous issues of this time of trial, let our efforts 
be constantly supplemented by our prayers that the Lord may give 
us grace to let him work in us, to will and to do his good pleasure, 
for unaided by divine grace none of us can make our election sure. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R773 : page 12 

"CRY OUT AND SHOUT." 

DEAR BRETHREN: We read, "Cry out and shout thou inhabitant 
of Zion, for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee." 
Hallelujah yes he has come! "The Holy One of Israel" is now 
present. Those in "Zion" know of his personal presence; having 
heard his voice, and opened the door, they are now feasting with 
him. Blessed feast! "Wines on the lees." The marrow and fatness of 
gospel truth. New dispensational truth. "Meat in due season. " Again 
we say hallelujah! We cannot help it. The very stones would cry out 
if we held our peace. Our hearts are full of gladness, our mouths 
with praise, and eyes with tears of joy, as we read the last 
"TOWER," so full of gospel truth. Yes, beloved as you so 
truthfully say -"the whole armor is needed now more than ever in 
this day of battle for God's truth." 

What joy to the faithful virgin Bride to know that her Lord has 
come! What joy to her holy Bridegroom to reveal himself to his 
waiting, watching, faithful ones! "Unto them that look for him, 
shall he appear the second time." 

Long years ago "witnesses chosen of God" (Acts 10:41) saw him 
ascend in "a cloud." Silent and still his departure, unknown alike to 
the world and the worldly- lukewarm Church. Having received the 
kingdom, "in like manner" has he returned, "sitting on the white 
cloud" (Rev. 14:14), unknown alike to the world and the lukewarm, 
or Laodicean Church. 

But "witnesses chosen of God," by faithfully taking heed to the 
"more sure word of prophecy," whose eager eyes of faith, piercing 
through the white cloud, behold the King of Glory, with his golden 
crown and sharp sickle; a sure indication of harvest work. "The 
harvest is the end of the age." 

The seven churches of Asia seem clearly to represent the seven 
successive steps or stages in the development of the nominal gospel 
church, from the ascension to the second advent of Christ. He did 
not say, "Behold, I stand and knock," to any of the seven, except to 
the last, or Laodicean Church. To the others he said, "Behold, I 
come quickly." A dear friend, living in a distant State, writes me: "I 
am coming to you quickly." Has he come? No; but I am looking for 
him very soon. Again a message comes: "Behold! (see!) I stand at 
the door and knock. " Has he not come? Is he not present? 

Why does Christ accuse the seventh or Laodicean Church with 
blindness, unless because he is personally present and they fail to 
see recognize his presence? To none of the seven except the last 
does he say: "Anoint thine eyes with eyesalve, that thou mayest 
see." See what-who? Evidently the "Holy One of Israel," who is 
now "in the midst of Zion." "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they 



shall see God." "Without holiness no man shall see the Lord." The 
greatest joy of our hearts is to know that "all nations shall come and 
worship, in his presence." Your brother laborer in the harvest-field. 



R773 : page 12 

YOUR STANDING. 

We publish the following letter and its answer, as they may be of 
assistance to others of similar mind. 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL, Dear Sir:-I write to solicit two copies of 
"The Tabernacle and its Teachings," as I have just found where 
they are needed. I regret that I am unable to send a mite for the tract 
fund with this note. I am only a sinner, but I take great interest in 
this work. I do what lies in my power to propagate these truths, but 
few seem to have any curiosity, and still less the patience to 
investigate, yet occasionally we find one who is willing and 
anxious to search and find. 

I have always ridiculed orthodoxy, but have believed in the divinity 
of Christ. The WATCH TOWER has made the Bible very plain to 
me, and although I often feel myself a castaway, it is a great 
comfort to know that such a glorious future is soon to dawn upon 
this dying world. In reading the letters and articles of the WATCH 
TOWER I see that some are drinking the cup of which he drank, 
and are being baptized into his death. It seems to me impossible 
that any who have been so enlightened by the Spirit and exalted to 
such fellowship with God should falter or suffer any influence of 
evil in to any measure separate them from the love they have in 
him. 

If in early years I had known what I now know, I might have been 
among your number, but doubtless it is well. 

Yours very truly, 



DEAR BROTHER:-I presume you will be somewhat surprised 
that I address you as brother when you do not seem to reckon 
yourself a child of God. But of one thing I feel quite sure, that if 
you are not a brother of the anointed company, you are a brother of 
the household of faith-a sinner SAVED BY GRACE-and 
therefore not now a sinner. The weaknesses of our flesh which will 
not permit our perfect conformity to the will of God, are not 
imputed to us. They are not reckoned as our sins. Our sins were all 
laid upon Jesus who bore their penalty for us. Please read in the 
TOWER of March, 1884, the article entitled, "Lost and Saved," and 
I think you will see that I am right in calling you brother. 

But it may be that even in a higher sense you are a brother, yet not 
fully discerning your high relationship to God and his anointed. 



May it not be with you as it has been with many others, that you 
have at some time in the past given yourself to the Lord fully and in 
all sincerity, yet because of surrounding temptations, and only a 
vague indefinite knowledge of our Father's will and plan, you had 
grown cold and even forgetful of your covenant? If so, the truth 
now made so clear to your mind should be regarded as a special 
incentive urging you to fulfill your covenant, and thus make your 
calling and election sure. It is our Father's good pleasure to give us 
the kingdom, hence the special incentives now made so manifest in 
this special time of need. The restitution, or restoration to human 
perfection, which is to be the portion of the mass of mankind, will 
indeed be a glorious portion; but those who have once presented 
themselves as living sacrifices, holy, (justified) and therefore 
acceptable to God, can never be developed to human perfection 
(restitution); such are "new creatures in Christ" (spiritual) and as 
new creatures they must be developed. The human once given up 
and accepted of God, cannot be taken back. 

Think well, dear brother, and in the light of God's truth determine 
what is your position and calling, and then run with patience the 
race set before you, whether it be for human or for spiritual 
perfection. 

May the Lord richly bless you and lead you to a yet fuller and 
clearer apprehension of his glorious plan and his will concerning 
you. 



R774 : page 1 



VOL. VII. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., SEPTEMBER, 1885. 

NO. 1. 



page 1 



ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 40 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 
TAKE NOTICE. 



This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



R775 : page 1 

A SUGGESTION TO THE CONSECRATED. 

We have a plan in view which will enable those who have some 
time to invest, to bring forth fruit to the glory and praise of our 
Master. Those anxious for greater service in the Vineyard even at 
the eleventh hour may send a Postal Card to this office stating the 
fact, at once. What an honor is the privilege of being co-workers 
together with God. 



page 1 

A NUMBER of letters lately received give no post office address. 
This has wasted valuable time in searching them out, and some we 
could not find after all. The address should be FULL and very 
distinctly written, the first thing, at the top of your note. When an 
address is changed, state where from, as well as where to. When 
renewing a subscription remember to give the same initials as those 
given at first, in which you have been receiving it, if they are right. 
We cannot know that Mrs. Amelia B. Smith is the same we 
formerly addressed as Mrs. Charles D. Smith. 



R774 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

"Gird thy sword upon thy thigh O mighty one! (it is) thy glory and 
thy majesty; yea it is thy majesty. Be prosperous; ride along for the 
cause of truth and meekness and righteousness; and fearful things 
shall thy right hand teach thee. 

Thy sharpened arrows (people will fall down beneath thee) will 
enter into the heart of the King's enemies. Thy throne, given of God 
endureth forever and ever: the scepter of equity is the scepter of thy 
kingdom." Psa. 45:4-7.- Leeser. 

We are living in the grandly awful time when this Scripture is 
being fulfilled. These words were uttered by the prophet as 
Jehovah's mouth piece, foretelling not the suffering and death of the 
Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world, but declaring 



the majesty of him who gave himself a ransom for all, when he 
shall come to reap the fruits; of the victory which he then won, 
when he shall come to be glorified in his saints and admired 
[respected, obeyed, worshiped] in all them that believe in that day; 
when he shall take his great power and reign in equity, putting 
down all unrighteousness and subduing all things to the will of 
Jehovah. 

Would that more could see the fulfillment of this prophecy now in 
progress; it would inspire confidence to the meek lovers of right 
and truth, and inspire with awe those who practice unrighteousness 
and who receive not the truth in the love of it. 

The sword of Messiah is the truth, and with it he shall smite the 
nations. The smitings of the truth come upon all who come into 
conflict with it. It will smite and severely wound the unjust whether 
he be master or slave; whether workman, laborer, clerk, or master, 
employer, or capitalist; whether professed saint or sinner. The 
sword in the hands of him who now takes his great power to 
establish righteousness is the truth, and is to fulfill the prayer, "Thy 
kingdom come, thy will be done on earth." It is no respecter of 
persons and opinions, and he only that doeth righteousness shall go 
unrebuked. 

In which ever direction we look, we see the smitings of the sword 
of truth. The lesson of "RIGHT" [righteousness] is being forced 
upon every one; upon nations and individuals-all are gradually 
being forced to a clearer recognition of the advisability, yea, the 
necessity of EQUITY and fairness in their dealings one with 
another; and it is the smitings of the sword of truth that is causing 
them to learn the lesson. There are, and will still be for quite a 
while, and even increasingly so, wide differences between 
governments and people, and between employers and employed, 
between truth and error. On every subject conflicts will come, and 
the final victory will be for right and truth. 

He who most clearly apprehends the situation and most quickly 
yields to laws of the new King, will be first and most blessed. They 
who fall before him in obedience, and reverence to his scepter of 
righteousness, will the soonest be blessed and exalted by the King 
of glory, while they who oppose his scepter of righteousness are 
counted his enemies, and shall fall before his sharp arrows. In HIS 
DAY the righteous shall flourish and the evil doer [unjust] shall be 
cut off. Psa. 72:7 and 37:9. 

Many have claimed that this rule has always obtained, but such is 
not the case. The just and those who served the Lord have, suffered 
in so doing, because Satan, hitherto the "prince of this world," had 
no friendship for either the Head or members of Christ; and through 
all to whom he could communicate his spirit he has crucified and 
persecuted and maligned the Lord's anointed, and made the path of 
equity an uphill road for all who sought it. The meek and peaceably 
disposed he disdained and ignored and took advantage of. The bold, 



rapacious and grasping who exalted themselves by abasing and 
oppressing and sacrificing their fellow mortals, these he favored, 
and their deeds of violence he published as virtues and graces. 

But now we are in the transition time; Satan's power must grow 
less, and right, justice truth must become more respected and 
appreciated because the King of righteousness and peace now takes 
it as his sword and is wielding it. But though assured of the final 
outcome, that right and its Lord will conquer, and that he must 
reign, not only until he hath put all enemies under his feet, and 
brought the whole creation into entire submission to the will of 
Jehovah, whose will shall be done in earth even as in heaven, yet 
we must remember that the conflict will be sharp; every inch of the 
way will be contested. Between government and people we see 
more and more a disposition on the part of the people to see their 
rights and to demand them; and on the part of the governments 
exercised by the largest measure of liberality a disposition 
gradually to see and to concede these rights, though slowly and 
with reluctance. Between capital and labor also the struggle 
progresses; labor is awakening to its rights and to the necessity of 
vigorously demanding them; and some of the more liberal and fair 
minded capitalists conceding some of the rights claimed, are aiming 
as they can see the way, to grant to labor its proper reward and 
respect. But among nations, not all, but the few are wise and liberal; 
and among the people, not all are just in their demands or prudent 
in their expectations: capitalists in general are not liberal or 
disposed to be just toward their less favorably circumstanced fellow 
beings, and among laborers and workmen only a small minority are 
calm and wise and intelligent enough to be able to see both sides of 
the vexed problem so as to act reasonably and prudently. 

As a consequence of these obstacles, and further, because the 
present order and arrangement of society, is such that the conduct 
of employers and the wages paid for service, etc., must to a large 
extent depend upon the course of others, therefore the way to an 
open and complete rupture, the civilized world over is gradually but 
surely being forced. The end of this will be the victory of RIGHT 
and the overthrow of injustice, as well as of the misconceptions 
upon which they are built, and by which at present they are 
fortified. One result of that time of trouble will be the greater 
sympathy with which each class will look back upon the course of 
the other, in the present time. The bringing of all to a common level 
(the grand level of human brotherhood, with equality of rights, 
whose variety of talents shall minister to the blessing of all) is the 
first lesson of the Great Teacher and will prepare for further though 
less severe lessons in the theory and practice of the will of God "as 
it is done in heaven." 

Every one who in any way assists in the advancement of TRUTH 
and the establishment of RIGHT is a laborer in a good cause, 
whether saint or sinner. Such are fighting in this battle on the side 
of the Mighty One, and are helping to draw the bow of truth which 



sends the arrows of conviction into the hearts of the enemies of the 
King of Righteousness; and though as shown above the conflict 
cannot be averted the crash must come yet to such we say Press 
on! your labor will hasten the conflict to its glorious end. It is 
noble; It is right. Seek to serve the cause of TRUTH from the love 
of truth, not for faction or party policy. 

Yet the saints should not be found battling thus, though they may 
sympathize with the RIGHT and TRUTH on every issue: they have 
a still higher and still more important position, in the same "battle 
of the great day of God Almighty." They stand closer to the 
conquering King; they are armed with the same sword of the spirit, 
the word of God. They also ride upon white horses [pure doctrine]. 
They that are thus with him are "called and chosen and 
FAITHFUL," (Rev. 17:14; 19:11-16) and their part in the fray is to 
oppose false doctrines, and to slay with the SWORD of the truth. 

Great is the multitude of Babylon, grand and imposing their 
appearance, yet fear not little flock, the race is not to the swift nor 
the battle to the strong and mighty, for greater is he that is on our 
part than all they that be against us. 

R775 : page 1 

His word assures us that "the slain of the Lord shall be many" (Isa. 
66:14-16), but he smites to bless; he wounds to heal. When the 
conflict is ended Great Babylon with all its legions will be no more. 
The Presbyterian legions, with its staunch veterans and their well- 
worn battle flags of "Predestination" and "Decrees," will be no 
more. The arrows of scepticism and unbelief will smite down many, 
and the sword of the conqueror shall prevail against them, until they 
shall SEE him and surrender themselves and their banners to him 
and take a place in his army. The Methodist legion, with their 
popular banner- "Free Grace," will be no more; many of her 
defenders will fall, and some will find in the ranks of the Conqueror 
a larger and a grander banner of Free Grace and full salvation than 
they had ever dreamed of. The Episcopal, and the Lutheran, and the 
Roman legions and others shall be no more. Those of each of these, 
who were once blinded and deceived, shall join the Legion of "The 
King's Own" so soon as they see 

R775 : page 2 

the truth. But woe then to those who now see and obey not the 
truth; woe will then be upon all who knew the Master's will and did 
it not who knew that they were among those opposing the 
TRUTH, and who gave their time, influence and voice against it 
from policy, or other considerations. Such shall be beaten with 
MANY STRIPES. 

Let all who would serve the King, and who would be seen under no 
other banner than His, and be known by none other name nor wield 
another sword, than his, put on the whole armor of defence and take 
and use the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God. The 



message to every faithful member through the Head is "Gird on the 
sword.... Be prosperous, ride along for the cause of truth and 
meekness and righteousness." "I will give you a mouth and wisdom 
which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist." 
Luke 21:15. 



R775 : page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Hucknall Torkard, England. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL.-I forward another small sum 
towards whatever fund most needs help. I have great reason to be 
thankful for the glorious light which shines upon the Word of God, 
but I am distressed at my small amount of service. I long to be able 
to preach the glad tidings, but it seems sometimes as though I had 
to keep all the good things to myself. I don't know what member I 
am, but I'm thankful God gives me some little to do. A word here a 
line there. A copy of "Food" loaned here with a request to have the 
reader's opinion after going through it; a copy of WATCH TOWER 
there, and a conversation wherever I feel it will be for the edifying 
of saints or the pulling down of the strongholds of Satan. These I 
feel assured are not fruitless ways of proclaiming the gospel of 
peace. 

Since I last wrote to you, my brother who was in the Methodist 
ministry, has "come out of her," not being able to hold the traditions 
and dogmas of the deceived elders. He will not accept all my views, 
but is very much more in favor of ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 
"Food" and "Tabernacle" teachings than he was some time ago. 

My position is a most peculiar one. I have had my name taken off 
the books and refuse to subscribe towards the connectional funds, 
but the people with whom I have labored so long are not willing 
that I should leave them. They know my views, in some measure at 
any rate, and are willing for me to teach them, saying we are 
Christians, brethren in Christ, and on that ground we claim your 
fellowship; we don't care what you believe; we know you are a 
Christian and that is enough for us. It is the fellowship we desire 
not the name. 

They are a most loving little band of people, and you may rest 
assured that the grains of truth let fall and those scattered, are not 
lost. If I am doing wrongly I only want the Lord of the vineyard to 
show me and give me something to do somewhere else. I cannot 
live without working for the Master, but it seems very slow work. 



I have to preach for these people next Wednesday, and intend 
taking "The Lord's Coming" (discourse) from the TOWER, with 
additions. May the Lord of the harvest separate the wheat. 

I have had some severe conversations with one of the ministers here 
which only confirms my faith in God's word and the WATCH 
TOWER'S interpretation; it is by such things we are made strong. 

I do long for the manifestation of the Son of God, though I am by 
no means certain of being amongst specially favored ones. I was 
only a very nominal Christian until after 1881. 1 am totally 
unworthy and unfit for such a glorious high calling, but I know my 
joy will be full if I'm only a meek inheritor of the earth. 

It is a great trial for the members to be separate. I don't know how 
others feel, but I do long for the fellowship, face to face with 
another who holds ZION'S WATCH TOWERS' teachings as fully 
as myself; but organizations are not to be desired, therefore, we 
must wait patiently and if the Lord will, I'll praise him in company 
with the other brethren in his kingdom. 

I would not part with my TOWERS for their weight in gold. I am 
reading all carefully through again and making notes. May the Lord 
bless you ever more and more abundantly. Will try to send again in 
a short time. With heartiest Christian brotherly love. I am dear 
brother, very faithfully yours. . 



DEAR BROTHER:-You seem to have a hopeful field. If they 
"have an ear to hear" let them hear the good tidings. Preach the 
whole truth, exposing popular errors fearlessly but kindly, 
withdrawing all your influence from sectarianism, and very shortly 
you will find the truth doing a separating work; more than likely 
too, some of the reproaches which fell upon our Lord will fall upon 
you. 

Regarding your hopes of membership in the Christ only yourself 
and the Head can fully decide. Let me say, however, that the fact of 
your discernment of spiritual things (1 Cor. 2:9-12,14,15) and that 
discerned they awaken a love which leads you to willing self- 
sacrifice in the service of truth, seems to indicate that you are 
begotten of the spirit of the truth to "the high calling of God which 
is in Christ Jesus." We presume that like thousands of others you 
covenanted with, and consecrated yourself to the Lord, long before 
you realized all that it implied. In fact all have done so, to a greater 
or less extent. We esteem you a brother in Christ: grow up unto him 
in all things, who is the Head of the body, even Christ. 

EDITOR. 

page 2 



Dyersburg, Tenn. 



DEAR SIR AND BROTHER IN CHRIST. -Inclosed please find 
P.O. for $5.00 which you will please place to the credit of the Tract 
Fund. I am very sorry I have not been able to do more for the Lord's 
cause, but he has seen fit to permit me to be sorely tried. I have 
done very little work for ten months previous to May 1st, since 
which time I have been here under severe and trying circumstances. 
Of course having no work for so long, I was obliged to go in debt, 
and now I have to work very hard for very small pay. Last week I 
worked overtime and made a few dollars extra, so I send the above 
hoping the Master will accept the sacrifice. 

God bless you is my daily prayer. Yours in hope of the First 
resurrection. 



R775 : page 2 



Passaic Co. N.J. 

DEAR FRIENDS :-I promised last year to send the price of my 
subscription but was unable to do so because we got in debt, and I 
had to pay it by washing. I am now teaching to finish a term left 
vacant before the close of the school year. I enclose money to pay 
for the past year and the present, to renew my mother's 
subscription, and to send the paper to a poor brother who is 
searching after the truth. I think some copies of previous papers 
would be beneficial to him. I want to tell you, for encouragement, 
that there is no reading matter that presents to me such good 
doctrine; that affords so much meat in season as the TOWER. I 
look for them eagerly. I am trusting in God, but it seems I am 
almost overcome with the cares of this life. Since I have been 
teaching I have done the work for my family of seven except 
washing, with the little assistance my boys could give me, taking 
my one year and a half baby to my sister-in-law next door, and 
walking a mile to school. I am so tired and so unreasonably irritable 
sometimes, I am discouraged, I thought I might have taken too 
much upon myself, but the matter was in the Lord's hands entirely. 
I was willing to live in debt and want if it was best for my 
discipline, and, not five minutes before the trustee came to inform 
me of my acceptance I had said "Father if it is best for me to have 
the school and the money, I am ready; if not, it is all right." And 
now all glory be to him, he has enabled me to accomplish the work 
successfully, to purchase a cow and implements to make butter, and 
to supply some of the most pressing needs in the family, beside 
paying my subscription and furnishing more food for mother and 
brother. I visited him last Sunday and he eagerly asked for proof of 
some truths I opened to him. He could not understand how I could 
stay away from church and be justified, while I had an "influence 
for good" among them, but I cannot go to church, and you cannot 
know how alone I am, and set aside as evil. I could not bear it but 



for God. I am willing, however, and find much comfort in a clear 
conscience and the Word of God. Yours in our Lord. 



page 2 

A Brother who is laboring privately in the vineyard has been 
privileged to see some fruit to his labor; he received the following 
letter which explains itself. He sent it to us and we give some 
extracts to you. All may not so soon see precious fruit rewarding 
labor but every effort pays and bears fruit, upon ourselves, if not 
always in those we endeavor to help. 

EDITOR. 

York County, Pa. 

DEAR SIR. I suppose you do not know that I owe you a large 
amount, not of money, but of thanks, for something. You could 
hardly guess what, but I will tell you what; it is for certain 
instructions, or a start to that instruction or knowledge which I have 
since learned. Do you recollect last fall at the York Fair we were 
talking about the Bible and its teachings? You told me that you 
learned a great deal, I think you said in the last year or so; and you 
told me different things about the Bible, etc. But just at that time 
the Bible was not of much weight to me, because I found too many 
faults and errors in it at that time, and about one-half contradicted 
the other half of it. And, in fact, I thought Ingersoll was more right 
than the Bible; and he is, just as correct as the doctrine our 
ministers are preaching from the pulpits. I am altogether astonished 
at myself that I did not see and understand more than I did. I 
thought when I read something I could understand, too, but I did 
not. 

You probably remember that you told me to subscribe for ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER, I at once did so, and got a few numbers, and 
also the tracts entitled "Food for Thinking Christians" and "The 
Tabernacle Teachings," and I commenced to read these papers and 
books through, and pretty soon I got to studying these papers and 
books and am to-day not half done studying them, because the more 
I read them, the more I have to refer to the Bible, and now I find 
that the Bible is a most wonderful book. Everything is right; there 
are no contradictions in it; it supports its own teachings perfectly 
throughout. I am a great friend and lover of it. Indeed, everything is 
plain if a person can just get to see it once. How simple and how 
easy and beautiful it is. Oh, the depth of the riches both of the 
wisdom and knowledge of God. What astonishes me, is the 
ignorance of our ministers. In every sermon that I hear preached, I 
hear many mistakes, but these mistakes in themselves would of 
course be of not much account, but they in this way teach and 
instruct the people wrongly, telling them things which are not so. I 
think it is dreadful. But I must also tell you that it is very hard to get 
people to believe the Bible as it is. May be you are more successful, 



but I find it hard to convince them. O, to be sure, there are some 
who take no special interest in it who listen, but when all is said, 
are dull and know nothing. Those who want to understand 
something are not so quick turned. 

I cannot express my thanks to you in giving me the start in so noble 
a study. 

Very truly yours, . 



New Orleans, La. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL: I am glad that the "Plan of Redemption" 
has met with a joyful reception in my Norway home. I heard from 
my father a week ago. He sends his thanks and warm greetings to 
you all. He says that it is not entirely new to him, he having 
discerned from the Word the outlines of the plan; but he rejoices 
now with joy unspeakable in being more fully able to see the plan 
clearly, being aided by my translations from the WATCH TOWER 
and FOOD, together with the long letters that I write to him, 
making it as plain as I can. Others besides himself are also getting 
interested, to whom these translations and letters are read, as the 
epistles of old, to different little congregations. 

I have had a chance for about a month past to tell these wonderful 
tidings in a public way-the best way I can. The chaplain of the 
"Seamen's Bethel" has gone North for the summer, and left his 
place in charge of a man who is good enough to let me speak at 
their Sunday evening and Thursday evening meetings. There are 
not many ships and sailors in port at present, but a good many city 
people go to these meetings. Some are getting interested. I will, 
with God's help, continue till I am put a stop to, which will be when 
the old orthodox chaplain comes back. I give away many WATCH 
TOWERS to Christian seamen going to foreign countries, no telling 
what soil they may strike root in. 

By the way, I experienced last night that when a natural or non- 
begotten person gets sick, and repents of his sins believing in 
Christ, his body is also restored to soundness in answer to prayer. I 
could not help thinking about the passage in Mark 4:11,12. The 
time is coming that those without should also understand and 
believe and be converted that they might be healed. Bless the Lord, 
O my soul. Yours as ever, 



"THERE is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the 
man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified 
in due time." -1 Tim. 2:5. 



R776 : page 3 



R776 : page 3 



"MASTER, SAY ON!" 

Master, speak! Thy servant heareth, 
Longing for Thy gracious word, 
Longing for Thy voice that cheereth; 
Master, let it now be heard, 
I am listening, Lord, for Thee; 
What hast thou to say to me? 

Often through my heart is pealing 
Many another voice than Thine, 
Many an unwilled echo stealing 
From the walls of this Thy shrine. 
Let thy longed-for accents fall; 
Master, speak! and silence all. 

Master, speak! I cannot doubt Thee, 
Thou wilt through life's pathway lead; 
Saviour, Shepherd, oh, without Thee 
Life would be a blank indeed. 
Yet I seek still fuller light, 
Deeper love, and clearer sight, 

Resting on the 'faithful saying,' 
Trusting what Thy gospel saith, 
On Thy written promise staying 
All my hope in life and death;- 
Yet I ask for more and more 
From Thy love's exhaustless store. 

Master, speak! and make me ready, 
As thy voice is daily heard, 
With obedience glad and steady 
Still to follow every word. 
I am listening, Lord, for Thee: 
Master, speak, speak on, to me! Sel. 



THEUNDEFILEDONE. 



Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one. -JOB 
14:4. 

That the pre-existent Son of God "was made flesh and dwelt 
among us," is clearly stated in the Scriptures (John 1: 14); that he 
was "holy," "undefiled" and separate from sinners is plainly stated 
(Heb. 7:26 and Luke 1:35); and that he knew no sin, while all other 
men are sinners by nature, is also stated (2 Cor. 5:21; Rom. 5:18; 
and 1 Pet. 2:22). The Apostle's argument that he was able to, and 
did give himself a ransom or corresponding price for the forfeited 



life and rights of Adam Rom. 5:17-19; 1 Tim. 2:6) proves the same; 
because the first Adam was perfect until he sinned; hence one who 
could give a corresponding price must have been likewise perfect, 
without sin, and free from its condemnation. The same thought is 
logically deduced from the statement that Jesus kept, fulfilled all 
the requirements of the Law; for we know that it was the measure 
of a perfect man's ability. Hence the conclusion is irresistible that 
he must have been a perfect man when able to do what no imperfect 
man had done or could do. (Psa. 49:7; Heb. 1:3; 4:15; 9:28; 10:5- 
10; Isa. 53:10-12; John 1:29.) 

But notwithstanding the mass of Bible testimony as to his human 
perfection, many inquire, Can the possibility of this be scientifically 
shown? Others assert that it is an impossibility, and that the laws of 
nature are in direct opposition. They give unbounded weight to 
their imperfect understanding of nature's laws, and lightly cast aside 
the weight of Bible testimony. 

The question, however, is well worthy of an examination from a 
scientific as well as from a scriptural standpoint: and Science and 
Scripture will be found to agree when properly understood. There is 
no law against our seeking evidence from every good source, but 
only egotism, or blindness, or both, will exalt human reasonings 
above the divine testimony. 

We raise the query then: How came it that Jesus was perfect while 
his mother was imperfect? Who can bring a clean thing out of an 
unclean? Seeking to answer this query, the Church of Rome 
promulgated the doctrine of the "Immaculate Conception": Not the 
doctrine that Jesus was miraculously conceived by the holy power 
of God, as recorded by the Evangelists; but that Mary, the mother 
of Jesus, had a miraculous conception, and hence that she was pure, 
holy, and free from Adamic sin and imperfection. But the 
originators of this doctrine could not have been far-seeing, or they 
would have known that by the same reasoning it must be proved 
that Mary's mother had an immaculate conception, and so all the 
way back; when they would meet the same objection in Eve, "the 
mother of all living." She certainly was not sinless, for her 
transgression is recorded. 1 Tim. 2:14. 

However, this subject is perfectly clear and plain now, from a 
scientific as well as from a Bible standpoint; but because of its 
intricacy and delicacy, special attention must be given in order to 
grasp its force. 

For this reason we have not heretofore presented this subject, but 
recent inquiries seem to indicate the necessity for its presentation in 
order to confirm the faith of some. 

The Scriptures hold out the thought that all EXISTENCE, LIVING 
ENERGY; or BEING, comes from the father and not from the 
mother. The mother receives and nourishes that germ of being until 
it is able to maintain an independent existence; i.e., until it is able to 
appropriate to its maintenance the life-sustaining elements which 



the earth and air supply: but the living organism which she 
nourishes came entirely and exclusively from the father. The word 
father has the significance of life-giver. 

In harmony with this principle, God was the "FATHER," or life- 
giver, while the earth was the Mother of Adam, and hence of the 
human race (Luke 3:38). In harmony with this principle, the 
children are spoken of, as of, or from their fathers and borne by 
their mothers. (Gen. 24:47.) Thus the children of Jacob, counted 
through his sons, were seventy when he came out of Egypt; but if 
he or the twelve Patriarchs had daughters, which we cannot doubt, 
the children of those daughters were not counted as Jacob's 
children, they being counted to their fathers. And all of these 
seventy souls or beings are expressly said to have come out of the 
loins of Jacob. (Gen. 46:26,27, and Ex. 1:5.) So of Solomon it is 
said, that he came out of the loins of David. (1 Kings 8:19, and 2 
Chron. 6:9.) So also the Apostle Paul and Israelites in general 
claimed that they all came out of the loins of Abraham; and of Levi 
it is written that "he was yet in the loins of his father when 
Melchisedec met him." Heb. 7:5,10. 

Thus also the whole race was in and sprang from Adam their father, 
but were not from Eve. And thus it is written that in (through) 
ADAM all die, but not in (through) Eve. Because the race came of 
Adam it was, therefore, tried in him. 

This which the Scriptures teach, is the latest deduction of science 
on this subject of Progeneration, as applied to life in all its forms. 
Scientists find abundant and conclusive proof in nature that life or 
being comes always from the male. The simplest form of 
illustration is a hen's egg: Of itself it contains no life; no living 
organism could under any circumstance come of it, unless it be 
impregnated with a living organism by the male. The egg consists 
of the proper elements, and in proper proportion, adapted to the 
minute organism received into it; and under proper conditions that 
organism develops: The yolk becomes wholly the bird, while the 
clear liquid albumen serves as its earliest nourishment until it 
breaks the shell and is able to sustain itself by appropriating cruder 
elements of nutrition. The principles here involved are the same in 
human and other animals. 

In view of these testimonies of the Bible and Science it is a 
reasonable deduction that if the father be perfect, the child will be 
so: the perfect progeny would absorb and appropriate only such 
elements of nutrition as were suitable and beneficial to its perfect 
development- throwing off through the operation of its perfect 
organism any other elements. On the contrary, if the germ of being 
be imperfect, it will appropriate whatever qualities its mother 
furnishes-good or bad; being imperfect, it would be unable to 
reject wholly the poisonous elements of disease. This is on the same 
principle that if two persons eat of strong food, the one with good 
digestive powers can appropriate its nutriment and pass off its 
unwholesome qualities, while the other with weak digestion could 



appropriate little nutriment from the same food and would be 
injured by its evil qualities. 

It follows then, that had mother Eve alone sinned, the race would 
not have died: had Adam remained perfect, his life unforfeited and 
unimpaired, his offspring would have been the same, the 
imperfections of Eve would not have affected them; being perfect 
they would have appropriated good elements and have passed off 
naturally any elements of decay without injury. On the other 

R777 : page 3 

hand, suppose that Adam had sinned and Eve had remained sinless, 
Adam's condemnation and death would have affected the entire 
posterity just the same; the most perfect nourishment given to 
imperfect and dying germs would never make of them perfect 
beings. Hence the appropriateness of the Scriptural statement, that 
"In Adam all die," and "By one man's disobedience.. .death passed 
upon all." (1 Cor. 15:22; Rom. 5:12,19.) How wonderful the 
correspondency here between the first and second Adams and their 
Brides. As the death of the race depended not upon Eve but wholly 
upon Adam, and yet she shared in the bringing of it, so the restored 
life of the race redeemed, depends not at all upon the Bride of 
Christ, but upon Jesus, though by divine favor it is arranged that she 
shall share in the work of RESTITUTION of "that which was lost." 

The fountain Adam having become contaminated by sin and death, 
none of his posterity can be free from contamination, for, "Who can 
bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one." The reference here 
must be understood as applying to the man and not to the woman: 
none coming from or out of the contaminated fountain can be clean: 
hence, "There is none righteous, no, not one;" none can redeem his 
own life nor give to God a ransom for his brother. Rom. 3:10; Psa. 
49:7. 

It follows then that the only obstacle to the generation of a perfect 
man is the lack of a perfect father to give a perfect life-germ; and 
hence the teaching of Scripture, that in the case of Jesus a perfect 
LIFE-GERM transferred by divine power from a pre-existent 
condition to the embryo human condition, was born "holy" and 
perfect, though of an imperfect mother (Luke 1:35). That he was 
free from sin and from every contamination which his mother in 
common with the entire human race shared, is entirely reasonable, 
and in perfect accord both with Scripture and with the latest 
scientific findings and deductions. 

Another fact which scientists are demonstrating to themselves 
which seems to concur with Scriptural testimony is, that though life 
or being comes from the father, FORM and NATURE comes from 
the mother. The scientific proofs of this are more abstruse and less 
easily grasped by the ordinary mind; and this because in wisdom 
God has not only separated the various kinds, or natures, but in 
great measure limited them, so that they cannot mix or blend 
beyond certain limits. 



The clearest illustrations of this principle that kind or nature comes 
from the mother, scientists have yet to learn, is found in the 
Scriptures: They furnish the principal and clearest illustration of the 
effect or result of miscegenation or the blending of distinct natures 
and prove more conclusively than science has yet been able to do, 
that NATURE comes of the mother though the father's 
characteristics attach. Take as an illustration, the offspring of the 
improper union between "the daughters of men" and those angels 
who kept not their proper estate, but degraded their nature: the 
progeny had the vitality of the fathers but the nature of the mothers- 
-they were renowned MEN. [Superior to the then decaying race, it 
would have had hard masters in those Nephelim, had not God in 
goodness not only swept away the new race [new, because not of 
the same father] in the Flood, but restrained "those angels" who 
caused this trouble, depriving them of their former liberties, see 
articles in issues of June and December, 1884, and January, 1885, 
treating of these.] So great was the renown of these that it is to be 
found with more or less distinctness in heathen mythologies to this 
day, and hundreds of years after their destruction in the flood the 
false report that some of these were yet alive caused a panic among 
the victorious Israelites flushed with the victory of recent battles. 
See Num. 13:33. 

But the chief illustration of this principle, is found in the fact that 
Jehovah, himself of the divine nature, has begotten sons of the same 
as well as other natures. He is the father of those of the angelic 
nature (Job 2:1; 38:7; Heb. 2:9), and of the human nature (Luke 
3:38), as well as of the "NEW CREATURES" who shall be made 
partakers of his own divine nature. (2 Pet. 1:4). The will or 
ENERGY of Jehovah operating upon spirit-substances produced 
and developed angels; operating upon earthly substances (Gen. 2:7; 
1 Cor. 15:47.) man was produced out of them, and when He would 
give us a clear conception of the generation of the new creatures to 
the divine nature, He represents us as begotten of him in the womb 
of the Covenant which he made with Abraham, which he 
symbolizes in a woman Sarah, telling us that as Isaac was the heir 
of Abraham and child of promise (by Sarah), so we as or like Isaac 
are children of God, being children of the promise or Sarah 
covenant. Gal. 4:23-31, and 1 Pet. 1:3,5,23; and 2 Pet. 1:4. 

The same principle is illustrated in the fact that in the typical 
dispensation, prior to the Christian Age, a child inherited blessings 
and privileges of its father, according to the favor and standing of 
its mother; thus again declaring that the mother's nature, rights, 
privileges and liberties attached to the child, though not of necessity 
the father's. See Gen. 21 : 10; Ex. 21:4; Gal. 4:30. 

Again, Jesus' birth of a woman proves the same thing. The "holy 
thing" born 

R777 : page 4 



of a woman partook of the woman's nature, i.e., human nature "of 
the earth earthy." Though retaining all the purity and perfection of 
the pre-existent (spirit) state, the transferred germ of being (in 
harmony with this law we are examining) partook of the nature of 
the mother and was "made flesh" by being "born of a woman." 

It is yet further in harmony with this same law or principle that 
though Christ has been highly exalted to the divine nature, and is no 
longer human, yet it is declared of Him that he shall be the life- 
giver or father of the whole human race, while it is also shown that 
his work for the race is to restore the perfection of human nature 
which was lost for all through Adam's sin, thus showing that He as 
father will be on the divine plane, while the restored race as 
children of God through Christ will be on the human plane as 
represented in the New Covenant, illustrated by Keturah, 
Abraham's third wife, in the type. See "Food," page 153. 



R778 : page 4 



OVERCOMING FAITH. 



"This is the victory that overcometh the world," says the Apostle 
St. John, "even our faith." Even so, faith is our victory whereby we 
overcome the prince of this world. Faith sets the stronger Lion of 
the Tribe of Judah against this roaring lion of the bottomless pit; 
that delivering lion against this devouring lion. When the soul is 
surrounded with enemies on all hands, so that there is no way of 
escape, faith flies above them and carries up the soul to take refuge 
in Christ, and it is there safe. 

That is the power of faith; it sets a soul in Christ, and there it looks 
down upon all temptations as waves at the bottom of the rock, 
breaking themselves into foam. When the floods of temptation rise 
and gather, so great and so many that the soul is even ready to be 
swallowed up, then it says, "Lord Jesus, thou art my strength, I look 
to thee for deliverance; now appear for my deliverance"; and thus it 
overcomes; the guilt of sin is answered by his blood, the power of 
sin is conquered by his Spirit, and afflictions that arise are nothing 
compared to these; his love and gracious presence make them sweet 
and easy. 

Although, then, thou seest thyself the most witless and weak, and 
findest thyself nothing but a prey to the powers of darkness, yet 
know, that by believing, the wisdom and strength of Christ are 
thine; thou art and oughtest to find thyself all weakness, but he is all 
strength -mightiness itself. Learn to apply this victory, and so it is 
thine; be strong in him and the power of his might. But thou wilt 
say, "I am often foiled, yea, I cannot find that I prevail at all against 
mine enemies; but they still prevail against me." Yet rely on him; 
he can turn the chase in an instant. Still cleave to him. When the 
whole powers of thy soul are as it were scattered and routed, rally 



them by believing. Draw thou but into the standard of Jesus Christ, 
and the day shall be thine, for victory follows that standard, and 
cannot be severed from it. Yea, though thou find the smart of divers 
strokes, yet think that often a wounded soldier hath won the day; 
believe, and it shall be so with thee. And remember, that thy defeat, 
through the wisdom and love of thy God, may be ordered to 
advance the victory to put courage and noble energy into thee 
against thine enemies -to humble thee, and drive thee from thine 
own imagined strength to make use of his strength. And be not 
hasty; think not at the very first to conquer. Many a hard conflict 
must thou resolve upon, and often shalt thou be brought very low, 
almost to a desperate point, to thy sense past recovery; then it is 
time to step in, even in the midst of their prevailing. Let God but 
arise, and his enemies shall be scattered. Thus the Church hath 
found it in her greatest extremities; and thus likewise the believing 
soul. Selected. 



R777 : page 4 



TO BE CAST OUT. 



If the salt have lost its savor,. ..it is thenceforth good for nothing, 
but to be cast out, and to be trodden underfoot of men.-MATT. 
5:13. 

The careful student of Jesus' words will find in them convincing 
evidence that he foreknew the history of the Christian Church from 
its inception to its close. It was through him, beyond doubt, that 
Paul was enabled to point out, for the guidance of the faithful, the 
great apostasy which was to extend through centuries of her history, 
and the final revelation of the man of sin. 2 Thess. 2. 

In the epistle to the Romans (chap. 15), Paul alludes to and explains 
something of God's plan relative to the casting away, and 
subsequent restoration of the Jews; and hints at the casting away of 
the Gentile Church for the same cause, viz., unbelief. That this was 
more than a surmise on the Apostle's part, events have clearly 
demonstrated. 

From our standpoint we can readily discern that what was 
apparently but an admonition was really a prophecy as well. 

We cannot estimate the value this fore-knowledge of our Lord has 
been to his Church. Amid all the persecutions that have befallen his 
followers, they could "rejoice and be exceeding glad," assured of 
"great reward in heaven." How else could they have remained 
faithful among the faithless? 

That the words quoted as our text are also prophetic and descriptive 
of the final unsavory condition of the Church (nominal) is more 
than a presumption. 



Has this condition already been reached? This is an inquiry from 
which no Christian should shrink, and in the solution of which 
every Christian should be interested. 

It is but fair to say that opinion is divided on the subject. While 
many mourn over the waste places in Zion while they recognize 
and deplore the absence of spiritual life and power, the great 
majority see in the interest displayed in the erection of fine 
churches, in a highly-cultured ministry, the large sums annually 
expended in sustaining these, and in multiplying their member, sure 
evidences of prosperity. 

Add to this the cordiality which the world displays in furthering her 
enterprises, and there seems little more to be desired. 

The few who recognize the loss of the real essentials of a true 
Church, hope for their recovery and a new lease of spiritual power. 
Vain hope! The student of the Word need not be misled by any 
such deception. Either this hope is delusive, or many scriptures 
must be false. Jesus says that at the time of his coming (presence) 
the Church will be made up of both wheat and tares. He teaches us 
that many who profess to be his followers were never recognized as 
such, and will be rejected. They may have taught in his name, they 
may claim to have cast out devils in his name, they 

R778 : page 4 

may have done many wonderful works in his name, but all this will 
avail them nothing. Many "wonderful works" that are highly 
esteemed among men are an abomination in God's sight. 

While the world may have applauded these claimants, Jesus never 
recognized them as his followers, nor their works as contributing to 
the success of his cause. Much that is done in Jesus' name is really 
done to gratify pride and selfishness. Millions of dollars are 
expended with no higher motive than that of having the finest 
church edifice, the largest and "best-equipped" Sunday school, or 
the most eloquent minister. 

Jesus made no attempt at a reformation of the apostate Jewish 
Church. His work was to inaugurate and carry forward the harvest; 
and with fan in hand he separated the wheat from the chaff. He 
accepted the faithful the unfaithful he rejected. 

Like all former dispensations, the present will give place to another 
when its allotted time has expired. The nominal Church having 
become a great worldly institution, has signally failed to bear 
witness to the truth, and is unfit for the greater work now becoming 
due. 

Seeming conscious of her impending doom, she eagerly attempts 
whatever promises to save her from destruction. But Ichabod is 
plainly written over her portals. On her walls is the inscription, 
"Weighed in the balance and found wanting. " Like her type, she 
compasses sea and land to make one proselyte, and with like result. 



The world, quick to discern the condition of affairs, has already 
withdrawn a large portion of its respect, and accords her a much 
lower place than she formerly occupied. Her influence is sought 
more for worldly advantage than for spiritual aid. Her ministers no 
longer wield the moral power that was once theirs by almost 
universal consent; and it seems beyond dispute that the Saviour's 
prediction is about to be realized, and the aptitude of the 
comparison admitted by all, "Good for nothing, but to be cast out, 
and to be trodden underfoot of men." 

S. T. TACKABURY. 



R778 : page 4 

FRUITS OF THE RANSOM. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I send you a brief synopsis of 
some discourses I recently delivered at Paris, Ills., hoping that it 
will not be uninteresting to yourself and the readers of the TOWER. 

Yours in the blessed hope, 

ALFRED MALONE. 

"Because we trust in the living God, who is the Saviour of all 
men." 1 Tim. 4:10. 

"Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give 
you the kingdom." Luke 12:32. 

"And behold! a great crowd, which no one could have numbered, 
out of every nation, and of all tribes, and peoples, and languages, 
standing before the throne and in the presence of the Lamb, 
invested with white robes and palm branches in their hands." Rev. 
7:9. 

"These are those coming out of the great affliction, and they 
washed their robes and whitened them in the blood of the Lamb. On 
this account they are before the throne of God." Rev. 7:14,15. 

From these Scriptures and others of their class I deduced that:- 

(1) God is the Saviour of all men from the Adamic sin and death. 

(2) To accomplish this, he is the Saviour at first of a very few, a 
"little flock." (3) And in the work of this salvation he is the Saviour 
of a great crowd. 

In the first, salvation from Adamic sin and death, is the great aim to 
be attained and is builded upon God's philanthropy and the eternal 
fitness of things. And it is necessarily now held in abeyance until 
the accomplishment of the second salvation; because the little flock 
is destined to be kings and priests, with Christ, to bring about both 
the first and third of these salvations. He is not now the Saviour, in 
fact, of all men, nor indeed of any as generally taught a Saviour 
from famines, pestilences, earthquakes, cyclones, etc., etc. But he 



will be "the Saviour of all" from the effects of the Adamic sin and 
death. 

Adam and Eve wrecked themselves and the race in the loss of 
innocence, in the loss of God's image, and in a gain of sin and 
death. Innocence, a God-like intelligence and moral grandeur, equal 
to the very perfectness of a God-made and God-endued manhood 
were lost by disobedience and death gained; yet so perfect in his 
organization, so God-like in intellectual and moral grandeur, that it 
took nearly a thousand years to so efface this image as to become 
totally dead. 

The threats that met the sinning pair were, "In the day thou eatest 
thereof thou shalt surely die;" "Cursed is the ground for thy sake; in 
pain shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life;" "and in the sweat of 
thy face shalt thou eat bread till thou return unto the ground, for out 
of it wast thou taken; for dust thou art, and to dust shalt thou 
return." 

Animals as well as man felt the influence of the curse; when Adam 
sinned, they changed, revolted, and became abnormally offensive to 
mankind as perfection and dominion passed away from their ruler. 
And they all, as well as mankind are to feel the influence of the Son 
of Man in "the times of the restitution." 

While obedient in Eden's Garden the pair were so gifted with the 
beauty, perfection and glory of a perfect manhood; so filled the 
grand niche in God's creation, that they only fell a little short of the 
angels of God. And all intelligences were put under contribution to 
administer to their necessities and happiness. His sight was flooded 
with glory, his taste was satisfied with richest viands, and his ears 
were thrilled with grandest melodies, his lungs were filled and 
bathed in the life -inspiring atmosphere, and his blood was made to 
leap and dance with a perfect manhood God's inexpressible gifts 
for the perpetuation of a glorified manhood. 

And this perfect state of manhood might have been continued 
forever, as the means to this end were placed within their reach. But 
with the entrance of sin, Eden was lost, lordship was lost, innocence 
was lost, happiness and a glorified humanity were lost, and pain 
and 

R779 : page 4 

woe and misery were gained! 

"In Adam all die." "By man came death." "Wherefore, as by one 
man sin entered into our world, and death by sin." "By the offence 
of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation" of death. 
Through the disobedience of one man the world was flooded with 
sin and woe and death; and these could never have been lifted had 
not another perfect and obedient Man Redeemed-Ransomed the 
race. And so the revealing Spirit has said, "This is good and 
acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour; who will have all men 
to be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the truth. For there is 



one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ 
Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due 
time." (1 Tim. 2:3-6.) And when "the little flock" shall have been 
glorified, that due time shall have arrived, and not till then. 

This salvation is universal, and "God 

R779 : page 5 

will have" it, no matter who may oppose; for "He works all things 
after the counsels of his own will." 

"But we see Jesus who was made a little lower than the angels for 
the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor; that he by the 
grace of God should taste death for every man." Heb. 2:9. Taste 
death for what? That man might not die? No ! That was God's 
inexorable arrangement the condemnation was just and 
unalterable. Man, therefore, must die; but thank God! a Ransom 
was prepared to take him out of this death. "As by Adam all die, 
even so by Christ shall all be made alive!" 

"Forasmuch, then, as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, 
he also himself took part of the same; that through death he might 
destroy him that had power of death, that is, the devil." Heb. 2:14. 
"For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust." 
1 Pet. 3:18. "Behold the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of 
the world." John 1:29. That is, Jesus as the sacrifice for the sin of 
the world, released all from that condemnation and opened the way 
for restoring all to perfection-thus removing sin and its penalty- 
death. 

With these and other Scriptures of like import, which I cannot quote 
here, it is unchangeably fixed and unalterably true, that all men 
shall be restored to the Adamic life through the Ransom. And as all 
sinned and died in or by Adam, so God being just, after the ransom 
was paid, the Redeemer controls all and may restore all to Adamic 
life and perfection; and then put them upon trial for themselves, not 
Adam for them; they will live for, or in, their own obedience; or die 
for their own sins. 

2. To accomplish this, He is the Saviour of a very few a "little 
flock." 

"Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give 
you the kingdom." If to "the little flock" he gives the kingdom, 
makes them rulers with him in the kingdom, and "partakers of the 
Divine nature," this is a special salvation he does not give to all. 

"Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leadeth to 
life, and few there be that find it." Matt. 7:14. This life is 
immortality, and the relationship corresponds. They were living- 
justified before, but the strait gate and narrow way led to another-a 
different life. This salvation is only for "the little flock." 

"For many be called, but few chosen." Matt. 20:16. This does not 
make God partial. He was under no kind of obligation to make any 



of the race immortal rulers. But this is a striking glory conferred 
upon the "little flock"; those that "suffer with Christ that they may 
reign with him." It is an election by grace for kingship and 
priesthood in the kingdom. This salvation is only for "the little 
flock," for the Bride of Christ, for members of his Body; and here 
there can be only so many. Christ's Body is not to be a monstrosity, 
but perfect and complete. And though "many" may run for this 
honor, it is only the "few," the approved, who shall be crowned. 
Paul therefore urges these "to so run," that ye may receive the 
crown, lest, if we do not so run, others shall receive our crown! 

Now in this day many have lost sight of this great truth. We are not 
generally taught that if we do not die to the world, consecrate, be "a 
peculiar people, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, zealous of good 
works," we shall lose the crown, or be excluded from "the marriage 
supper of the Lamb." 

Now it is popular, honorable, and leads to wealth and fame to 
belong to some so-called orthodox church, but in Paul's day, it 
meant the loss of caste, of riches and honor, and even life itself to 
be a member of the true Church. Pure Christianity is unchanged; 
now, as then, "they that live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution." And, if we are not partakers of this persecution, of 
this dishonor, we "are bastards and not sons." That is, many claim 
to be children of God, to belong to "the little flock," to the 
consecrating ones, whereas they only have "a name to live while 
they are dead" to this life of toil and labor and entire obedience to 
God! 

Now, as in Paul's day, true believers must continue to "fill up that 
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in their "flesh for his 
body's sake, which is the Church." The Head consecrated, suffered 
and died for the great honor of being King and Priest; and so must 
all the members of his Body partake of the sufferings in order to be 
partakers of his glory. Every vestige of sin and unc leanness must be 
covered by the blood of the mercy-seat, the Christian "reckoned" 
holy by the atonement, or there can be no such acceptable 
sacrificing, and without the sacrifice no reign with Christ. 

They must be "killed all the day long, and accounted as sheep for 
the slaughter"-"must endure all things for the elect's sake, that they 
may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal 
glory." 

As yet the world is not fully ready for restitution to Adamic life and 
perfection, as the Body of Christ is not yet complete. But so soon as 
the last member shall have finished his sacrifice, so soon shall the 
full work of restitution begin. 

3. And, in the work of this salvation, he is the Saviour of a great 
crowd. It could not be otherwise. If the gospel call to the "many" is 
not compulsory to an entire consecration, then many who start and 
are honest will not obtain the prize; and these, though losing the 
crown, may be "saved in the day of Christ." 



Having failed to make an entire consecration, they, in the great time 
of trouble that shall come upon all the world, may then and there 
come "up through great afflictions, washing their robes and making 
them white in the blood of the Lamb." 

Forgiveness of sins or their punishment, or both, not only take place 
in this age, but will be continued in the age to come. "Wherefore I 
say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven 
unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be 
forgiven unto men. And whosoever speaketh against the Holy 
Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in 
the world to come." Matt. 12:31,32. 

The age to come is to be an age of mercy and forgiveness, as well 
as this. All sins may be forgiven there except the sin against the 
Holy Ghost. Those who have utterly apostatized here cannot be 
forgiven there; but the honest, though weak ones, who have failed 
of the crown now through the weaknesses of the flesh, may be 
forgiven there, or suffer "many stripes" for the wrong doings of this 
age, and finally get "near the throne" and live forever! 

This is not the leading feature of that Restitution age, but grows out 
of the higher life and rulership offered "the little flock." So that, 
thank God! they who fail to win the crown may obtain eternal life 
"near the throne"! 

"And that servant, who knew the will of his master, and was not 
prepared, nor did according to his will, he shall be beaten with 
many stripes." Luke 12:47. This, with other scriptures, teaches that 
Christians, servants of the Lord, they that knew and did not the will 
of God, shall in the age to come suffer therefor. This is not eternal 
misery, but "many stripes"; and these "stripes" are corrective, and 
not vindictive nor eternal. It is not "the second death" either; for 
"stripes" are not used to kill or destroy, but to correct. 

The "few stripes" to those who did things worthy of them, because 
they knew not their Master's will, will be administered to those who 
have never heard of the Ransom; these are not even professed 
Christians, but belong to that larger class-the world-all men- that 
God will have come unto the knowledge of truth. First saved from 
the Adamic death, through the ransom, then brought where truth is, 
and placed on trial, to live for his own obedience, or to die for his 
own sins. 

The world is not now on trial, nor has it ever yet been. Adam was 
tried and failed, and all men in him. The new trial of the world 
cannot take place until the Head and Body of Christ are prepared to 
offer it. The Head of the Christ has been tried and triumphed. "The 
little flock" is now on trial, and when it shall have triumphed and 
been joined to the Head, then the trial of the world shall commence. 
When the King and Queen -the Christ and his Bride-shall have 
been married, then, and not until then, shall "the times of 
restitution" bear their perfected fruits. The "little flock" are not to 
be restored; they are to stand out as bright stars, and shine as the 



sun over a restored earth. The restored earth and its restored lord- 
mankind-will be indeed grand, but the "little flock," the Body of 
Christ, his Bride with the Head is the grandest of all! far above 
angels as well as men. 

The pure wife is the glory of a pure husband; the redeemed, 
glorified Bride is the glory of Christ, and Christ is the glory of God! 
Everything in its own proper place and time; but "God over all 
blessed forever" ! 



R780 : page 5 

Y.M.C. ASSOCIATION EFFORTS. 

"We confess to some alarm at the atmosphere of religious thought 
that hangs over the American churches to-day. The loud demands 
for a change of standards, the fascinating cry of 'progress in 
religious thought,' the easily-expressed ridicule for evangelical 
doctrines, in conjunction with 'elevated criticism,' may work harm 
among the young men of the churches; but we have great faith in 
Bible-reared young men, and if all our Associations but do their 
duty on the line of Bible work, there will be a faithful battalion to 
engage in the coming battle who will be undeterred by sneers, and 
unbewildered by the intellectual gymnasts of Bible criticism." 

-Y.M.C.A. Watchman. 

The above clip from the leading organ representing "Young Men's 
Christian Association" has an air of honesty and candor, but when 
critically examined, it has little substance, and suggests either 
ignorance, self-deception or hypocrisy on the part of the writer. We 
prefer to think not the latter. 

How absurd for a truly "Bible-reared" man, who should know that 
the Bible teaches that God's children must "grow in grace and 
knowledge" (2 Pet. 3:18) in order to "come to a knowledge of the 
truth," (1 Tim. 2:4,) and leaving the first principles of the doctrine 
of Christ should go on unto perfection, (Heb. 6:1,) to feel opposed 
to "progress in religious thought" ! Surely this "Bible-reared" 
brother has overlooked the promise of our Lord that the spirit of 
truth would guide or lead us into all truth, showing us things to 
come (John 16:13): and surely he has never read the Scripture 
which declares that "The path of the just is as the shining light 
which shineth more and more unto the perfect day." Prov. 4:18. 

If he knew the Scripture teaching to be such, why should he stand 
in such dread and opposition to "progress in religious thought"? 

But ah! we see his point now. It is that "progress in religious 
thought"- "may work harm among the young men OF THE 
CHURCHES." Well, the writer is correct; and states himself well 
and truthfully: progress in religious thought would certainly work 
their ruin as sectarians. Growth in knowledge of truth is a grand 



liberty and privilege to every free child of God, for "whom the Son 
makes free is free indeed," free to grow as much as he can in all 
the truths of God's Word, into which the holy spirit of truth will 
lead; but not so those whose "progress in religious thought" is 
chained to creeds formed in the fifteenth century or later by men 
who, though honest, were no more inspired than their followers, 
and did not possess half the opportunities of Bible study and 
criticism enjoyed by their enslaved followers to-day. These cannot 
make "progress" while they are in and of the CHURCHES (so 
called). To make progress is to break the chain which hinders the 
God-ordained progress, and hence to wreck the sects as such. If this 
were accomplished there would be no longer Presbyterians, 
Methodists, Episcopalians, Lutherans, etc., but instead one church, 
fellow-members of one body of which Christ alone would be the 
Head and the Bible the only "standard." 

The writer objects to any change of "standards." Poor man, he is as 
ignorant on this subject as of the Bible teachings on "progress in 
religious thought" ! Does he not know that the standards or 
authorities recognized by the various sects are as different as they 
could be- that they ALL contradict each other? The man who 
cannot see that the various sectarian creeds cannot all be right while 
contradicting each other is blind indeed. And if these conflicting 
"standards" are thus evidently in error, why should any 
conscientious man oppose "a change" of those standards? 

And finally, what nonsense is in the last sentence quoted: "We have 
great confidence in our Bible-reared young men, and if all our 
Associations but do their duty on the line of Bible work, there will 
be a faithful battalion to engage in the coming battle," etc. If all the 
Young Men's Christian Associations of the world will do their duty 
as the writer suggests it, viz., by opposing "progress in religious 
thought," or changes in the "standards" of the sects, they will 
indeed get ready a battalion for the "battle of the great day of God 
Almighty" already commenced; but it will be a battalion prejudiced 
and trained, to use their energies against the progress of light and 
truth; against the establishment of the Bible as the true and only 
standard of Christian faith and knowledge. It will be prepared to 
fight with and for, present darkness and error in Church and State. 
This battalion is 

R780 : page 6 

even now taking its place in the ranks of "the kings of the earth and 
their armies" who will be ignorantly fighting against him that sitteth 
upon the white horse and his army (Rev. 19:19-21), to be 
ultimately, thank God, smitten with the broad sword that 
proceedeth out of his mouth-the Word of God- the truth. 

Then, they will be agreeable to a change of standards, to the Bible 
only. Then, they will favor progress in religious thought, for then 
Babylon, in which they are now in bondage, sectarianism with all 
its chains and standards will have fallen-sunken to rise no more, 



though "the smoke" or remembrance of the anguish of her 
overthrow shall never be forgotten, but will prove a lasting lesson. 

Alas for the Bible-rearing practiced in the Y.M.C. Associations! 
they are completely under the control of the sectarians, by whom 
they are supported. Though professedly non-sectarian, professedly 
controlled by no creed but the Bible, they are more creed-bound 
than others, since they are bound by all the popular creeds. Their 
interest lies not in the building up of the body of Christ, whose 
names are written in heaven, so much as in the building up of the 
various sectarian systems: less in the truth than in the traditions of 
men which make the word of God of none effect, as did the 
sectarians at the first advent. (Mark 7:6-9.) While professing great 
Bible study, it is in ruts and grooves, and so hampered by creed- 
chains that progress, or growth, or Bible-rearing, is impossible. 
Hence they as others are "babes" instead of strong men, and have 
need that one teach them what be even the FIRST PRINCIPLES of 
the doctrines of Christ. 

What a power these Y.M.C. A.'s might be if they really were what 
they profess. There true Christians could meet to study the Word, 
and throwing off sectarian shackles, grow in grace and knowledge 
and love of God; and growing up into Christ in all things, come to 
the measure of the stature of men in Christ, and henceforth be no 
longer billow-tossed by every wind of doctrine. They should know 
the truth, and the truth should make them free. 

The cry of "Change the standards," from those of the popes and 
councils to that of the Bible only, or "progress in religious thought," 
was the battle-cry which shook the Church of Rome in the days of 
Luther. The Bible, as the only foundation of faith, was the basis of 
protest then, and the Church of Rome opposed it with all her power 
then and since, yielding only inch by inch to the increasing light. 
To-day she is being joined by those who once opposed her; They 
now cry "No change in the standards. Each seeking to defend its 
own existence founded in measure upon darkness, cries, Avoid and 
oppose any increase of light and all "progress in religious thought." 
No wonder that they lately feel themselves being drawn closer 
together than ever before. They now fight together against the ever- 
advancing light; but truth is mighty, and shall now prevail because 
it is due time, and these systems shall all be destroyed by the bright 
shining from HIS PRESENCE -who is called the TRUTH as well 
as the way and the life. How even some in Babylon can see a little 
of what is going on, notwithstanding sectarian prejudice, and the 
fact that their bread and butter, as well as influence and reputation, 
are all in Babylon, is shown by the following extract from Bishop 
Foster's lecture on MODERN METHODISM. He says: 

"The Church's great dangers are assimilation to the world, neglect 
of the poor, substitution of the form for the fact of godliness, 
abandonment of discipline, a hireling ministry, an impure gospel, 
which, summed up, is a fashionable church.. ..The Church of God is 
to-day courting the world. Its members are trying to bring it down 



to the level of the ungodly. The ball, the theatre, nude and lewd art, 
social luxuries, with all their loose moralities, are making inroads 
into the sacred inclosure of the Church, and, as a satisfaction for all 
this worldliness, Christians are making a great deal of Lent, and 
Easter, and Good Friday, and church ornamentations. It is the old 
trick of Satan. The Jewish Church struck on that rock, the Romish 
Church was wrecked on the same, and the Protestant Church is fast 
reaching the same doom." 



R780 : page 6 



SUBJECTED IN HOPE. 



For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by 
reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope. -ROM. 8:20. 

On account of sin, mankind has been made subject to an 
oppressive bondage. 

All who have ever possessed a measure of life have felt the 
restraints that have deprived them of its full enjoyment. An 
"adversary" has been permitted to snatch away from us the glorious 
gift of life bestowed by our Creator. For a few brief years we catch 

R781 : page 6 

here and there glimpses of the inestimable boon, and then yield up 
the last vestige to his insatiable demands. 

He has but to lift up his imperious sceptre, and millions hasten to 
lay down this treasure at his feet and pass into his prison-house, 
from whose dark recesses no sound ever yet fell on mortal ear. 
Relentlessly he pursues all, unmoved by the sighs and groans and 
tears that reach to heaven. 

When one contemplates the misery, the untold suffering, the 
anguish that for six thousand years have been permitted to prey 
upon the race, it seems a wonder that despair has not taken 
possession of almost all hearts, and hurried them rashly to terminate 
an existence that offered them so little of enjoyment so much of 
pain. But here was another opportunity for God to manifest his 
love. He so loved the world that he gave, to accompany man on his 
weary pilgrimage, HOPE. Like a good angel, Hope enters the heart 
of the weary toiler, and beguiles him with visions of ease and 
plenty. Hope transforms the chamber of suffering and woe into an 
abode of happiness and peace. 

She approaches the weary watcher keeping vigil at the bedside of 
some loved one, and quickly the pallor of death gives place to the 
flush of health, and the emaciated form recovers its fair proportions. 

To-day the storm rages and darkness prevails, but to-morrow the 
sun will gild the heavens, and no storm traces remain. Hope 
whispers in the ear of that mother whose first-born has been smitten 



by an arrow from Death's quiver; her grief is assuaged, her tears are 
dried, and life is again possessed of some joys. The light from this 
good angel's presence penetrates the prison-house of Despair, and 
the strong bolts melt away; the chains that bound the many victims 
become as ropes of sand, and the prisoners arise and walk forth. 
When the shadow of Death darkens our threshold, and benumbs the 
senses, and the heart has almost ceased its pulsations, Hope 
whispers, "You shall live again," and points to an existence 
unfettered by the restraints of the present life, and unaffected by its 
evils. Not the Christian alone is blessed by her ministrations, but 
the vast millions unlightened by revelation as well. 

To the former she brings sweet comfort from God's promises, 
which never have failed those that have trusted in them. To the 
latter she points out the many evidences of a Creator's love, for he 
hath not left himself without witnesses of this. (Acts 14: 17.) Soon 
these promises will be more than realized in manifestation of the 
"sons of God" commissioned to "restore all things." Then shall 
Death be compelled to release his prisoners, for at the command of 
the Son of man all that are in their graves shall come forth to the 
judgment of Jesus and the saints. John 5:28; 1 Cor. 6:2; Psa. 149:9. 

Then will be accomplished that which so long ago was promised to 
faithful Abraham, that in his seed all the families of the earth 
should be blessed. (Gen. 22:18.) Then all the ends of the world 
shall remember and turn unto the Lord; and all the kindreds of the 
nations shall worship before him. Psa. 22:27. 

S. T. T. 



R781 : page 6 

PERPETUAL APOSTOLIC INSTITUTIONS. 

Of necessity, the preaching of the gospel must precede all possible 
action for the teaching of those who are thus called out from the 
world. Because of this priority some seem to reckon gospel 
preaching the supremely important apostolic institution, and that 
therefore the chief, if not sole, object of the church's existence is to 
evangelize the world. We cannot but question this view when we 
examine the conduct of the apostles, coupled with the abundant and 
special provision made for the edification of the church. 

"When the Lord ascended on high he gave gifts unto men... for the 
perfecting of the saints unto the work of the ministry, unto the 
building up of the body of Christ, till we all attain unto the unity of 
the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a full-grown 
man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, that 
we may be no longer children." Eph. 4:7-16. 

The teaching of this oracle convinces us of two things:-First that 
the service of those several gifts was for one main object "the 



perfecting of the saints unto the work of the ministry;" and second, 
that the purpose of that ministry was for "the building up of the 
body of Christ." A great work was to be done, and the spiritual 
"gifts" speedily or instantaneously prepared men for that work. But 
this rapid preparation of the men did not necessarily imply that their 
work was speedily done it was a life-long labor, and ever 
permitted the exercise of patience, forbearance and prudence. The 
teaching of the apostle in 1 Cor. 14. shows how, in a church 
company richly endowed with these "gifts," it was necessary to be 
cautious in the use of the special capacities, in order to the general 
good of the whole. First, the service was to be intelligible- "let him 
that speaketh in a tongue pray that he may interpret;" then it was to 
be respectful to one another, for "if a revelation be made to another 
sitting by, let the first keep silence, for ye all can prophesy one by 
one, that all may be comforted:" and again, all was to be "done 
decently and in order. " However great the variety -though "psalm, 
teaching, revelation, tongue, and interpretation" crowded upon each 
other, this order was possible, because "the spirits of the prophets 
were subject to the prophets," and we may presume that the 
exercise of all other gifts were equally under personal control. The 
"word of wisdom," "the word of knowledge," and the discerning of 
spirits "-appearing in the spiritual category of 1 Cor. 12-were also 
gifts to be exercised in the church; finding their most evident scope 
among the brethren. And thus we have a very abundant provision 
made for the teaching of those who had put on Christ. 

But teaching is not a sufficiently comprehensive word to use in 
defining this work in the Church; rather say Edification; that is, 
building up. The man who essays the building of a house for 
himself and his goods, has not only to select his material, but to rear 
it after a definite plan and on correct architectural principles; else, if 
his house do not tumble about his ears, it may perhaps be a 
laughing stock to all gazers. How much more important is the 
building up of "the house of God." And though the master builders 
may lay the foundation ever so well, there is still great care and 
much wisdom needed in the superstructure. 

In the Scriptures there are frequent references to the style of 
building necessary -as to quality (See 1 Cor. 3:10-15). The "gold, 
silver and costly stones" contrasting favorably with the "wood, hay 
and stubble," which the fire of trial is sure to destroy. As to kind, 
Peter gives it without a figure in his second epistle, chapter 1 , 
where faith grows into virtue, virtue into knowledge, knowledge 
into temperance, followed by patience, godliness, brotherly 
kindness and love. This is the edifying or upbuilding which results 
in noble, good, and holy character. 

Our own words, instruct and inform, carry with them the same idea 
of building; and whether in natural or spiritual things we cannot 
reckon a man to be properly taught or trained unless he is built up 
within in-structed; neither can he be perfectly fitted for all service 
till he adds to his outward and visible aspect the quality of being 



informed furnished unto every good work. It is easy to see how 
good a structure the spiritual house must be when it is built up of 
such elect, precious, living stones as these. 

We presume it was in pursuance of such service as this that Paul 
and Barnabas retraced their steps in Asia Minor -confirming the 
souls of the disciples and confirming the churches. (Acts 14:21-23; 
15:36-41.) A necessary work; for how else could those who were 
called to holiness and virtue maintain their stand against evil, and 
grow up unto Christ? 

It is true we lack those primitive spiritual endowments so well fitted 
to qualify for the building up of the Church; but we are not 
deprived of their utterances. If the gospel of the grace of God, 
originally ministered by apostles and evangelists, has been written 
and "set forth in order" that thus we may be taught what was surely 
believed by the first disciples; we are no less fully supplied with 
"the words of wisdom and knowledge" and even much of "the 
discerning of spirits" of the olden times-all faithfully expressed, 
not in words and sentences of man's wisdom, but in those of the 
Spirit of God. Therefore to us most precious; the living oracles and 
divine testimonies by which we are to be built up, and brought to 
the inheritance of the kingdom of God. 

R781 : page 7 

The teaching of those inspired Scriptures is inexhaustible; they 
furnish instructive lessons and educative provision for ages of 
disciples and students; possessing a living and growing power like 
the other works of God, which forbids them ever becoming stale or 
useless. The Word of God has all shades of power, and every 
possible degree of fitness. If it is like the thunder blast to split the 
cedars of Lebanon, it is no less the gentle electric current which 
thrills in the telephone; a hammer so heavy as to break in pieces the 
rocks, yet anon so light that its pulsations on the tenderest chords of 
the human heart can elicit sweet music; a two-edged sword piercing 
even to the dividing of soul and spirit, and of both joints and 
marrow, 

R782 : page 7 

yet so delicate a probe as to discern the thoughts and intents of the 
heart. Wonderful treasure ! How can we be poor or void of ability 
when thus furnished? 

Whatever we may be short of in our Church needs for building up; 
it is a great fallacy to look for help to mere professional teachers. 
We may not have spiritual gifts, neither have they. We may not be 
able to show any speciality in our call to particular service, neither 
can they. They are to be tested simply by experience of their certain 
or probable utility. Are churches better taught by hirelings? Is it 
indeed likely that they should be? It is easy to compare the real 
intelligence of churches with or without "clergy"; and always to the 
disadvantage of the former. And it would not be reasonable to 



expect otherwise, because for this kind of moral building there is of 
necessity moral training. Mere faculty of speech, or depth of 
knowledge, or power of discernment, or even prophetic insight, 
must be qualified by love of the truth, by faith in God and devotion 
to personal holiness. No man can know the doctrine who has not 
done the work of God. (John 7:17.) This was true in apostolic 
times, and is true to this day. How little are we the better of those 
scholastic men who affect to be pastors and teachers in the Church 
of God: hiring out their learning by the month and year, and 
seeking for preferment to good livings in virtue of their college 
breeding. 

"A peasant may believe as much As a great clerk, and reach the 
highest stature:" 

not only in faith, but in church service. Witness the choice of the 
all-wise Master, when the foolish and weak and base things of the 
world were chosen to confound the wise and great and honorable; 
that no flesh should glory before God. 

By the good providence of God we have most excellent translations 
of all the Holy Scriptures, and in addition, have access to a large 
amount of illustrative literature and biblical criticism calculated to 
awaken a still deeper and more permanent interests in the meaning 
and application of Scripture. And again, the occurrences of ordinary 
life and the relations of society, in and out of the Church, when 
viewed through the divine medium of faith and holy life, are 
instructive and suggestive in the highest degree. 

Not everyone is qualified to be a prominent teacher or extorter in 
the Church; but everyone may do something towards edification or 
correction. The most diffident may find opportunity in private; and, 
indeed, in the family of God, where all are closely knit together, 
there never fail times and occasions when a quiet word, an earnest 
appeal, or a friendly remonstrance may be used. Where everyone 
has access to the divine library, all may be wise; and who is there to 
forbid the loving and hearty service of the humblest in the Church? 

The whole drift of the apostolic exhortation and teaching is toward 
universal, personal interest. They were to speak to one another in 
psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs; they were to examine 
themselves, to confess their faults one to another, and to pray one 
for another; they were to build up one another in their most holy 
faith; and was there an urgent call for help, they were all to 
contribute according as God had severally prospered them. Now if 
this spontaneous and general ministry was the rule in early times 
when they were so beholden to spiritual gifts and spiritual 
guidance, and before the copious Scriptures of the Apostles were 
written out, surely we should be no less energetic in the cordial 
exercise of every power. The counsels of divine wisdom sound 
down the long ages, and demand attention at this hour. Only when 
they are faithfully attended to, can the Church be built up, and 



subsist as the pillar and ground of the truth.-G. Dowie, in 
Messenger. 



R782 : page 7 

A REMARKABLE FAITH CURE. 

Sister A. J. Cowles of Massachusetts sends us an account of her 
very remarkable cure in answer to prayer. This occurred in 1881. 
Since that time she has become deeply interested in the Scripture 
teaching relative to RESTITUTION, that it is due to the world and 
that physical healing can only be claimed consistently for such as 
have not consecrated the human nature even unto death. Were she 
in the same condition again she could only present her case before 
the Lord, saying, "Thy will be done." She could not with her 
present light make positive request for things and rights of the 
human nature she has sacrificed, to obtain the new nature and joint 
heirship with Christ. Nevertheless God is pleased to heal some of 
the consecrated ones even though they do not request such blessing. 

Sister Cowles says: 

"I received an injury to the nerves of the spinal cord while 
practicing gymnastics at Glenwood Ladies' Seminary. My 
physicians have given as their opinion, that "there was spinal 
weakness some years previous to this," and those who have studied 
the case most, say that this trouble existed from childhood and was 
probably a constitutional weakness from birth. They have also said 
that ultimately I "would have been a sufferer from spinal disease 
had this accident not occurred; but this hastened it, and caused a 
complication of diseases and greater suffering." My whole system 
rapidly became diseased in sympathy, and at last I was confined to 
my bed helpless. But scarce five months had passed ere I was 
seized with a severe attack of cerebro-spinal meningitis. I was taken 
to Boston for treatment. At Dr. Estabrook's Institute I received the 
tenderest treatment night and day, and Dr. Benjamin Codman being 
called in, fitted for me a spinal prop that supported the whole body. 
With the treatment and the aid of the prop, and a ten months' course 
of treatment at the Homoeopathic Hospital a year later, I was 
benefited so far as to be able to walk from room to room on the first 
floor, but was liable to fall at any moment. From the very 
commencement of my disease, the spine between the shoulders 
would suddenly give way, and I would fall to the floor without an 
instant's warning, and intense agony always followed. I was always 
suffering; never had one night's refreshing sleep, and severe attacks 
of neuralgia of the heart, alarmed my physicians and friends. I was 
shut in from all that made life dear, and the days, nights, months 
and years were one terrible great pain. O, those years of agony! No 
one but God can ever know what I suffered. One bitter trial came 
after another everything seemed to slip from my grasp. No words 
can in the slightest degree, express what I suffered, with never one 



hour's freedom from pain. The doctors comforted me for years by 
telling me that if I did not get better I could not live long, but I lived 
on and on. 

I prayed to be made willing to live God's time; and through all these 
years I tried faithfully, cheerfully, lovingly, to bear my heavy cross 
and not cast a shadow over the pathway of others, and I earnestly 
strove to keep my eye of faith fixed on Christ; and he did sustain 
me. 

January 1st, 1881, 1 was admitted to the Adams' Nervine Institute in 
Boston, was confined to my bed and failed rapidly, and only the 
influence of outside physicians kept me there. 

In April, the physicians decided that there was no earthly help for 
me, and told one of my former physicians and friends their 
decision, but he urged them to try again, and tried to think that they 
had made some mistake in the diagnosis of the case. Although he 
felt I could never be well, he had great sympathy with me and 
hoped that I could be a little relieved while I lived. The new 
attending physician, the 1st of May, finally decided to take up my 
case, and I was removed to a private room, forbidden to take one 
step or sit up for one moment. I was not allowed even to feed 
myself, but was given my food and drink like a babe there 
remaining the hope that perfect rest might quiet the intense pain in 
my spine, but much to our disappointment the disease increased and 
I failed even more rapidly. 

Through these years I have been under the care of the best 
physicians. They all spoke of my courage, and of trying with all my 
strength to be well, but all my courage and will-power could not 
conquer disease. 

Through these years various kinds of treatment had been tried: 
electricity in its most approved forms, electro-magnetism, 
hydropathic treatment, the massage, plaster jackets, etc. My spine 
had been blistered over and over again, and burned with chemicals. 
The freezing process has been tried hundreds of times. Indeed it 
seems as if nearly every kind of torturing treatment had been tried, 
as I was willing to endure anything that held out the slightest hope 
of quieting that pain. After all those months at the Nervine, I was 
called to pass through the severe operation of having my spine 
burned with hot irons. Three times did I pass through that severe 
operation of having my spine cauterized with the thermo-cautery, 
and then the physicians thinking I was receiving injury, it was not 
tried further. 

I shall always remember the day that the superintending physician 
entered my room, and kindly, tenderly, even sympathetically, tried 
to give me the physicians' opinion. He said, "Miss Cowles, the 
doctors of this institute have done everything in their power for 
you. You have been under the care of such men as Dr. Eades, Dr. 
Putnam and Dr. Webber, who 



R783 : page 7 

stand at the head of the medical profession throughout New 
England. Indeed you have had the best medical skill of the country, 
and you, by your courage, have aided us by being willing to endure 
anything that we suggested; but you have failed rapidly, and now it 
is hard for me to say it, and for you to hear it, but you must go 
home and never try to step again." I said, "Doctor, I shall try to step 
while I live," but he answered, "Do not try to step much-if you do 
not you may live for a time we cannot say how long, but if you do 
step much, or catch a little cold, sudden congestion will set in and 
you will die, for you know whenever we have yielded to your 
entreaties and allowed you to step, those hard pains have 
increased." After a somewhat lengthy conversation, the doctor 
turned to leave my room, and I said, "Doctor, you have convinced 
me that you are right. I fully realize that there are diseases that you 
physicians cannot reach, but if human power cannot reach me, 
Divine power can." 

Through these years the mystery of suffering had troubled me, not 
alone my own pain and sorrow, but the suffering of the world 
seemed a problem I could not solve. Gradually I was led to see that 
there was much in our Bible that was passed over at the present 
day, and that we did not receive all the blessings promised in God's 
word. As I look back now, I can see that several times I was very 
near my present belief, and then in conversation with others I found 
those far wiser than myself could not believe it, and fearing it was 
sin in me I was thrust back again into the darkness; but through 
those last terrible months at the Nervine, as I grew weaker my faith 
grew stronger, and more and more firmly I believed that this 
blessing which was in the world in Christ's time, was being brought 
back again. I did not at this time realize, that this was coming to 
me, but I felt sure, and said to others, "This light is in the world, 
and to those who live it will be revealed." You may ask what first 
led me to this belief; I can only answer, hungering and thirsting 
after righteousness, striving to live near to God and being guided by 
him, longing for a higher, purer spiritual life; for, although I had 
been a Christian all these years, there was something beyond my 
experience that I craved, and my most earnest supplications rose to 
God for spiritual blessing. 

After a complete consecration to God and his service, those 
petitions were answered. That precious gift was mine. Then, God 
taught me that we must look to him for physical blessings, even as 
for spiritual, and I asked Jesus to take me where I should be under 
no doctor's authority, that I might discard all human aid and claim 
him as my physician. 

August 25th, 1881, 1 was discharged from the Nervine as incurable. 
Dr. H. sent me to "St. Luke's Hospital" for a few days, until the 
papers were made out for me to go to Brooklyn to the "Home for 
Incurables." 



When I reached St. Luke's, owing to a peculiar web of 
circumstances, I was under no doctor's care. Dr. H. had power to 
place me there, but the attending physician insisted on not 
admitting me regularly, as he had conversed with the doctors from 
the Nervine, and feared I would fail and die; he would not regard 
me as a patient. This at first tried me, but here was a link in God's 
chain to answer my prayer. I left off taking medicine, although I 
had it with me, and claimed Christ as my physician. 

At this time I had never been under the influence of any faith 
people, indeed the influence had been all to the contrary. Never had 
I met one who understood this faith. God, through my Bible, had 
been my only teacher. 

I gave up medicine on Thursday, and through the days following, in 
spite of the unbelief that surrounded me, I was trying to press 
through the crowd of doubts and fears to touch the hem of Christ's 
garment, but all was dark. 

I earnestly requested Dr. Codman to bring me some faith people, 
and he very kindly came on Tuesday with Dr. George B. Peck and 
Miss Charlotte Hawes. When they reached St. Luke's, the matron, a 
noble woman and earnest loving Christian, objected to their being 
admitted, saying: "It is not right to believe that one with incurable 
diseases can be healed." Dr. Codman replied: "Miss Cowles has the 
faith, and it would be a great comfort to her to have these people 
pray for her. I have something at stake as a physician, but under the 
circumstances I will go up with them, and as a physician watch the 
case, and see that she is not injured or excited in any way. Can they 
pray with her?" The matron answered: "I really have no right to 
forbid your going to her room, as she is not our patient." If I had 
been a regular patient, these friends could not have prayed with me. 
They came to my room. After a preliminary conversation, Dr. Peck 
prayed that I should be given more faith. Throughout that prayer I 
had the most terrible battle, but Christ overcame the adversary for 
me when I was too weak to battle longer. Dr. Peck then said: "We 
will go now and come again;" but I begged them not to leave me. I 
cried out: "Lord, I believe. Help thou mine unbelief!" The battle 
was over. I was calm then and ready for the second prayer. Dr. Peck 
anointed me with 

R783 : page 8 

oil in the name of the Lord, and claimed the promise in James 
5:14,15. He then said: "Stand still and see the salvation of the 
Lord," and bidding me good morning, he and Dr. Codman went 
down stairs. At my request Miss Hawes lingered for a moment, and 
knelt by my bedside. I said: "Would it be right for me to rise and 
dress and go down stairs?" She simply answered: "Ask the Lord." 
We remained in silent prayer a moment. I then arose. For years the 
cords in my limbs had hurt me intensely in stepping. When I placed 
my feet firmly on the floor those cords relaxed at once. I walked the 
length of the room without the pain. I lay no stress upon the words, 



"I walked," but I do emphasize decidedly the words without the 
pain, for I was free from that agony that had been my constant 
companion day and night all those thirteen years. You cannot 
realize that glorious freedom that was mine. I knelt, praised God for 
his wonderful gift, rose, dressed, stepping freely and naturally, 
without one indication of falling, and in God's strength walked 
down stairs, very much to the surprise of Dr. Codman, who was 
waiting for Miss Hawes in the room below. I refused to sit, wishing 
to glorify God by standing. After conversing for a time with these 
friends, and as they were leaving me, Miss Hawes said: "As this 
gift is given you, you must not be presumptuous. You had better lie 
down for awhile." I obeyed, and for an hour great strength came to 
me that I could feel to my finger-tips. O! such strength and power 
was poured into my body. One lady patient said to me afterwards: 
"Were you suffering intensely that hour? Your face was almost 
purple, but we did not dare speak to you." I found afterwards that 
they thought I had become suddenly insane, and went down stairs 
and came back, and was dying. As I look back now I do not think it 
strange that they should have thought so. Would it were in my 
power to describe the experience of that hour, for it was glorious. 
You may ask, "Did this pain ever return again?" Yes! twice; once as 
a temptation, and must I confess it? once for a sin. That afternoon 
as I thought, now I will rise again, the pain came back and seized 
me in its firm grasp from head to foot. If they had only told me 
what I always tell an invalid to-day, Satan may be allowed to place 
pain in your body just like the old pain, to test your faith, I should 
have been prepared, but that was not God's way for me, and it came 
to me like a terrible shock, "O! I am not healed after all!" Then the 
thought came, I have been down stairs; that alone was a miracle, 
and I looked to God for an explanation. He taught me that it was a 
temptation, and giving myself into God's hands, and trying to rise in 
his strength, the pain vanished in an instant. Two days after this I 
limited God-not willfully, but thoughtlessly but it was a sin 
nevertheless. I was thinking, "How glorious it is to be free from this 
pain, to be well once more," and then I thought, "It is not possible 
all that tenderness in my spine is gone," and I placed my hand upon 
my spine to test it. The pain came back. In an instant I realized I 
had sinned; I had limited God's power. I prayed earnestly for 
forgiveness, and the pain went away never to return again. 

The day after I was healed I received this message from Dr. C, "I 
am anxious about you, but cannot leave my office. Do send me a 
word." I obeyed him literally, and sent the one word, "Victory." 
Later, another message came, "Please write me a few lines on a 
card." I again obeyed, and wrote him, "Victory! Victory! Victory! 
through our Lord Jesus Christ!" 

Dr. C. came to me, and as a physician tested me, and the very tests 
that proved disease three weeks before, failed now. I was wholly 
healed, and gained in strength rapidly. The most precious gift of all 
was sleep. All these years I had never known what sweet sleep was, 
and in those months at the Nervine the physicians had ordered for 



me all kinds of medicine, chloral, etc., and the little sleep that they 
succeeded in giving me was filled with terrible dreams and agony; 
but now I slept like a little child. 

By this time the papers were made out admitting me to the "Home 
for Incurables," but lo! Christ had healed me! I wrote to those who 
had obtained the permit, and said how wonderfully I was doing, but 
received word to wait until they had seen the Dr. H. who sent me to 
St. Luke's; and so I waited until they met, and he told them to allow 
me to go home, as I was perfectly able to do as I pleased. I was 
"now no case for any hospital," and three weeks from the day I was 
healed, I went home alone to surprise my friends. I had written 
them once, but they did not understand the 

R784 : page 8 

full extent, as my thoughts at that time were more on the spiritual 
blessing. 

On that beautiful afternoon, as I crossed the threshold of my home, 
my friends looked upon me very much as Mary and Martha must 
have looked upon Lazarus, when he was risen from the dead. My 
dear father said, "Allie! Allie! if you had been brought in here in 
your coffin to-day I should not have been surprised, but what can I 
think now?" and a neighbor calling him outside, said, "Mr. Cowles, 
how is Allie?" and he answered, "O, don't ask me! she is so well 
that I do not dare to think or speak of it." 

God has led me forward, and my faith has grown firmer and 
stronger as I have witnessed Christ's wonderful power in others. 
Often have I been told by even good people, "This was a wonderful 
gift to you, but do not tell others they can be healed." Ah! their eyes 
are blinded, and they do not see Christ as a perfect Saviour able to 
save to the uttermost. 



R784 : page 8 

REST-IN GRACE SUFFICIENT. 

The benediction of undisturbed rest is a blessing sought and 
eulogized wherever man is known, but experienced by a 
surprisingly small fraction of the race. Everyone craves rest. 
Careworn souls, turning away from the vision of weary years of 
trial and bereavement to friends upon whom sorrows press but 
lightly, wonder at the beauties life seems to hold for them, and ask 
the secret of their peacefulness, enquiring where this rest is to be 
found. Disappointed hearts, turning from the futile chase for joys 
which kept so near, but just beyond their reach, tantalizing, 
beguiling, inviting, yet receding faster than the swiftest feet could 
follow, come, breathless and panting, ready at last to relinquish the 
long-continued pursuit, and, dropping with weariness, imploringly 
ask for rest. Beautiful home-circles, long unbroken by the ravages 



of the destroyer, and all the more perfect by the firmness of 
affection's cords, grown to be so mature, must be broken now. The 
cords must be parted, and all the attendant pain endured. Hearts 
must bleed, tears must flow. And now the bereaved, sighing for an 
hour of forgetfulness, in which they may recruit their vigor, looking 
away from this, the keenest sorrow they have known, with swollen 
eyes and with sobs that melt the sternest heart, appeal to our 
sympathies and ask, "Can you not tell us where we may find rest?" 

All classes are in search of rest. The cry for it reverberates upon a 
thousand hill-tops, and echoes along the fertile valleys of the earth. 
It comes to us from the north; the south also is calling for rest. They 
seek it in the east, nor is the west satisfied without it. Millionaires 
have everything beside it; the penniless desire it above the bread 
they crave. Health cannot satisfy without it; with it, sickness is 
powerless to disturb. Ease becomes wearisome if rest of soul be 
absent; its presence makes the heaviest burdens light. Without it, 
we sigh; but this soul-rest turns our sighing into singing. Bitter tears 
flow where it does not abide; but with rest, tears lose their 
bitterness. What price is too dear to pay for rest of soul? Cheerfully 
will they endure hardness for a season, if but the assurance of its 
coming attend the labor of its famished seekers. They will work till 
hands are brown and callous from their toil; till brains are weary, 
eyes are dim, and limbs grow feeble. They will deny themselves the 
comfort of the present, modify arrangements for the future, to 
prepare for its enjoyment, and engage every power, to the end that 
this priceless boon be made their own. 

Yet while it stands knocking at their very doors, they will not take 
it! While it sits awaiting entertainment, they turn away as if it were 
an intruder upon their time! While it offers itself, saying, "I will 
confer enduring comfort," they refuse, as if because so readily 
obtained it could not be worth the taking. They would work for it, 
yet seem unwilling to accept it as a gift. But oh, wearied, one, have 
you not labored long enough to no account? Have you not yet borne 
enough? Have you not suffered enough, sighed, wept, sought, 
agonized and called? Have you not already spent too much time 
and means without avail, conscious, after all this anxiety, of the 
same hungering, thirsting, aching heart? Have you not 
experimented until convinced that such is not the means by which 
the pearl may be discovered? Have you not tried all that reason bids 
you venture? Alas, 'tis true! but your soul is burdened still. Now 
cease your random search, and embrace the blessing just outside 
your heart. Rest is there! Rest for you. Rest now. Rest forever. The 
grace of God includes it, and comes to you laden with its sweetness. 
Walk with God, and it shall be yours this day and evermore! "Come 
unto me," said Christ, "all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I 
will give you rest." That means you if you are burdened. Surely you 
do not doubt it! You would not say that because your burdens are 
peculiar, and unaccountably afflicting, that therefore Christ is 
unable to fulfill his word? Then he must mean you just as you are; 
and the heavier the burden the greater is your need of relief. It 



signifies nothing whether the burden be great or small. He can bear 
it in either case. Therefore, bring it to him, and having done so, 
leave it with him. You must do it; the privilege is too great to be 
neglected. Christ loves you and would not see you burdened thus. 
He commands you to do it, and if you love him you will obey. 
Having "come" to Christ, having "taken" his "yoke," and "learned" 
of him, the unqualified promise is, "you shall find rest." Now, if 
you do not find rest it will be because of some reserve; for the 
promise stands unchanged. Rest is always given when the 
conditions are fully met. Then plead no excuse; your case is not an 
exceptional one. You shall have rest if you will accept it. Then do 
so and "go in peace." 

The cause of unrest among believers is not the excessive weight of 
burdens, not the severity of trial, for often the fully consecrated, 
who enjoy the sweetest rest, are they whose material surroundings 
are of the most distressing character, subjecting them to sorrows 
calculated to harrow beyond expression; yet they ride on 
victoriously, while others with far less reason for complaint are 
disturbed much of the time. The cause lies within themselves; and 
consists in a partial reception, only, of the grace which would drive 
forever from their lives such inconsistencies as are often deplored 
in penitence and sorrow. Neither victory nor rest shall ever gladden 
our hearts by the simple absence of the ills of life, but rather 
through divine strength being brought to our assistance. And this 
can only be done by the concurrence of our wills; including, and 
indeed, necessitating an unreserved surrender to God. Oh, if this 
work be accomplished what mighty results will follow! It will be as 
natural for us to rest in God as it is for us to breathe. Soul-rest will 
be ours continually, and effective labor for God the outward 
expression. As the child, timid, fearful, unwilling to venture, when 
alone, becomes wonderfully brave when conscious of his father's 
presence, so we, though formerly helpless, will, by the abiding 
presence of our God, venture anything, everything so long as it be 
IN THE DEFENSE OF TRUTH and in obedience to the Father, 
who has promised to protect us. 

And what shall be able to disturb us while God's strength is still our 
own? Shall it be the remembrance of weary years of trouble? Shall 
it be a death-bed scene? Shall it be painful memories of loved ones 
who have failed, and thus mortified or grieved us? I tell you it will 
not be found in these things to molest the repose abiding in our 
hearts. While the surface may sometimes show agitation, the 
peaceful currents of the soul will move on toward the boundless 
ocean God himself, whence came this wondrous grace; then the 
tide of his love will come, overwhelming the little disappointments 
of an hour, drowning our sorrows, washing away the stains our 
tears had left, and thrilling with a heavenly joy our souls, as, 
standing in bewilderment, we demand, with the astonished Paul, 
whose words were unequal to his rapture, "Who shall separate us 
from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, 
or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it is written, For thy 



sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for 
the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors 
through him that loved us. For I am persuaded that neither death, 
nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things 
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other 
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is 
in Christ Jesus our Lord."  H. Roissy. 



page 8 

Z.W.T.T. SOCIETY'S FLORIDA LANDS. 

Some who engaged plots of the land donated to "Z.W.T. Tract 
Society" at Pinellas (see Supplement), finding that circumstances 
do not favor their going, have donated the installments paid to the 
Fund and returned the land for sale. Besides this, another Brother 
interested in the truth, has donated to the Society near the other 
donated lands four ten-acre plots. 

Thus it comes that we have about twelve plots now for sale. Of 
these four have small ponds, and would require some ditching, and 
can therefore be had at half price. 



R785 : page 1 
VOL. VII. PITTSBURGH, PA., OCTOBER, 1885. NO. 2. 

page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 40 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 



we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



page 1 

FORTUNATELY we have come across another small lot of 
"YOUNG'S ANALYTICAL GREEK, HEBREW AND ENGLISH 
CONCORDANCES"-the best-the "Author's Edition," at much 
below the present price of the work. We desire that many might 
avail themselves of the opportunity for obtaining a work so 
valuable, indeed almost indispensable to Bible study. This great 
book is cheap at the regular price, five dollars; but we have secured 
this lot so as to offer them to you at just half the price. They are 
new and perfect. See last page, last column. 



R785 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The announcement in our last issue, that we had in view a plan by 
which those zealous for service could probably use as much time as 
they could gather from the absolute necessities of life, brought a 
shower of Postal Cards to our office. These, should they lead to 
nothing more, have proved already a blessing to your fellow 
servant, the Editor, refreshing his heart as he perceived from your 
earnest words how deeply the truth had taken hold of your hearts as 
well as of your intellects. 

When one's heart is absorbed with the truth, he not only seeks by 
every means and every sacrifice to promulgate it, that others may 
be blessed with it, but he will look for fruit from his labor; he 
cannot help it. And thus it is that you and I as we labor for the 
cause we love, desire as the Apostle expresses it, to "know that our 
labor is not in vain in the Lord;" to see some of the fruit. Yet we 
must learn to labor on steadily whether fruit appears or not, 
knowing that though the germination be tedious and the growth and 
ripening slow, the ultimate success of the labor is assured by the 
all-wise Master in whose service we engage. If we go forth earnest 
in the service, and fully consecrated, he will surely use us; and if 
done for him only, our labor cannot be in vain. "He that goeth forth 
and weepeth [feeling the importance and cost of the work in self- 
sacrifice] bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again 
bringing his sheaves." Psa. 126:6. 



Sometimes the blessing comes in an unlooked for way, even as in 
the present case your cards were refreshing messengers to us. And 
again, the blessing of consecrated service, is sure to be greater upon 
ourselves than upon others. He that watereth others, shall himself 
be abundantly refreshed. To the extent that you have been a laborer 
for the Master and have sacrificed anything for the spread of his 
truth, we feel sure you have received present pay of this sort, as 
well as persecutions (2 Tim. 3:12) besides the laid up hopes and 
promises "reserved in heaven for you." 

This, your experience and mine, was the experience of others 
before us in the service; and to us, as to them, God sometimes 
grants a glimpse of the fruit of labor when we feel faint and 
discouraged. Thus it was with the Lord; after considerable labor 
and teaching "many went back" and followed him as disciples no 
more, and Jesus said unto the twelve, "Will you also go away?" 
Then came the refreshing evidence that the truth had taken fast hold 
of some, when Peter answered "Lord to whom shall we go? Thou 
hast the words of eternal life, and we believe and are sure that thou 
art that Christ, the Son of the living God." (John 6:66-69.) Not only 
was Jesus' heart cheered by Peter's zeal, but Peter also was blessed, 
"Blessed art thou Simon." Matt. 16:16,17. 

Elijah felt lonely, and that his efforts to refute the false teachers of 
Baal were yielding no fruit, and prayed that he might die; but God 
who knew all about it, encouraged him with the assurance that 
seven thousand of Israel were still faithful to the truth, who 
doubtless had been helped and strengthened by Elijah's labors. 

Paul, the great Apostle, whose writings have been, and yet are 
God's storehouse of wisdom and instruction, from which the 
faithful throughout the age have been supplied with "meat in due 
season," appears to have written almost all of his epistles with a 
view to correct some doctrinal errors into which he saw the various 
companies of God's children liable to fall, or to help them out of 
errors into which they had already fallen. Little did he suppose 
probably that his zeal and efforts to assist the saints and guard them 
with truth, were to be so widespread in their influence as God's 
guideposts to the Pilgrims of eighteen centuries. 

So with us dear friends; we must not gauge our sacrifices and 
efforts by the little we are permitted to see of the results, but must 
press on. In fact while interest in the work enters largely into our 
sacrifice, we must beware and remember that our sacrifice was 
made to God, and not in any particular interest of our own, in the 
work; and while we take an absorbing interest in the work, as the 
development of his plans, we should remember that our 
consecration was to the Lord; that in accepting it, the Lord made no 
promise to show us any fruit of labor, and hence whatever we enjoy 
in this way is God's favor more than promised. In order that we 
may ever feel our own insufficiency, and that all the needed power 
and wisdom for the work is in him who is at the helm "working all 
things after the counsel of his own will, we are not permitted to see 



much fruit from our own individual labor. Otherwise success in his 
labor might enkindle pride and self-sufficiency, and make us unfit 
for further service. But we thank God that we are given so clear a 
view of the grand results at the end, worked out by the various 
agencies operating under divine supervision. 

Seeing the final results, portrayed in God's Word, should lead us to 
diligence and sacrifice that we at that time may find, that by the 
favor of God our labors and tears, and weariness, and endurance of 
the reproaches of Christ, (Luke 6:22,23.) were not in vain, and that 
in the accomplished results we shall have some share, and then 
more fully than now appreciate the privilege of being co-workers 
with God and with our Lord Jesus in the greatest and grandest work 
of God- Redemption, Reconciliation, and Restitution of the race. 

Ah, yes; the Master saw little fruit of his sacrifice when he died, 
and you and I must expect a similar experience. But of him it is 
written, "He shall see the travail of his soul and shall be satisfied. 
(Isa. 53:11.) The grand results will abundantly prove the wisdom 
of God, and the cost, though great, will prove none too great when 
actually seen as God already foresees it. Then, too, all who now 
sacrifice for and suffer with Christ shall be satisfied fully. If they 
have had travail and have made sacrifices, not for error, but for the 
truth; not for sects, but for Christ, they shall receive great reward 
(Matt. 5:11,12); they shall be satisfied when they enter into the joys 
of their Lord. 

Recently, in looking over our list of English readers, the smallness 
of the number suggested the fact that each of the about three 
hundred had cost an outlay of about forty dollars. (The outlay, of 
which these are as yet the only fruitage, amounted to nearly eleven 
thousand dollars, aside from the willing labor connected with it.) 
And the thought came, How many of these appreciate the truth? 
How many, as they see what it costs in reputation to hold the truth, 
regret that they ever received it? How many how few appreciate 
the truth at forty dollars-at what it cost to bring it to their ears? 

These were discouraging thoughts; and then we thought of the great 
cost of the Master's sacrifice of what the expense of our salvation 
had been; not in silver and gold, but the precious blood of Christ, 
and the precious cost as well, in self-denial to him who made 
himself of no reputation, and, though rich, became poor for our 
sakes, that he might redeem and bless us. As we saw how few there 
are who appreciate the first great cost, or endeavor to do a part in 
the same direction, we said to ourselves, Ah! it is because they and 
we all see but imperfectly. The world, the flesh and the adversary 
paint things in false colors before men's minds, and it is only as the 
truth shines in and gets possession of us that we are able even to 
approximate its value. 

The mail then brought us three English letters, one from a new 
reader, who had just received a copy of "Food," and two from older 
readers, one of which, from dear Brother Riley, was just in time for 



the last TOWER, which contains some extracts from it. We said, as 
we read Bro. R.'s letter, and saw how firmly the truth had taken 
hold of him, What is such fruit worth? Our answer, as we 
considered our own estimation of the value of the truth beyond 
price, preferred to millions of money and oceans of respect and 
influence was, one such heart made glad and brought nigh to the 
Lord and refreshed by his glorious plans, as seen in the unfoldings 
of his word of truth, is well worth the entire expenditure, made in 
England, of time and labor and money. If no other one there had 
been reached and blessed, doubtless Bro. R. would refuse such a 
price in exchange for it. And who can tell how many shall yet 
believe through the words and efforts of these already blessed. 

Then came the memory of sacrifices which we knew some had 
made [and we know probably of but few of the sacrifices and 
sacrificers God alone knows them all]; the sick sister who, not 
being able to give time or money, cast into the Lord's treasury two 
long switches of her hair to be sold, and the funds used in the 
spread of the truth; and the sister who, in the same interest, sold a 
gold watch chain, in which she had once prided. Under the 
influence of truth that pride had given place to zeal for the truth. 
We remembered also the brother in Kentucky who, having no 
money to spare, sent a watch, and a sister who, from the same 
motives, sent a gold ring; and many others who we know are 
denying themselves many things which they once prided in, such as 
costly apparel, etc., that they may have means which they can and 
do use in the blessed service. Let all such remember, as they hear of 

R786 : page 1 

hearts made glad by the truth, that they have had a share in the 
work of blessing. 

R786 : page 2 

If we may not see much fruit from our individual labor, thank God 
for what we are permitted to see of fruit to our united efforts. As 
memory called up these and other sacrifices, and the many whom 
we know to be using the spare moments and holidays in spreading 
the truth, or attempting to spread it (which is as highly appreciated 
by him who looks upon our hearts who accepts our endeavors 
rather than our results); and as we noted the many and earnest 
answers to the proposed new plan of labor mentioned in our last 
issue, which have come, and are still coming to hand, we thanked 
God and took courage afresh. 

We need scarcely tell you that "a book of remembrance" a special 
record is made in our office of those whose zeal for the Master and 
his Word is thus evidenced; and who can doubt that such and a 
much more perfect record is kept by the Master. They are his and 
found on his side in this day, when he is selecting his jewels. As he 
tests each one, can we doubt that he measures their love for him by 
the spirit of sacrifice for the truth which actuates them? Then let us 
value more and more our privilege of showing our love for him by 



gladly bearing reproach, and dishonor, and weariness, and 
inconvenience in the cause of truth the cause of God. 

These thoughts, encouraging and strengthening to us, we give to 
you, that they may likewise do you good. 

"Truth! how sacred is the treasure; 
Teach us, Lord, its worth to know; 
Vain the hopes, and short the pleasure, 
Which from other sources flow." 

If we could properly estimate truth, it would make us careful lest 
we should lose it, and we should value less its price in self-denial, 
and appreciate more the privilege of communicating it to others, 
even at the cost of further self-denial. Sacrifices of time, and 
money, and reputation would be considered "light" matters and 
would "work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory," while we would be prepared thereby to look not at the 
things which are seen, our sacrifices, etc., but at the things which 
are not seen the exceeding great reward in reservation for the 
overcomers. 



R786 : page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

page 2 

St. Louis Co., Mo., Sept. 28, 1885. 

C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR FRIEND IN CHRIST:-You will find 
enclosed one dollar to pay for the TOWER. I am doing all I can to 
spread the glorious truths. I am very poor in this world's treasures, 
but rich in faith. Year before last I had the TOWER sent to a 
brother of mine and he loaned it to his neighbors. I was there since, 
and was surprised to see how much good fifty cents could do. Men 
who had never feared God, who would not talk on religion, had 
their Bibles searching for more light, and would hardly talk of 
anything else. I am "anxious for greater service in the vineyard," 
and wish to know the plan you have to suggest. I have one copy of 
"Food" very nearly worn out by loaning and desire more, please. I 
know it is but little I can do, but I know it will be acceptable to our 
Father. 

Yours in Christ, 
R786 : page 2 

Yorkshire, England. 

GENTLEMEN: -Working in an empty house some days ago, I 
found some leaves of a book treating on the Bible. There is nothing 



to lead me to a conclusion as to what the title is, but every leaf I 
have is about the Bible and its teachings. "Why Evil was Permitted, 
The Day of Judgment, The Plan of the Ages," etc. These leaves 
have whetted my appetite, and after searching well I found what 
appears to be the last leaf, and it directs me to address a letter as 
this is directed for further information on these matters. I can only 
say that, not only I, but others with whom I associate, are never 
tired of talking, reading or hearing of these things. The leaves I 
have I would not sell for money, but I should like more, and I hope 
you may be able to supply me, God bless you richly. Yours in 
Christ, 



Berrien Co., Michigan. 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER.-Dear Friends: -A pamphlet published 
by you, accidentally came to my notice a few days ago, and 
although torn and mutilated, I have read all I can of it, and desire 
more of that light that seems to have penetrated your soul. In 
accordance with your request, which I find on last page of cover, I 
write you as an earnest, prayerful seeker after truth; knowing that in 
time past it has pleased God to send light to his children through 
one another, as in the case of Cornelius (Acts 10). My prayer is 
"Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" 

Now I send to Pittsburgh, to Zion's Watchman, that he may tell me 
what to do, and send me what he thinks I need. I think I could use 
several of the pamphlets to good advantage. 



Yours in fellowship of Christ, 
page 2 



London, England. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It is with heartfelt thankfulness 
that I write to you for the TOWER. Praise God from whom all 
blessings flow. The TOWER is looked for with delight, not by 
myself alone, others here look for it with equal pleasure, and we 
desire you to send it for another year. The subjoined list are the 
names of those who send money. We have of late had a real feast 
through the TOWER; it has opened up the Scriptures so that we can 
now search for ourselves. What once was to us very nearly a sealed 
book, now becomes full of harmony and beauty. We are already 
despised and rejected of nominal Christians, but we count it joy that 
we are accounted worthy to thus suffer with him. Since we have 
seen something of the truth, and are no longer building with the 
wood, hay and stubble of men's traditions. 

Our little Bible class does not grow very large, but we are not 
building on numbers. We find we get some very precious seasons 
with about four, and I think up to the present our best meetings 



have been the smallest; and during the week when two or three 
meet for a few minutes we often part with some new thought or 
reminder of the grandeur of the plan or character of God, and go 
forth with renewed energy to serve him. I find the experience 
vastly different from my previous experience in the nominal 
church, then doubting and fearing with a very indefinite idea of 
what was future both for the servants of God and those who did not 
serve him. 

But now we are glad to see that all shall be taught of God. Looking 
at the unfolding plan of God we cannot but see that his ways are 
higher than our ways and his thoughts higher than our thoughts. 
Please send more reading matter. We are gradually finding 
interested readers. 

Your brother in Christ. . 



R786 : page 2 



Neosho Co., Kan. 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:-If I should not be too late please 
forward a wall chart to my address for which I will pay express 
charges. I expect to return to my own nation in the near future 
(Cherokee Indians) and I will be more able to make the vision 
plain. I would send you money to pay for one or two years 
subscription of your paper, the Z.W.T., if I had it; but just now I am 
so pressed financially that I can scarcely keep my family, but hope I 
can do something soon. I preach as often as I can leave home, and 
ride from ten to twenty miles to make known this truth. Pray the 
Lord to bless his poor servant, who once was blind but thank God 
that now I see. I ever remain your brother in the Anointed One. 



[N.B. The supply of WALL CHARTS is exhausted.] 



Toledo, Ohio, Sept. 20, 1885. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Again is the welcome Z.W.T. at 
hand. But alas I can not read it any more. [A cataract has been 
forming over his sight gradually.] Having it read second-hand, and 
by those not consecrated however well meaning they be, it has not 
the satisfactory result as when read by myself. I am hungry for the 
glad tidings, but for the present cannot be satisfied and must now 
draw on the store gathered when natural sight was one of the 
blessings. Please inform me what your plan is for the consecrated 
ones. If I cannot see to read I may find a willing ear to talk to. 
Hoping you may be able to gather the meaning of this 
communication, the Lord bless you and be with you in his work is 
my prayer. 



Yours in Christ, 
page 2 



Mitchell Co., N.C., Sept. 29, '85. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-A suggestion in your last number 
of WATCH TOWER to those having time to invest in the Master's 
service at the eleventh hour, caught my eye and moved my heart, as 
I had been asking the Lord to open up the way that I might be 
enabled to do more effectual work in his vineyard. Not that I have 
been idle or careless about the "glad tidings of great joy which shall 
be to all people," or of the Church's glorious position, either; as I 
have been lecturing on these glorious themes for some time past 
until this summer, when the powers of darkness became somewhat 
alarmed, taking possession for the present, but it is only for the 
present, for they have already whipped themselves. 

It was after this manner: I had, as a feeble instrument in the hands 
of the Master, built up a considerable Sunday attendance, on 
lectures and Bible readings, in a section deserted by all 
denominations, but formerly belonging to the Baptists. They saw a 
good chance to reorganize their church and Sabbath school, which 
they did, offering me the superintendent's place if I would join 
them. Telling them I was not for sale, of course they left me "out in 
the cold." Many were dissatisfied with the proceedings and caused 
considerable interruption, so much so, that they now have no 
Sabbath school and very seldom any preaching. 

Their preacher passed my house today and told me that perhaps he 
would leave this fall, not having been here quite twelve months. 
Truth will prevail. He sees there are impressions of God's eternal 
truth so deeply rooted that he will either have to submit to it or 
leave. 

I was lecturing on the Millennium and God's promises to the Jews, 
when by a strange circumstance I fell in with your Sample Copy of 
Z.W.T. This has been over two years since. I was led by God's 
Word to see that there are deeper and richer blessings for the church 
and world than held out by the sects. Praying for more light on 
these glorious truths, the Lord sent your publications. It would be 
strange to you indeed, if you could know the harmony in our 
teachings before I saw your views, or heard of them. But I only had 
the outlines until the Lord brought us together. O then, what light 
indeed, rayed forth from "ZION'S WATCH TOWER. " 

Ever since I have been circulating your publications and lecturing. 
In this and the adjoining county deep impressions have been made 
and I feel confident will show fruit in God's "due time." The 
Methodists and Baptists prevail in this country, and held strong 
antagonism until the true light burst forth; since, they have become 



alarmed and are holding meetings together. Pilot and Herod were 
made friends in condemning the Lord of Glory. Strange coincident 
with his first rejection! It is only a question of time, when the way 
will be open for more successful labor. Patience for the Lord's "due 
time," is what we all, perhaps, are deficient in. May we "let 
patience have her perfect work." 

I have engaged a school, but am not bound for any definite period; I 
only take it while waiting for the Lord to open up something in 
which I can serve him better. If he has directed through you in the 
"plan" mentioned in last TOWER we will shortly "know of his 
will." I wish to stand ready for whatsoever and whenever he may 
call me. 

Being aware of the great value of time with you, and the vast 
importance of the glorious work in which the Lord has called you, 
makes me feel as an intruder by writing so much, but I cannot close 
without giving you an expression of my feelings and desires as a 
co-worker in the closing gospel harvest of the age, which indeed "is 
ripe" while "the laborers are few." 

The vast importance of the truth of the millennial glory so thrills 
my whole being, that I could proclaim the "glad tidings from 
Greenland's icy mountains to India's coral strand," and "from the 
rivers to the ends of the earth" in honor to the name of Jesus who is 
riding forth in his majesty. 

Sweetest name on mortal tongue, 
Sweetest notes in Seraph's song. 

Truly, 



R784 : page 2 

NOT to know evil, that is innocence; but to know evil and choose 
the good, that is virtue. 



A WORD spoken pleasantly is a large spot of sunshine on a sad 
heart; who has not felt its effects? A smile is like the bursting out 
of the sun behind a cloud to him who thinks he has no friend in the 
world. 



TRUE repentance consists in the heart being broken for sin and 
from sin. Some repent, yet never reform; they resemble a man 
traveling in a dangerous path, who frequently starts and stops, but 
never turns aside. 



"THAT fortitude which has encountered no dangers, that 
prudence which has surmounted no difficulties, that integrity which 
has been attacked by no temptation, can best be considered but as 



gold not yet brought to the test, of which therefore the true value 
cannot be assigned." 



R786 : page 3 



OUT AND INTO. 

Out of disaster and ruin complete, 
Out of the struggle and dreary defeat, 
Out of my sorrow, and burden, and shame, 
Out of the evils too fearful to name, 
Out of my guilt and the criminal's doom, 
Out of the dreading, and terror, and gloom; 

Into the sense of forgiveness and rest, 
Into inheritance with all the blest, 
Into a righteous and permanent peace, 
Into the grandest and fullest release, 
Into the comfort without an alloy, 
Into a perfect and permanent joy. 

Wonderful love that has wrought all for me! 
Wonderful work that has thus set me free! 
Wonderful ground upon which I have come! 
Wonderful tenderness, welcoming home! 

Out of the terror at standing alone, 
Out, and for ever, of being my own, 
Out of the hardness of heart and of will, 
Out of the longings which nothing could fill, 
Out of the bitterness, madness and strife, 
Out of myself and of all I called life; 

Into the light and the glory of God, 

Into the holy, made clean by blood, 

Into His arms, the embrace and the kiss, 

Into the scene of ineffable bliss, 

Into the quiet, the infinite calm, 

Into the place of the song and the psalm. 

Wonderful holiness, bringing to light! 
Wonderful grace, putting all out of sight! 
Wonderful wisdom, devising the way! 
Wonderful power that nothing can stay! 



-Sel. 



R787 : page 3 



ONE MEDIATOR. 

There is "one mediator between God and men, the man [Greek 
anthropos human being] Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom 
[Greek antilutron -a corresponding price] for all."- 1 Tim. 2:5,6. 

The Greek word translated Mediator in this text is meshes, and 
has the significance of the English word mediator, viz., "middle 
man," or reconciler, or, as defined by Webster, "one who interposes 
between parties at variance for the purpose of reconciling them." 

On this subject there are two views, both of which we believe to be 
very erroneous. First, we mention the view growing popular 
recently among so-called advanced thinkers, viz., that God, after 
trying to secure man's attention and love and reconciliation for four 
thousand years with very little success, changed his plan of 
operations and sent Jesus to entreat for him with mankind and to 
win man's love over to God, that thus reconciliation between God 
and men might be effected. They take this view because a false 
theory compels it; their theory being that God has nothing against 
mankind that would require a Mediator to adjust and settle, while 
mankind has supposed grievances against God which the Mediator 
was needed to dispel. This class, for the same reason, find no 
meaning or sense in the Scriptural statement that Jesus was a 
ransom for all men. They claim that God required no ransom for 
sinners, but was so full of love for men that he could not permit his 
justice to act in opposition to them; that God's love over-mastered 
his justice. 

This theory makes void the ransom, and the atonement through it, 
in a most deceptive manner, because it pretends to accept all the 
Scriptural statements on these subjects, though it as really opposes 
and makes void the Scriptures on these subjects as do open infidels. 

Its influence is really more misleading than theirs. But not only 
does such a theory make void the ransom, but it is totally 
unreasonable of itself, being in opposition to all the known facts. 

Facts testify in hundreds of ways that "the wrath of God" rests upon 
the race. Sickness, pain and death, pestilence, cyclones and 
earthquakes are facts however we may account for them. We must 
either conclude (1) that our Creator cannot prevent and remedy 
these evils, or (2) that he is careless of our welfare, or (3) these 
evils are permitted by him as a penalty for sins, and as a 
manifestation of his just wrath and righteous indignation therefor. 
We are not left to conjecture as to which of these views of the facts 
are correct; for the Bible not only assures us (1) that God is able to 
prevent evil, and has all power in heaven and in earth, and (2) that 
he is not careless and indifferent to the welfare of his creatures, and 
that he loves them; but (3) that death with all its attendant miseries 
and troubles, is the just penally for sin, (Rom. 6:23; Deut. 32:45; 
Gen. 2:17; 3:17-19; Rom. 5:17-19.) and that exposure to the 
disorders of nature as experienced in earthquakes, cyclones, etc., 
are incidental adjuncts of the curse which came upon man as the 



just wages or recompense for the sin of their representative Adam, 
and are therefore evidences of divine disfavor or opposition. 

That the Scriptures clearly state these facts to be evidences of the 
WRATH of God, should be known to all. The apostle speaking for 
himself and the Church, says, We "were by nature [through the 
fallen nature inherited] children of wrath even as others. " (Eph. 
2:3.) "For the wrath of God is revealed [displayed] from heaven 
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness." (Rom. 1:18.) Not 
only is there the present general display of divine displeasure 
against the race, (death, etc.) but the Scriptures point to a "wrath to 
come," "a day of wrath and righteous judgment of God" (Rom. 2:5.) 
the great time of trouble in the end of this age. The wrath 
manifested in death, etc., for Adam's sin, is supplemented by that to 
come because of the wilfulness and perversity of Adam's fallen 
children. 

Such as shall accept of Christ as their ransom, we are expressly told 
"shall be saved from wrath through him" (Rom. 5:9): while on such 
as believe not in the Redeemer "the wrath of God abideth" 
[continues]. (Jno. 3:36.) Such as now accept of Christ and become 
his obedient followers, are saved or delivered from wrath to come; 
and even now, though not delivered from present wrath and 
penalties of sin, they are assured of God's acceptance of the ransom 
and of his favor toward them and of a full release shortly from 
every vestige of the curse and wrath now resting on all. Thus by 
faith we reckon ourselves delivered or "saved from wrath through 
him" (Rom. 5:9.) whom God raised from the dead, even Jesus, 
which delivered us from wrath to come. 1 Thess. 1:10. The same 
word is rendered vengeance, Rom. 3:5. Is God unrighteous that 
taketh vengeance? Compare verses 23 to 26. 

From these texts, as well as from the facts about us, slow indeed 
would be the mind, or obstinately obtuse the heart that would claim 
that the great Creator could not be angry under just and proper 
cause. It would be as improper for our Creator to refrain from 
righteous indignation and wrath when there is a just and proper 
cause, as it would be for him to be angry without a cause. He is 
angry with wickedness and sin every day (Psa. 7:11), and declares 
that ultimately, sin, and all who love it, shall be no more. 

The same Greek word rendered "wrath" in the above texts, is 
rendered "angry" in Mark 3:5, "He [Jesus] looked about on them 
with ANGER, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts. " This 
was proper anger, a righteous indignation at hypocrisy and wilful 
opposition to the light. 

While God announces his anger, and shows its justice, he bids us 
beware of it, lest, because of our fallen condition, we err in 
judgment. We therefore recognizing ourselves as imperfect in 
judgment, are admonished to leave it for him who cannot err, and 
who says "Vengeance is mine I will repay." Hence we are exhorted 
to "put off all these-anger, wrath," etc., (Col. 3:8) and let all 



bitterness and wrath and anger... be put away from you," (Eph. 
4:31.) and to be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath." (James 
1:19.) The Greek word used in these three illustrations referring to 
the Church is orge the same exactly as used above in referring to 
the "wrath" of Jehovah, and the "anger" of Jesus. The reason, as we 
have shown, is that we are not capable in our present fallen 
condition to judge our fallen fellow creatures; hence while God's 
wrath is a righteous indignation "the wrath of man worketh not the 
righteousness of God." (Jas. 1:20.) Hence the command, "Be ye 
angry and sin not." There may be instances of wrong and 
oppression when we should be angry, when to be otherwise minded 
would be wrong, and would show either a sympathy with the 
wrong, or a lazy fear of the result of opposing it. We must 
remember our own weakness and liability, and be ready to cease 
resentment upon evidence of true repentance and reform, 
remembering that God has said, "Vengeance is mine, I will repay, 
saith the Lord." (Rom. 12:19.) We say, therefore, that this view, 
which ignores and denies the wrath of God against sin and sinners, 
and which therefore sees no necessity for Christ as a mediator for 
man's sin toward God, is in direct opposition, both to the facts of 
life and to Scripture testimony. 

But now let us look at the other distorted view of the mediation of 
Christ, the view generally known as orthodox. It pictures before 
men's minds, a God so angry as to be ferocious and cruel, whose 
rage against sinners pursues them not only during the present 
existence, but beyond the grave, and supplies them with existence 
for the one and only purpose of torturing them everlastingly. Then 
dropping for the time being their unscriptural and absurd idea that 
there are three Gods, "one in person," they speak of Christ Jesus as 
being very different from Jehovah; for whereas the one, as 
described, would be the personification and embodiment of hate, 
anger and malice, the other, they represent as love and love only. 
While according to this view Jehovah was engaged in hurrying off 
earth's millions to everlasting torture, Jesus appeared and by a 
sacrifice of himself, placated, or in a measure, satisfied the wrath of 
Jehovah. 

According to this view, Jesus having finished the sacrifice for man's 
sins, ascended to heaven, where it is claimed he sits upon what is 
termed his mediatorial throne. It is claimed that Jesus will occupy 
the mediatorial throne until the end of all probation. Their claim is 
that while he sits as mediator between God and men, he will plead 
for the sinner, and importune God not to send him into everlasting 
torture, but to let him come into heaven; and that when Jesus shall 
leave that mediatorial throne and come a second time, there is no 
more hope for sinners. Then it is claimed Jesus will look again 
over the already fixed verdict of the just and unjust, in what they 
term the judgment day, and thereafter Jesus and his Church join 
with Jehovah in the grand (?), glorious (?) and delightful (?) work 
of superintending the everlasting and hopeless torture of the great 



majority of the human race in endless woe, either mental or 
physical, or as claimed by some, both. 

We deeply pity the benighted mind to which this view of God's 
character and plan has the slightest appearance of right or truth. 
Such know neither the Father nor the Son. 

The idea of so-called Protestants on the Mediatorship of Jesus is 
very closely related to that of Roman Catholics on the same subject. 
The Church of Rome directs the sinner to go to the priest, who will 
intercede for him with the Virgin 

R788 : page 3 

and dead saints, and these in turn intercede with Jesus, who finally 
intercedes with Jehovah and secures the forgiveness of sin. 
Protestants, leaving out the mediation of priests, dead saints, and 
the virgin, come directly to Jesus, as a Mediator and Intercessor. 
The thought presented is that of the angry Jehovah approached by 
the loving Jesus, who PLEADS for us, showing the wounds of 
Calvary, until finally the Father relents and reluctantly receives the 
sinner. This view is forcibly expressed in the following verse from 
an old and familiar hymn: 

For me he ever lives, 

For me to INTERCEDE; 

His all redeeming love, 

His precious blood to PLEAD. 

Forgive him, O forgive, they cry, 

Nor let that ransomed sinner die. 

Alas ! that any claiming the name of Christ, and possessing the 
Bible, should be in such ignorance of the character of Jehovah 
therein revealed. Instead of repelling his ransomed creatures and 
requiring the pleading and interceding of a Mediator to induce him 
to be reconciled to us, the very reverse is true. All the mediation is 
in the past, so far as God is concerned; and ever since the ransom- 
sacrifice of Jesus was accepted as the propitiation or satisfaction for 
our sins and the sins of the whole world, Jehovah's attitude has been 
propitious [favorable -gracious] toward the sinner, ready and 
willing to receive all that come to him in and by the merit of that 
propitiatory sacrifice. And it has been the mission of the Apostles 
and of all who have become the children of God through faith in the 
finished work of Christ, to herald the fact to all men that God is 
now ready and willing to receive all who thus come. Therefore, as 
says the Apostle, it is, "As though God did beseech you by us, we 
PRAY YOU in Christ's stead, BE YE reconciled to God." (2 Cor. 
5:20.) This text shows that the part of Christ's work of mediation 
which related to the settlement of the claims of justice against us, as 
sinners, was at a full end-finished, completed, and that the part 
remaining was the making known of this divine reconciliation to 
the sinners, making them aware of God's favor and willingness to 
receive all that come unto him through the finished work of the 
Mediator. 



How clearly the Scriptures guard us against the two extreme 
theories of man. They assure us that God is love; that the Lord is 
very pitiful and of tender compassion; that he has no pleasure in the 
death of the wicked, but would that all would turn unto him and 
live; that he authorized Christ and all his followers to be his 
ambassadors and ministers, to make known the good tidings of 
reconciliation accomplished "by the death of 

R788 : page 4 

his Son, whom he set forth to be a propitiation for our sins, and not 
for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world." (Rom. 3:25, 
and 1 John 2:2.) They assure us also that Jehovah's love and 
wisdom planned the redemption, and that, in raising Christ from the 
dead, he gave proof of the acceptableness of the sacrifice, and of 
the certainty of the resultant blessing. It is not only true that in due 
time God sent his only begotten Son for our redemption (Rom. 5:6), 
and that God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we 
were yet sinners, Christ died for us (Rom. 5:8), but it is true also 
that this was Jehovah's original plan, and that before sin entered, 
even before the foundation of the world (1 Pet. 1:18-20; Rev. 13:8), 
his wisdom and love provided, and beheld in the distance, "the 
Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world." 

So far as God is concerned, the mediation of Christ Jesus is all in 
the past. As the Apostle expresses it in the text under consideration, 
the Mediator who stood BETWEEN the just Creator and his 
condemned and guilty creatures, was "the man Christ Jesus," and 
not the exalted Jesus. He mediated by giving himself a ransom [a 
corresponding price] for all. It is not the glorified Jesus that 
intercedes as mediator and prays pardon for sinners. If such were 
the case, the Son of God need not have come into the world to die 
for the sinners, but might from the first have prayed for them. But 
if prayers only were needed, no mediator would have been 
necessary, for God himself "SO LOVED the world" "while we 
were yet sinners." It was because no mediation, in the sense of 
entreaty, was necessary, and because no such action could mediate 
between God's violated law and the sinner, that the mediation was 
accomplished in a totally different manner. The Mediator was the 
man Christ Jesus. He became a man that he might be the Mediator. 
The act of mediation consisted in the man Jesus giving himself a 
ransom [corresponding price] for all men, to meet the penalty of the 
law of God against all men, that henceforth the condemnation of sin 
and its penalty death being removed, there might be no obstacle 
hindering men from the enjoyment of God's blessing and favor. In 
a word, the sacrifice for sins is the mediation, and the Sacrificer at 
the time of the sacrifice is the Mediator. 

That this is the correct idea, is not only borne out by reason, and the 
above statement of Scripture, but by every text in which the word 
Mediator, as applied to Jesus, occurs. The same word occurs as 
follows: Gal. 3:19,20; 1 Tim. 2:5; Heb. 8:6; 9:15 and 12:24. These 
refer to Jesus and Moses, both as mediators. They show that Moses, 



as the mediator of the Law Covenant, was a type of Jesus, the 
Mediator of the New Covenant. 

The apostle, after informing us that Christ was mediator of the New 
Covenant, adds, (Heb. 9:15-22-Diaglott) "For where a covenant 
exists, the death of that which has ratified it, is necessary ...a 
covenant is firm [binding] over dead victims, since it is never valid 
when that which ratifies it [or, is to ratify it] is alive. Hence not 
even the first [i.e. the Law Covenant] has been [was] instituted 
without blood," [though the blood used in the type was not the 
actual blood of Moses the typical mediator of that typical covenant, 
but the blood of beasts representing Moses' blood]. For every 
commandment of the law having been spoken by Moses to all the 
people, taking the blood of bullocks and of goats with water and 
scarlet wool and hyssop he sprinkled both the book [of the law, the 
covenant] itself, and all the people, saying, "This is the blood of [or 
evidence of the death, of that which ratified] the covenant which 
God enjoined on you." 

It will be observed that the killing [shedding of the blood] of the 
bullocks and goats, was the mediation, their death representing the 
death of Moses the mediator of that covenant. In the killing of 
these, the mediation was completed; the covenant was ratified and 
in full force that very instant. The sprinkling of the blood upon the 
book and people was not a part of the mediating of the covenant, 
for the covenant had no force or binding value until the mediation 
was complete, finished. That which mediated for the sins of the 
people RATIFIED, or completed the covenant, i.e. made its 
provisions applicable to the people. The sprinkling of the people 
and book came as a result of the ratifying of the covenant; as a 
result of the mediation for their sins typically represented in the 
death of the beasts. 

As in the typical, so in the real mediation for sin, which ratifies and 
brings into force the better covenant-the New Covenant. The man 
Christ Jesus mediated or came between God and man by meeting 
the penalty of the law against which mankind had sinned. He 
opened up a new and living way [a new way of life] by bringing 
into operation a New Covenant or new arrangement between God 
and man. The original arrangement entered into between God and 
his creatures was, that if obedient to God, man should live forever. 
This we failed in as a race, represented in Adam, and the penalty- 
death came upon all. God could not make another contract or 
covenant with men whereby they could have life, while they were 
already under sentence of death for the violation of the original 
covenant or arrangement. Hence it was impossible for a new 
covenant or arrangement between God and man to take effect at all, 
until the penalty of the violation of the original engagement had 
been met by the payment of a ransom- a corresponding price. The 
one paying that price and removing the obstruction which hindered 
the making of a New Covenant, is the MEDIATOR. The man 
Christ Jesus, who gave himself a corresponding price, did thus 



cancel the penalty of the violated covenant, and thus opened the 
way for the "New Covenant," or new contract between God and 
men; wherefore he is called, "The Mediator of the New Covenant." 
Compare Heb. 9:15. 

Thus the death of Christ, by meeting our penalty, mediating for us 
or making "reconciliation for iniquity," RATIFIED or established 
the New Covenant, putting it into force, and so, immediately after 
Jesus' sacrifice was complete and had been formally presented to 
God on our behalf, came the Pentecostal blessing, marking the 
beginning of the New Covenant. 

It may help us to appreciate the matter, if we examine the New 
Covenant and see what kind of an arrangement it is, and also the 
typical covenant of which Moses was the mediator, as represented 
in the dying beasts. 

The New Covenant or new arrangement between God and man, is 
that expressed to Israel, whose sacrifices, covenants, etc., were 
typical of those to be instituted once for all men. "Behold, the days 
come, saith the Lord, that I will make a New Covenant with the 
house of Israel and with the house of Judah.... This shall be the 
covenant that I will make with the house of Israel: After those days 
[after a while or by-and-by], 

R789 : page 4 

saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it 
in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people. 
And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every 
man his brother, saying, 'Know the Lord'; for they shall all know 
me from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: 
for I will forgive their iniquity and remember their sin no more." 
Jer. 31:31-34. 

The new and future covenant is here compared and contrasted with 
the Law Covenant, under which, as a nation, they had long been. 
The thing to be desired was to get rid entirely of the original sin and 
condemnation, and to get a clear understanding of God's 
requirements and have a fresh trial-i.e., to be permitted each 
individually to stand trial for life or death according to obedience or 
disobedience, in hope of obtaining and retaining everlastingly the 
right of life. 

Israel supposed that they had received virtually this, when the Law 
Covenant was ratified. With great pomp and solemnity, that 
covenant was instituted at the hands of Moses, and they were 
assured, as the items of the Law were announced to them, that "The 
man that doeth these things shall LIVE" as a consequence [have life 
as long as he doeth them]. Rom. 10:5; Gal. 3:12; Lev. 18:5. But 
their bright hopes were soon blighted, for one after another died, 
giving evidence that none of them kept their part of the covenant 
fully; and it soon became evident that, By the deeds of the Law 
[Covenant] could no flesh be justified in God's sight. Rom. 3:20. 



This was God's object in giving them that typical covenant. He 
thus showed them their own depraved condition, to convince them 
that a great remedy was needed for the great malady of sin that a 
great Saviour was needed to deliver them from the enemy's power. 
The Law Covenant was given to teach this lesson, and to typify and 
illustrate the operations of the New Covenant coming after it, as 
well as to fill up the time intervening before the right time of the 
introduction of the New Covenant which it typified. 

The New Covenant is like its type, the Law Covenant, except that 
its range will be greater; it will embrace the world represented by 
Israel; its provisions will be grander and deeper as an antitype is 
always superior to that which is used to typify it. Comparing the 
two, under the Apostle's direction, we can see the vast superiority 
of the New Covenant over its type: The typical covenant, 
established or ratified or mediated by the death of bulls or goats as 
sacrifices for original sin, was insufficient; for such sacrifices "can 
never take away sins"; (Heb. 10:11), their death was not a ransom- 
not a corresponding price, to the death of man, not equivalent in 
value to the penalty resting upon mankind for the violation of the 
original covenant by their representative, Adam, and nothing short 
of this could cancel the sin and remove its penalty really. That God 
so regarded their covenant is evident from the fact that it had to be 
repeatedly ratified every year by the sacrifice of more bulls and 
goats on the typical "Day of Atonement," thus indicating that the 
original guilt was not blotted out and canceled, but merely 
RECKONED SO for a year at a time. This process of ratifying the 
typical covenant yearly, and offering life to every Israelite who 
would live up to its requirements, was kept up for centuries, though 
none of them gained the coveted boon-until the man Christ Jesus, 
came a perfect man whose life came not through a father of the 
Adamic race, but from Adam's Father, Jehovah. Thus we see 
another use for the Law Covenant; it pointed out and served to 
prove the man Christ Jesus the only perfect man, and hence the 
only one who could give a ransom a corresponding price for the 
transgression of the first perfect man's failure to obey the first 
covenant. 

But as the sacrifices by which the Law covenant was mediated were 
only typical and temporary, and hence of no lasting value to 
sinners, so also, the other provisions of that covenant; for instance, 
the law given them and which they covenanted to obey, was written 
in tables of stone, and their hearts being left in the depraved 
condition, to keep the law was an impossibility it could only 
condemn them, as out of harmony with it. 

Now contrast with this the New Covenant and its better conditions. 
The foundation of the New Covenant is sure; the mediation is 
thorough and complete and needs not a yearly repetition; the 
putting away of original sin is by "one sacrifice for sins forever" 
(Heb. 10:12), because the Mediator of the New Covenant mediated 
not with the blood of others [bulls and goats] "but by his own 



blood," by "better sacrifices" than those (Heb. 9:12 and 23), "when 
He offered up himself" (Heb. 7:27) "a ransom for all." Thus seen 
the security of the New Covenant rests upon the cancellation of the 
penalty of the original covenant violated by Adam our 
representative. A corresponding price, i.e., a ransom, is the only 
complete settlement of the old case which would admit of a new 
covenant being entered into with us. Hence the importance of 
realizing the RANSOM price given by the man Christ Jesus, the 
mediator of the New Covenant, before we can appreciate fully its 
blessed provisions. The man Jesus was not only a better sacrifice 
than bulls and goats, but His better sacrifice became the "surety of a 
better covenant." Heb. 7:22. 

Notice that by the provisions of the New Covenant the sinners 
released from the penalty of the former violated covenant, will not 
only have a new trial, but will, in addition, have restored to them 
the original perfections of being, whereby they shall individually 
have as full an opportunity of rendering obedience, and meriting 
life everlasting, as Adam their representative had under the first 
covenant. And their trial will be backed up by the lesson learned 
from Adam's disobedience and their own experience under sin. 
This is indicated in the promise of the New Covenant- "I will put 
my law in their inward parts and write it in their hearts. " Thus it 
was with Adam; he needed not to have God's law written on tablets 
of stone, for his instruction, because his very being was permeated 
with that law. His mind (spirit) was in harmony with God's mind 
(spirit). Sin had not warped and twisted his judgment and made 
wrong to appear right. Malice, selfishness and pride had not at that 
time displaced righteousness and love, the image of God in which 
he was created. And not only was his mind in harmony with God, 
but his body also. He had then none of the physical imperfections 

R789 : page 5 

and tendencies to evil that now so hinder and incapacitate, for 
perfect obedience to God: So deeply was the Law of God originally 
written in the perfect human organism that even the past six 
thousand years of degradation, sin, ignorance, superstition, and 
misery has not entirely blotted out that law; and to-day even the 
most degraded savages give evidence of some appreciation of right 
and wrong, even without the written law. "These having not the 
[written] law," "show the work [or give evidence] of the law, 
written in their hearts ...their thoughts the meanwhile accusing or 
excusing." (Rom. 2:15.) This glimmer of conscience, often so 
distorted by superstition and error as to lead into deeper error, 
serves to illustrate what it would be to have the full Law of God 
clearly and deeply written in the heart. 

But, moreover, the word "heart" is used to represent the center of 
affections, hence the promise of the New Covenant is not only to 
give mankind an intellectual knowledge of the Lord, so that they 
shall need no further instruction one of another, but the law will be 
deeply and lastingly engraven in the very center of the affections of 



all who will accept the provisions of that covenant. O how 
different is this new covenant from its type given to Israel! how 
much grander the sacrifice of mediation which cancelled the old 
and ratified the new. How much better to have the heart-written 
law (which implies restitution to God's image) than the law written 
on tables of stone. 

Thank God for the New Covenant, praise him for its bountiful 
provisions for every member of the fallen race; and above all, 
noting how all else depended upon its mediation and ratification by 
the settlement of our indebtedness or penalty under the original 
covenant (death), let us, above all, praise God for the gift of his 
Son, the Mediator, "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself a 
ransom." Compare Heb. 10:16-20 with Jer. 31:31-34. 



R789 : page 5 

OUR ACCESS TO GOD THROUGH THE 
ONE MEDIATOR. 

"Having therefore boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood 
of Jesus." Heb. 10:19. 

"No man cometh unto the Father but by me." John 14:6. 

From the foregoing it will be plain, we trust, that the mediation is 
all in the past, that it is not the living, glorified Jesus who is now 
mediating between God and men and propitiating God as toward 
and for us, but that the mediating and propitiating work, is all 
completed, finished, ended by the Mediator who gave himself as 
the mediatory or propitiatory sacrifice -the man Christ Jesus. 

This being true, it is evident that there is no longer any barrier or 
hindrance to prevent any sinner who accepts of that mediation-the 
ransom from having access to the Father without any one to 
intercede further on his behalf. It is evident that to obtain the 
forgiveness of sins provided for by that propitiating ransom, the 
sinner for whom it was given has only to go to God and claim the 
forgiveness, and needs not to bring any other sacrifice for sins than 
that ONE, and needs no Mediator either in earth or heaven. This 
simple truth is beautifully expressed by the poet:- 

"In my hand no price I bring, 

Simply to The cross I cling." R790 : page 5 

Alas ! how humanity would bar the way which God through 
Christ has made so open and free. How the traditions of men would 
hinder and obstruct the way of the sinner. Papacy set the example, 
saying by actions and practices, God is not fully satisfied with the 
ransom: He must be approached by Jesus and pleaded with to 
receive you; and Jesus loves his mother, say they, and would make 
special effort for the sinner if his mother requested it, and the 



Virgin Mary, say they, would not take special interest in the sinner's 
plea for mercy and forgiveness unless she were importuned by a 
regularly ordained priest, and the priest would not spend his effort 
for the sinner unless it paid either in money or influence. Protestant 
sects obtained much of the same spirit of error from the false 
doctrine that the penalty for sin is everlasting misery instead of 
everlasting extinction -death. This false doctrine has produced an 
awful dread and fear of God which love cannot cast out, while life 
and this error lasts. Of this the Lord speaks through the Prophet, 
saying, "Their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men." Isa. 
29: 13. Having such a fear of Jehovah and not seeing clearly that 
the ransom given cancelled all the claims of justice against the race, 
and silences forever the condemnations of the curse against those 
who, by faith, lay hold of that ransom, they still feel a need for 
some one to stand between them and Jehovah and plead forgiveness 
for them. And this wrong idea leads to other wrongs of action. 
Teaching an unwillingness on God's part to receive the sinner freely 
and fully, without being urged to do so by Jesus, is the foundation 
of what is known among some of God's children as the "mourner's 
bench," where the repentant sinner, seeking forgiveness, is taught, 
by practice and example at least, that tears and groans and 
entreaties of himself and others must precede any forgiveness of 
sins or acceptance with God. To thus represent him as requiring 
entreaty is to misrepresent God and the teaching of his Word, and 
to undervalue the efficacy of the precious ransom sacrifice by 
which we have full, free and uninterrupted access to the Father. 
The way to life does not need to be opened by groans and 
pleadings; it was opened more than eighteen centuries ago by the 
Mediator-the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a RANSOM for 
all. 

The custom of so-called Revival Meetings to call upon sinners to 
arise, and thereby request an interest in the prayers of Christians 
present, is a part of the same error. It is virtually saying to sinners 
that they need the intercession or pleading of saints with Jesus, and 
of Jesus with the Father, before they can be at harmony with God. 
It thus deceives the sinner and helps to fix an error in his mind, 
which even though he should become converted, will for years be a 
stumbling block to him, and through him to others, preventing 
many from correctly apprehending God's character and plan. 

Doubtless from this error, in conjunction with others, has sprung 
the erroneous but common custom of praying for the conversion of 
friends. While it is proper for us to make known to the Lord our 
interest in our friends, and in sinners in general, yet it is not proper 
for us to request God to change his plan and arrangements and to 
adopt our plans. Rather, we should listen to his word, and learn 
what is his way and then reverently say, Not my will but thine be 
done, and not my way and time but thine. 

For an imperfect human being to attempt to direct the all- wise 
Jehovah, is the very extreme of presumption. It is evidently born of 



the idea that we love the sinner more than God loves him; that our 
love is deeper and stronger than that of the Father, who so loved the 
world, while all were yet sinners, as to send his Son to mediate and 
ratify the New Covenant, which would bless all the families of the 
earth; or that our love is deeper than that of him who declares, 
"Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for 
his friend. " Those who feel that their love for sinners is greater than 
this, should reflect that they have shown less love and made less 
sacrifice for sinners. 

A proper view of the matter would lead to some such conclusion as 
the following:- 

Here is a friend whom I love; I desire that he shall come into 
harmony with God-be converted from ways of sin and unbelief to 
ways of righteousness and faith. What shall I do about it? Shall I 
pray to God and entreat him to love him and to provide for his 
welfare? No; because I realize that he already loves him more than 
I do, and that he has already made provision for him at great cost. 
What then can I do for my friend? First of all, I can inform myself 
of what plan and arrangement God has made for him, assured from 
the very outstart that that plan must be as much more wise, loving, 
and just, than any I could design, as God is more wise, just and 
loving than I am. 

When I find in God's word that a full ransom has been given for all, 
and that a New Covenant, a new way and arrangement, was thereby 
opened for all, I realize that my friend, myself, and all others are 
sure to be given an opportunity for life everlasting under its 
bountiful provisions. Thanking God then, that my friend has been 
redeemed, and that "in due time" he will be brought to understand 
the conditions of the New Covenant, and helped to comply with 
those conditions, I rejoice in this. 

Then, I inquire of the Lord through HIS WORD, whether, in order 
to partake of the New Covenant blessings, my friend must 
recognize and accept of its provisions now; and I find the answer 
there, and in the facts of life, that only a few of the whole race, who 
shall be blessed by that covenant, learn anything of it in this present 
time, that the vast majority die in infancy and in almost total 
ignorance of it, but that whoever hears of it and receives it now, 
during the Christian age, has the opportunity and privilege of 
sacrificing, and thus of receiving the additional favor promised to 
such. Now I say to myself: I know that my friend will be blessed 
through the ransom, and brought to a knowledge of that blessed 
truth, and to the enjoyment of the favors thus opened up some 
time. There can be no doubt of this. But now, I wish that he could 
see it and receive the truth now, that thus he might have the honor 
and blessing to be conferred on the overcomers of this age. The 
fact that God says that some are so blinded by the ruler of this 
world (John 12:31) that they cannot see the truth, suggests at once 
that there is a strong possibility that my friend might be one of 
these, whose mind is so prejudiced and blinded that he cannot 



receive the message of redemption and reconciliation until the next 
age shall have removed the obstacles and hindrances, when all the 
blinded eyes shall be opened. Isa. 35:5. 

But desirous of doing all I can for my friend, and, if possible, of 
getting him upon the race course for the grand prize of the divine 
nature, I inquire again of God's Word-Lord, according to thy wise 
and gracious plan, are all who may run for that prize arbitrarily 
called? or is the call for all who can hear and receive it? The 
answer is, "He that hath an ear, let him hear;" "To-day, if ye will [or 
shall] hear his voice, harden not your hearts" (Heb. 4:7); for 
whosoever cometh unto the Father by the Mediator is accepted, and 
has every privilege and opportunity of any other. So then, all that I 
can do in the matter is to try in every way to reach the "ear" of my 
friend with the good tidings. Some have less ear to hear than 
others, therefore the Lord tells us that we should use wisdom and 
prudence, not in what we shall tell him, for we must tell the truth 
and nothing else; but we should use wisdom and prudence in how 
we tell it; that time, circumstances and manner may be favorable for 
reaching his ear with the truth concerning God's love, God's plan 
and the favors now obtainable. Therefore, if I go to God in prayer 
concerning the matter, I may not pray for my friend, that God 
would change his plan, and do the work of reaching his ear; for if 
that were best, he would do so without my asking. But I may well 
pray for wisdom to guide me in my endeavor to proclaim the good 
tidings, so that if my friend have "an ear to hear" I may be able to 
reach it and "let him hear." 

The Apostle declares, that it has pleased God by the foolishness 
[i.e., seemingly slow and unsuccessful method] of preaching 
[teaching-declaring] to save them that believe. (1 Cor. 1:21.) He 
does not say anywhere that it is God's plan to save people because 
people pray for them; nor is there an instance in Scripture where 
Jesus or the Apostles prayed for the conversion of any one. 
Whence then comes the practice to-day, except, as we say, it is born 
of erroneous views of the love of God and a failure to appreciate 
the fullness of the ransom and the ultimate breadth of its results, 
under the provisions of the New Covenant? The bringing of men 
into harmony with God in the next age, will be by the same means 
as in this age preaching but under circumstances more favorable 
to their hearing [i.e., believing or accepting] than at present. 

But stop, here is another consideration: There is a limit placed upon 
the time, "To-day if you will [or shall] hear his voice." Yes, to-day 
limits it in two ways; it is to-day, or during the Christian age, that 
there is any if about the hearing, for in the coming age all shall 
hear; for this is the will of God, that all shall come to a knowledge 
of the truth (1 Tim. 2:4); and one of the provisions of the New 
Covenant, ratified by the blood of the Mediator, is, that the 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth, and then none 
shall need 

R791 : page 5 



"say to his neighbor, know thou the Lord, for all shall know him." 
Yes, it is shall hear and shall know then, but it is if any man have an 
ear, and if he come in contact with the truth, and if he hear, now. 
The "if" is limited to "to-day" -the present Christian age; it has no 
place beyond. 

But further, the "if," and the to-day, limit it in another way. If we 
hear to-day, i.e., during the Christian age while the CALL to the 
divine nature is being made; if we hear that call, to both suffer and 
reign with Christ. But "if" we do not hear it "to-day" we will not 
again hear that call; for the "little flock" to be joint-heirs with Christ 
and partakers of the divine nature will have been completed, and 
the call will be different thereafter, though it will be grand 

R791 : page 6 

also. It will have all the blessings and promises contained in the 
New Covenant, but not the added blessings of the Abrahamic 
covenant. None will then be called to be of the "seed"-the Christ 
which shall bless the world (See Gal. 3:29) for that company will 
be complete, but the call will then be to share the blessings of the 
New Covenant, and be thus blessed by the "seed" now being 
selected through suffering and sacrifice. 

And since we find the Scriptures teaching clearly that the CALL to 
the divine nature is now at an end, we must not in preaching 
express that call to our unconverted friends, but should point them 
to the New Covenant blessings of restitution. We may say to them, 
See the goodness of God, the breadth of the salvation, the ransom 
fully as far reaching as the curse; let it lead thee to repentance; give 
thy heart to God, let him at once begin to write upon you his perfect 
law, and at once begin to restore you, both mentally to his image, 
and to physical perfection. It took 6,000 years to blot out that law 
and bring you to your present unlikeness to him, but it will not take 
so long to restore you. He promises that it shall be done, for all 
who will accept it, within the 1,000 years of the reign of Christ. 
Begin at once to taste the fellowship with God, and to express by 
obedience your appreciation of his great love as manifested in his 
great and loving plans. 

We see, then, that ALL and the FULLEST MEDIATION between 
God and man, was accomplished in the death of the Mediator-the 
man Christ Jesus, though God did not formally accept of it for 
several days after it was made, and though all mankind will not 
even have ability to accept its provisions until some time in the 
millennial day. Reconciliation on God's part was deferred until 
Jesus had ascended on high and formally presented the ransom 
given for his formal approval and acceptance. It was accepted by 
God, and this was indicated by marked manifestation of the Holy 
Spirit on the day of Pentecost. So many of the race then living as 
had ears to hear and eyes to see, and who accepted of the ransom 
and the New Covenant which it ratified, were then brought into 
harmony and fellowship with God. So many of the race as have 



since heard and accepted have had the privilege, while others, the 
great mass of the race for whom the ransom was given, will come 
to "see" and "hear" only after the Prince of darkness shall be bound 
and the Sun of righteousness shall have risen with healing in his 
wings, bringing blessings and restoration, mentally and morally as 
well as physically, to all the blind, deaf and lame. Then they shall 
hear and all shall know, and thus be enabled to avail themselves of 
every blessing provided under the New Covenant, even to life 
everlasting, as a reward of obedience everlasting. 

Thus seen, the ONE Mediator, the man Christ Jesus was sufficient, 
and the mediation accomplished by him when he gave himself a 
RANSOM was abundant, and therefore the way of access to God 
and to everlasting life, stands open wide to every sinner who shall 
either now, or in the next age, see by faith the sacrifice, and grasp 
by faith the ransom and the mediation accomplished in it. 

Then take away the hindrances and let sinners come to God. Put 
away the false idea of Jesus standing before the throne of God 
pleading for the sinners as though God were unjust and unwilling to 
grant the favors which he himself had arranged for by the sacrifice 
of his Son. Take away priests, and saints, and virgin; take away 
your mourners benches and your unscriptural prayers which only 
hinder the sinner. And instead of praying with him or for him 
instruct him; point him to the strait road, the open way to life. Give 
him full assurance of your faith, making very plain to him the 
greatness and all-sufficiency of the ransom given and the mediation 
completed, FINISHED at Calvary. 

Dear dying Lamb thy precious blood, 
Shall never lose its POWER, 
'Till all the RANSOMED ones of earth 
Are saved from Satan's power. 



R791 : page 6 

AN ADVOCATE WITH THE FATHER, 
INTERCEDING FOR US. 

"If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus 
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation [satisfaction] for our 
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world." 
1 John 2:1. 

This passage is supposed to favor the thought, that when coming 
to the Father, the glorified Jesus must act as an ambassador or 
advocate with the Father, to plead for our acceptance and 
forgiveness. This we have already shown to be contrary to reason as 
well as contrary to the spirit and word of God. How then is this 
statement of John's to be understood? We answer that when this 
statement concerning the advocate is taken in connection with the 
context, all is clear and plain. The evidence of our ransom, 



presented by Jesus when he ascended on high, is, and ever shall be, 
our advocate. As the blood of Abel "cried" or spoke to God after 
his death, so the blood of the man Christ Jesus, the Mediator, 
speaks for every sinner for whom he died, for all who come unto 
God trusting in his sacrifice for sins. The blood of Abel cried for 
vengeance, but not so the blood of Christ. (Heb. 12:24.) It speaks 
peace and pardon to the sinner, and speaks full satisfaction 
(propitiation) to God, for our sins. That blood, that sacrifice, that 
ransom presented by Jesus, is our advocate; ever with the Father, 
ever heard on behalf of every repentant sinner, and Jesus, the 
glorified, has no need to further plead for our forgiveness. 

And this is plainly the apostle's teaching. In the preceding verse he 
says, "If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves." "If we 
confess our sins, he [God] is JUST TO FORGIVE us our sins." 
Then in explanation of why we may know certainly of our 
forgiveness and see how God to be JUST must forgive us, the 
apostle points to our advocate, the blood which speaks for us 
"Jesus Christ the righteous" without sin, therefore a perfect 
ransom, the satisfaction for our sins and for all sins. He thus points 
us to Calvary and to the acceptance of that ransom price as our 
advocate. 

We read of the INTERCESSION of Christ for us, and it is well that 
we should appreciate its meaning. "It is Christ that died, yea rather 
that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also 
maketh intercession for us." "He is able to save to the uttermost all 
that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make 
intercession for them." (Rom. 8:34; Heb. 7:25.) These statements 
are not out of harmony with the foregoing. They do not teach that 
Christ Jesus prays or entreats with the Father for our acceptance. 
The Greek word used rather signifies to deal or to show cause. He 
ever liveth to deal or negotiate for them. The same Greek word is 
translated "deal" in Acts 25:24. 

Now the question arises, What negotiation is necessary? If the man 
Christ Jesus by the sacrifice of himself met all the obligations and 
penalties of the original covenant, and opened up a new way of life- 
-by ratifying a new covenant with his blood, and if whoever cometh 
to the Father by him-accepting of the ransom from the old, and the 
conditions of the New Covenant, is acceptable with the Father, why 
need there be any further dealing or negotiation on our behalf? 

We answer, The rolling away of the condemnation of the first 
covenant is not sufficient. If all the old score were blotted out, the 
sinner would still need to be helped; for if when the old score was 
settled, he was presented to God as a person against whom not a 
charge could be found fully cleared of all guilt, how long would 
such an one maintain such a standing? Not a moment; for though 
cleansed, if not made perfect; if not freed from the weaknesses 
resulting from the fall, we would be condemned again under the 
new covenant, were it not that the Great High Priest deals for us. 



As our Redeemer he bought us. His sacrifice is our price. As our 
Restorer he will bring us to perfection and to fellowship with the 
Father. Because he is perfect and acceptable with the Father, we, 
whom he purchased, and whom he represents, are acceptable 
through him representatively. 

As in the person of Adam, death passed upon all represented in him 
long before each individual became totally dead, so in Christ's 
person as their representative, a right to life has come to all 
mankind long before each individual becomes fully alive perfect. 
(Adam was the representative of the race by nature, by creation; 
Christ being their representative by virtue of ownership; having 
bought us with his own precious blood.) We will not be personally 
worthy of recognition by the Father until made actually perfect. 

Thus, then, while imperfect, Christ deals with us for God; judging 
and correcting us, etc., and he deals with God for us, by 
appropriating to us the merit of his own sacrifice. When the present 
trial is past, if we are accounted worthy of life, when we reach the 
point of actual perfection we shall need no one to "deal" 

R792 : page 6 

for us, or to represent us, but we will deal directly with the Father 
ourselves. 

But now, and so long as we are imperfect, it would be "a fearful 
thing to fall into the hands of the living God." (Heb. 10:26-31.) 
Fearful, in that every imperfect being, judged by the law of God, 
would be found imperfect, and hence as unworthy of life, 
condemned to death. Specially fearful, because it would be "the 
second death," for all were released from the condemnation of the 
first or Adamic death by the ransom, and should be hid or covered 
by the Redeemer until perfected. And all may be so covered who 
are willing to be; hence if they "fall into the hands of the living 
God" before perfection has been reached, it must be by a willful 
rejection of the Redeemer's merit. In thus removing their cause 
from his negotiation or dealing, such are face to face with Him 
whose laws they violate, and whose appointed way of reconciliation 
they thus spurn when they reject Jesus' merit as their justification, 
and attempt to deal with God themselves as though perfect or not 
requiring a ransom. 

But in all this there is nothing in favor of the usual idea of 
INTERCESSION, of Jesus pleading for sinners, and praying the 
Father to accept them. It is rather that of a representative or 
attorney, who, as our case is called, acts for us, represents us, 
applying the merits of his ransom- sacrifice to each one coming to 
the Father by him. He continues to supply and apply that 
meritorious sacrifice until we, made perfect, shall have no further 
need of it, though that sacrifice and merit shall never be forgotten - 
in eternity. Thus he not only redeems us from guilt, but is able (and 
willing) to save to the uttermost completely all who come to the 
Father by him. 



Thus every Scripture points to the merit of the sacrifice on our 
behalf. His sacrifice redeemed us, he bought all; all are his, and he 
represents all whom he purchased, and will continue to represent 
them, and to deal for them, until such times as he shall have 
perfected them and presented them perfect to the Father, (1 Cor. 
15:27,28 and Jude 24.) unless they wilfully and designedly remove 
their case from his charge. 

Those whom the apostle mentions as falling into the hands of the 
living God and receiving his fiery indignation, and being devoured 
or destroyed as his adversaries, are those who reject the ransom and 
refuse God's spirit of favor therein extended to them-who reject the 
efficacy of the blood which sealed and ratified the New Covenant 
and attempt to stand before God and deal for themselves with all 
their imperfection. 



R792 : page 6 

THE LAW COVENANT AND ITS MEDIATION 
TYPICAL NOT REAL. 

The Law Covenant made with Israel was binding upon them 
when they accepted its conditions, to the extent that it was a REAL 
covenant. And well it is for Israel that theirs was only a typical 
covenant and its conditions, penalties, etc., only typical; because, 
had that covenant been real, they in coming under its conditions 
would have become individually liable to its penalty, DEATH. For 
though this penalty is no worse, but in fact the same, that was upon 
them and the whole world, before, as sharers of the condemnation 
upon Adam their representative, yet there would have been this 
difference: that instead of one man's disobedient act and one man's 
penalty, to be met before another covenant could be ratified or put 
into operative force, there would have been the disobedience of 
every one of the millions of Israelites to be met by a corresponding 
price. Nothing short of ten million saviours would have been a 
corresponding price for ten million individual sinners. 
Consequently, only one man's disobedience and penalty, being thus 
far settled by one man-Christ Jesus, it follows, that if Israel's 
covenant had been real, if its Mediator brought them under a new 
condition of individual obligation, then indeed the Law Covenant 
would have been a curse and injury and not a blessing; for under 
that covenant all would have been individually condemned to death. 
And not one of those individuals could have life or any other 
blessing under the New Covenant, because if individually liable 
under the Law Covenant, each Jew would require an individual 
redeemer to die for him-to pay his ransom price, death. 

We know that millions of saviours have not died to ransom millions 
of Jews, consequently, if their covenant were a real one, they are 
not redeemed from its penalty to this day. 



R792 : page 7 

But that their covenant was not real, but typical only, can be 
clearly shown in two ways: First, because no new covenant could 
be made by the Creator, with any of the race, offering them life on 
any conditions whatever, SO LONG as they were already under his 
own condemnation, as unworthy of life for the violation of a former 
covenant. In other words, the sin, the condemnation, the penalty of 
the covenant violated by the race representatively, through Adam 
must be fully paid by a ransom [a corresponding price] before 
any new covenant guaranteeing life could be ratified or instituted. 

The Law Covenant was not preceded by settlement or cancellation 
of the claims of the Adamic covenant against the Israelites. True it 
was preceded by sacrifices of bulls and goats (Heb. 9:19-22) as, or 
representative of sin-offerings, but it must be evident to all that 
those sacrifices "could never take away sin" (Heb. 10:4 and 11,) 
because they were not a ransom; that is, they were not a 
corresponding price for man's sin. The price of man's sin was man's 
destruction -man's death, and not the destruction of bulls and 
goats. The death of millions of bulls and goats would not settle the 
penalty of the broken covenant; nothing could settle it short of the 
death of a perfect man, against whom the original covenant had no 
claims. No, such sacrifice for sins was made until Jesus was "made 
flesh" for this very object and gave himself a ransom. And in this 
act of giving himself a ransom, we have seen that the man Christ 
Jesus mediated the New Covenant and the only real covenant ever 
ratified or sealed since the fall in Eden. 

That the Law Covenant was not a real one, but only typical of the 
New Covenant, is proved also by the fact that Jesus Christ, by the 
grace of God, tasted death for every man (Heb. 2:9), and that "as by 
the offense of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation, 
even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon ALL 
MEN unto justification of life. " (Rom. 5:18.) For if Israel, or any 
of the race were justified to life, i.e., freed from the condemnation 
of death which came through the violation of the Adamic covenant 
by the mediation of the death of bulls and goats as a sacrifice for 
sins, so as to make another covenant with them possible, before 
Jesus came, then the Apostle was in error on the subject; for in that 
case it would not be true that the justification to life came on all 
through Christ, EVEN AS the condemnation came on all through 
Adam. 

But all were justified by the one Mediator whose sacrifice was real 
and complete, and the only satisfaction of the penalties of the 
original covenant; hence the only mediation capable of establishing 
another covenant. Consequently, the Covenant of the Law based 
upon a typical and not an actual mediation or sacrifice for sins, 
could only have been a typical covenant, since it is impossible for 
any covenant to be of more value than is given it by the ratifier: The 
ratification being typical, the covenant could be no more. 



It follows then, that the Law Covenant was introduced in order that 
sin might be recognized in its full enormity; that the individual 
responsibility under the new covenant might be illustrated, and that 
the necessity of the help, or mediation of the sacrifice given by the 
man Christ Jesus, might be shown. Since the Law was not the real 
new covenant, but only its type, it follows that in being placed 
under it, and being unable to meet its requirements, Israel incurred 
no additional guilt to that which they in common with all mankind 
already were under, incurred through Adam's failure. Hence the 
benefits resulting to them, through Jesus' ransom, which cancelled 
the old and ratified the New Covenant, is the same exactly as that of 
all the rest of mankind. The end of their typical covenant, by the 
introduction of its antitype, the new, removed entirely and forever, 
all the provisions of their typical covenant, whether as seen from 
the above standpoint, it (typically) increased their sin and 
condemnation, or whether viewed as a typical favor and blessing; in 
either case it passed away totally when the real took the place of the 
typical. 



R792 : page 7 

SPECIAL FAVORS BEYOND THOSE OF 
THE NEW COVENANT. 

The question may arise with some, Do not the Scriptures hold out 
special promises and blessings to Israel above the blessings 
promised to mankind in general? And if, as above shown, the New 
Covenant applies equally to all men because its Mediator gave 
himself a ransom for all, then where come in the special promises 
and blessings and favors promised to Israel (as well as to the 
Christian Church) as the Apostle quotes: "This is my covenant unto 
them, when I shall take away their sins." (Rom. 11:27.) Does not 
this point to special favors, to be fulfilled toward them in the 
future? 

We answer, that God made his covenant in two parts. One part was 
that he would take away all sin and imperfection, and write his law 
again in the heart of flesh as originally possessed by Adam. This 
was typified in the Law Covenant, and will be fully realized under 
the New Covenant. The other part of God's plan is shown in 
another promise or covenant-the Abrahamic Covenant or promise 
that, THE SEED OF ABRAHAM should be honored by being used 
as an instrumentality in bringing those New Covenant blessings to 
the world of mankind. 

R793 : page 7 

But though the Abrahamic promise, "In thee and in thy seed shall 
all the families of the earth be blessed," was made before the formal 
announcement of the New Covenant, yet it was made dependent on 
the ratification of the New Covenant, since none could be "blessed" 



truly while all were under "the curse" of death for the violated 
Adamic covenant. Hence the utter removal of sin was typically 
shown in the symbol of circumcision, and the sacrifice of 
atonement for sin kept continually before the minds of Abraham 
and all the patriarchs as a pre-requisite to communion with God. 

The conditions of the New Covenant then will apply to all mankind 
alike, and not in any special manner or degree to Israel. All 
mankind were alike condemned through Adam, alike redeemed and 
ransomed by Christ, and will have equal privileges under the 
redemption. All shall have full opportunity for believing and laying 
hold upon the ransom and of being restored to harmony with God 
through it; and by obedience to God's law all will have equal rights 
and opportunities to have life everlasting. Consequently the extra 
blessing which comes to "Israel after the flesh," the natural "seed of 
Abraham," and to the Church, the true Israel of God, the higher 
"Seed of Abraham" (Gal. 3:29) is wholly outside the provisions of 
the New Covenant-embraced in the promise made to Abraham. 

To the Abrahamic promise then we must look for special blessings 
or privileges, always remembering, however, that none but those 
who shall first have shared in the blessings of the New Covenant 
are eligible to those privileges and opportunities of blessing others 
by administering the favors of that New Covenant. 

Though not generally discerned, the promise to Abraham includes 
TWO SEEDS children according to natural process, of generation, 
and children by special power of God, not actually children of 
Abraham, but children of Him whom Abraham typified, (Rom. 
4:17-margin.) children of God. These are the Spiritual Israel. 
These two seeds were typified by Ishmael and Isaac Abraham's 
sons. (See Gal. 3:7,29 and Gen. 22:17,18.) The one, the natural, is 
represented in the promise "as the sand of the sea"; and the other 
"as the stars of heaven." (Gen. 22:17.) In the fulfillment of all the 
provisions of the New Covenant blessings, there will be ample 
opportunity for using both of these "seeds," though the fact that 
there are two, has been hidden from the sight of the majority both 
of Israel fleshly and spiritual. The former saw and yet see, only the 
fleshly seed; the latter see generally only the spiritual seed; but we 
find clear Scriptural evidence that there are two seeds-the natural 
and the spiritual, not only from the foregoing, but, says the same 
Apostle, the promise made through Abraham is "of faith" and favor 
in order that "the promise might be sure to all the seed; not to that 
only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the faith of 
Abraham." (Rom. 4:16.) Hence it is written, "I have made thee a 
father of many nations"-or seeds. Isaac, the chief of Abraham's 
seed, represents the Church-the spiritual seed; Ishmael, Paul 
assures us, represented fleshly Israel (Gal. 4:22-25), also blessed 
through Isaac. 

The spiritual seed "as the stars of heaven" is the choicest portion of 
the promise; and the natural children of Abraham were first offered 
this honorable position in the beginning of the Christian age. A few 



of them accepted and laid hold of it, and the remainder of that elect 
company has been in process of selection and will be completed 
during this age, and will be composed chiefly of Gentiles. This 
entire company will be made like their head Christ Jesus-spirit- 
beings and will be engaged with Jesus in the most exalted sense in 
the accomplishment of the blessing of all earth's families. But there 
will be a use, and place, in this work of blessing in which men, 
human beings, may be used; and in this part of the blessing some of 
the natural children of Abraham shall share. Israel shall be among 
the first to appreciate the kingdom of Christ when it shall be fully 
inaugurated or "set up," and among the first to render obedience to 
it. They will be the first, therefore, to be blessed by it and in turn to 
be associated with the spiritual powers in conferring its blessings 
upon all the families of the earth. 

This is shown clearly in Paul's argument on this very subject. Read 
his question, Rom. 11:1, and then his reply in verses 23,24 and his 
proof in verses 25 to 27. Then comes the grand climax of his 
argument: "As concerning the gospel [the special favor of the 
Christian age, though a few have received it, as stated in verse 5, 
yet the nation as a whole have been cut off from the gospel favor] 
they are [treated as God's] enemies for your sakes [that you 
Gentiles might become inheritors in the Abrahamic promise]. But 
as touching the election, they are [still] beloved for the fathers' 
sakes. For the gifts and callings of God, are without repentance." 
He has promised certain blessings to the natural children of 
Abraham, and He did so with full knowledge of all succeeding 
circumstances and developments, and He never changes from any 
unconditional promise, such as that made to Abraham. Verses 28 
and 29. Then follows in verses 30 to 33 a statement of how Israel 
shall obtain mercy and be made to share the original promise 
through the instrumentality of the Christian Church, "They shall 
obtain mercy through your mercy"-They shall obtain this promised 
favor of God, through, and by means of, your receiving the chief 
favor, and thus the boundless unsearchable riches of God's wisdom 
and favor, will be manifested to them, as well as to us, and through 
them from us and to the world in general. 

The same root promise bears both these "seeds" of Abraham, but 
both are not developed at once. First the natural, afterward the 
spiritual, and then, as Paul informs us (Rom. 11), finally the natural 
grafted in again. The natural "seed" mentioned in that promise 
started as branches out of the first, and as such, Abraham, Isaac, 
Jacob and the prophets and the man Christ Jesus were developed as 
worthy and fit to have part in the work of blessing when the right 
time should come. Then, when the time had come for the 
development of the spiritual seed -The Church of which Jesus the 
"new creature" is "HEAD"-those natural branches were "broken 
off" and cast aside, while a new set of branches were grafted into 
that original root-the Abrahamic covenant. During the Christian 
age, the new growth of the new kind of branches, has been 
developing, and at the end of this age another change will come and 



the re-engrafting of the original branches will take place. These 
natural branches which for so long have seemed as thoroughly cast 
off of God as the Gentiles appeared to be previously, shall be 
grafted in again, and shall be sharers again of the richness of the 
root-promise, though they are and always will be, natural or human 
branches, while the overcoming Church selected during the 
Christian age will have secured the choicest portion of that same 
promise. (Rom. 11:7,8.) Thus the two sets of branches, or two 
seeds-natural and spiritual- come out of the ONE ROOT 
PROMISE made to Abraham, and together, though in very different 
ways, these two seeds become instrumentalities in blessing all the 
families of the earth under the provisions of the New Covenant 
mediated and ratified by the man Christ Jesus, when he gave 
himself a ransom for all who were condemned to death under the 
original covenant in Eden. 

It will be perceived, then, that the blessing of the World under the 
New Covenant mediated and ratified eighteen centuries ago waits 
for the full development of the "Seeds" of Abraham, The spiritual 
seed, Christ (Gal. 3:29) and the natural seed developed previously, 
to which shall be added the broken-off branches of the same root 
who, as the Day Dawns, shall not continue in unbelief, and thus and 
then the blessing shall spread to all the families of earth. 



R793 : page 8 

NOT WITH OBSERVATION. 

"And as it was in the days of Noah so shall it be also in the days 
of the Son of man. They did eat, they drank, they married wives, 
they were given in marriage. ...Even thus shall it be in the day when 
the Son of man is revealed." Luke 17:26-30. 

We once read this passage as though the ordinary affairs of life 
would be condemned as crimes in the day of the Lord's presence. 
But the above words were occasioned by the demand of the 
Pharisees as to when the kingdom of God should come, and imply 
that so unobserved would be the incoming of that kingdom that the 
world would know nothing of his presence for a time, and buying, 
selling, eating and drinking, etc., would go on without interruption. 
He would not come as an earthly conqueror comes, with chariots 
and horses and armies with banners flying, and all the pomp of war. 
Nor would His heralds proclaim his presence in the "desert," or in 
the "secret chambers" of one organization or another, doing many 
wondrous works. Neither shall a great invisible trumpet sound out 
so loudly as to be heard over all the earth, and causing graves to 
open, rocks to rend and mountains to shake, be the signal of his 
coming. If he came in any way like these, his approach would be 
observed, and it would not be true that "The kingdom of God 
cometh not with observation," and it would be hard to deceive the 
commonest observer with regard to it much less "the elect." 



R794 : page 8 

Peter tells us (2 Peter 3:4) that so unperceived will be his 
presence that scoffers will say, "Where is the promise of his 
coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they 
were from the beginning," and adds: "The day of the Lord will 
come as a thief in which the heavens shall pass away with a great 
noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the earth, 
and the works in it shall be burned up" (discovered ancient MSS.). 
This is in harmony with the Master's words to the Pharisees. The 
day comes unobserved; the heavens (ruling powers, political and 
ecclesiastical, founded as they are by usurpation and with tyranny, 
despotism, injustice, error, superstition, prejudice and ignorance 
entering largely into their very foundation principles)-these shall 
pass away with a "rushing sound," as escaping steam that must 
obey the decisive action of the "fervent heat." 

The Son of man himself in his "day" is as the lightning "flashing 
out of the one part under heaven and shining to the other part under 
heaven," as the flashes of truth upon all subjects and questions 
lighten up more and more the understandings of mankind, and as 
they come to see more clearly their condition of bondage and their 
rights to life and its blessings, they will per-force act and respond to 
the influence of those truths: The sword out of his mouth- the "Fire 
of God's Wrath;" the "Fire of his Jealousy;" the "Fervent Heat" 
which will compel the usurpation to pass away with great noise, 
and burn up all the works however wonderful they may have been, 
that man has so fondly or proudly done in opposition to the plan of 
this kingdom, although done in the name of the King himself. 

By the FIRE of truth shall every man's works be tried, of 
whatsoever sort it is; God's PLAN of his kingdom and saving of 
mankind from their enslaved condition under the Prince of this 
world together with the subjugation of all his enemies, is so far 
beyond, and more excellent than man could conceive, that we can 
rejoice to "wait upon the Lord" until the day that he rises up to the 
prey- seeing it is his determination-his plan declared-"to gather 
the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them 
mine indignation, even all my fierce anger, for all the earth shall be 
devoured with the fire of my jealousy. For then will I turn to the 
people a pure language (one manner of communication) that they 
may all call upon the name of the Lord with one consent" (Zeph. 
3:8,9). 

In all this the trouble and vexation consequent upon the burning up 
of every obstacle to his kingdom will be observed plainly enough, 
for there is no single question that must not pass through the fire. 
Yet his presence is unseen, except as revealed by these his acts. 
And the world will be well along in the Day of the Lord eating, 
drinking, etc., before they perceive the cause of the change of 
rulership and recognize the kingdom of heaven that "cometh not by 
outward observation. " 



H. L. GILLIS. 



R794 : page 8 



'A THROUGH TICKET." 



The above is the caption of a tract published and circulated in 
great quantities, by THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY of New 
York City, from which we give the following extract: - 

"Dying fellow travelers to eternity, how long have you been on the 
road? May-be it is only a few years; yet in that short time, how far 
and fast you may have journeyed in the wrong direction on the 
road which ends in woe. Apply at once for a through ticket upon 
the royal road which the King of heaven himself has cast up and 
opened-a through ticket, with the life insurance included. You 
know not how soon you will reach your journey's end, or pass the 
station beyond which it will be impossible to change your course. 
An hour longer may fix your home in hell forever, as you cannot 
come back to remedy the neglect. 

"Are you old, and near the end of your journey, and still in the 
wrong train, or uncertain where you are going? Oh, awake to your 
danger. Heaven or hell must soon burst on your vision; a company 
of angels or devils are waiting for your arrival; their conveyances 
are all ready; your place is prepared. Holy angels and saints are 
waiting to greet you with joy, or devils and lost spirits to aid in 
torturing your wretched soul. Maybe you will find among them 
your own children, to curse you for your example, and charge their 
damnation on your neglect of their souls." 

The thought that in any age any but savages would believe and 
teach such things must be humiliating to every one who feels the 
least respect for human intelligence; but when we remember that 
this is published in the Nineteenth Century when Bibles are printed 
by the million every year and can be had by the poorest, and that it 
is published in America, the land of freedom and schools, the 
humiliation is more than doubled. 

But even worse than all this, this blasphemy against our Heavenly 
Father's character and plans, is published in the name of 
Christianity in the name of him who so loved sinners as to give 
himself a ransom for all. Alas! Alas! Dear Master, how far from 
thy spirit is that of some who call themselves by thy name! How far 
from thy words are theirs ! how far from thy thoughts and plans are 
theirs ! As the heavens are higher than the earth, so are thy ways 
higher and grander and more beneficent than theirs, and thy 
thoughts than their thoughts. (Isa. 55:9.) Oh that they would taste 
and see that the Lord is good, that his mercy endureth forever. (Psa. 
34:8; 106:1.) Language fails us in seeking to express our 
abhorrence of such unscriptural, God-dishonoring statements. How 
then must it appear to the Master himself? 



And yet as shown by the report of the " Amer. Tract Society" for the 
year past, their receipts were $357,470, out of which 56,000,000 
pages of tract matter were published and distributed, carrying 
poisonous blasphemy, of which the above is one sample, into 
thousands of homes. 

Those giving their dollars and their influence in proclaiming such 
doctrines, such poison, labelled "Gospel" will ere long be greatly 
ashamed of their misuse of their Lord's money. "They shall be 
ashamed" when "He shall appear to your joy" (Isa. 66:5) who from 
love of THE TRUTH, and in its support, have sacrificed time, 
money, influence all. 

Think of it! over a third of a million dollars to enable the "Amer. 
Tract Society" to proclaim: -"Heaven or hell must soon burst upon 
your vision; a company of angels or devils are awaiting your 
arrival; their conveyances are all ready.. ..Holy angels are waiting to 
greet you with joy, or devils and lost spirits to aid in torturing your 
wretched soul;" and less than two thousand dollars for the same 
time to enable "Zion's Watch Tower Tract Society" to tell the 
"Good tidings of great joy which shall be unto all people." 

And yet those few who have given of their "living," intelligently, 
from the heart desiring the spread of the "good tidings," have not 
only "cast in more" than the wealthy of Babylon in the esteem of 
the Master, but they have given in such manner as to glorify instead 
of dishonor him. And furthermore, the influence and effect of the 
little sum, under God's blessing is far greater than that of the large 
one. The walls of Babylon are crumbling and its doctrines of 
Eternal Torment, dying gradually, but surely, notwithstanding over 
a hundred thousand ministers are paid large salaries for its support, 
and millions of dollars are spent annually to enforce and support 
these doctrines and systems. 

Ah, what better evidence could we have of the present power of the 
"Prince of this World" "The God [ruler] of this World," to blind and 
deceive and use God's careless children as his tools, than we have 
here before us in this and other similar systems and circumstances: 
wearing the garb of Christ's service, yet [deludedly] diverting 
money, influence and energy to the support of blasphemous errors 
and calumnies upon Jehovah the God of Justice and Love. Arise, O 
Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered. Awake, O Zion, put on thy 
strength, for one shall chase a thousand. Their ROCK is not as our 
rock, our opponents themselves being witnesses. 



R794 : page 8 



AN OBJECTION ANSWERED. 

A reader takes exception to a statement made in our last issue, 
page 3- The Undefiled One. We say therein- "Had Adam 
remained perfect-his life unforfeited and unimpaired, his offspring 



would have been the same (i.e. perfect), any imperfections of Eve 
would not have affected them." An objector thinks we have erred 
in such conclusion, because experience teaches that children do 
frequently partake of the nature and disposition of their mother. 

We fully agree that, as it is, children do partake from the mother, 
but our statement does not apply to present condition of things. Let 
it be distinctly noted that we stated as shown in the above 
quotation, the conditions under which we claimed children would 
not be affected by the mother, viz. : If the originally perfect father, 
Adam, had REMAINED PERFECT. 

But what difference can the blemish of the father have upon the 
mother's influence upon the child? may be asked. 

None, we answer. It would not affect the mother but it would 
vastly affect the unborn child and its dependance upon the mother. 
As we endeavored to show in our last issue, we claim that a perfect 
life germ from a perfect father could appropriate to its use and 
perfect development such elements of nutrition provided by the 
mother as would be beneficial, and could reject or pass off without 
injury any undesirable elements. And that on the other hand an 
imperfect, diseased, dying germ from an imperfect and dying father 
would be less able to rightly appropriate what is supplied, even if 
the supplies furnished were the purest and best, from a perfect 
mother and where the supply would be diseased from a diseased, 
dying mother, the influence on the already dying germ can well be 
surmised. It would appropriate the bad as well as the good 
elements, and being weakly already, would be very susceptible to 
injurious influences. 

And this is in harmony with all known facts of science as well as in 
harmony with God's revelation. We remind our readers again of 
the illustration given in the original article, viz., the effect of the 
same food upon a sick person, as compared with its effect upon a 
comparatively healthy person-to the one it might increase the 
sickness, to the other promote health. 

As we are upon the side of the Scriptures, we leave others to 
discuss it with the author of the Scriptures if they cannot see this to 
be clear it seems very clear and harmonious from our standpoint. 

The Scriptures positively declare the facts; we have merely coupled 
them together to show, any who can see them, their reasonableness 
and harmony. It is a Scriptural statement that death came through 
Adam, not Eve By one man's disobedience death passed upon all. 
And again it is of the Bible, that one perfect man was born of one 
imperfect mother. He was holy, undefiled, separate from sinners- 
one who inherited not death and imperfection; but on the contrary, 
"In him was life." The life, the perfection, the purity was not 
tainted with the imperfections of which his mother in common with 
others of the condemned race was a sharer. The cause of this is 
found in the fact that the life principle was not imperfect, but 



perfect-transferred from the higher plane of a pre-existent 
condition,-"In him was life." 

Hence it is that he alone could redeem mankind. He alone could 
give the ransom or corresponding price. A perfect man had been 
tried as the representative of a perfect race and had sinned; had 
been condemned with all in him, and a perfect man alone could be 
the ransom. Jesus was a ransom, hence Jesus was a perfect man. 
Hence perfect men and women could have been born of Eve, as 
Adam's children, had he not sinned. 

But our questioner asks, If Jesus was perfect why is it written that 
he was "MADE PERFECT through sufferings." (Heb. 2:10.) We 
answer that he was perfect as a man, but was made a perfect "new 
creature" of the DIVINE nature through or because he obediently 
suffered death on our behalf. This is more fully elaborated in our 
issue of January, '82 under the caption, "Jesus made perfect." See, 
also, March, '83 issue, "Perfecting the new nature." 



R795 : page 1 



VOL. VII. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., NOVEMBER, 1885. 

NO. 3. 



page 1 



ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 40 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS: -Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 
TAKE NOTICE. 



This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



page 1 

FORTUNATELY we have come across another small lot of 
"YOUNG'S ANALYTICAL GREEK, HEBREW AND ENGLISH 
CONCORDANCES"-the best-the "Author's Edition," at much 
below the previous price of the work. We desire many might avail 
themselves of the opportunity for obtaining a work so valuable, 
indeed almost indispensable to Bible study. This great book is 
cheap at the regular price, five dollars, but we have secured this lot 
so as to offer them to you at just half the price. They are new and 
perfect. See last page, last column. 

This book is too heavy to go by mail to Europe, and too expensive 
by express; but we have recently sent some to the very city of the 
author in Scotland, by mail, so cut in two, that it can be easily 
repaired and they thus cost our subscribers about one-third of what 
the book sells for there. We will gladly accommodate any of our 
foreign subscribers thus, that they may have the benefit of this 
valuable work at so low a price. 



R795 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

Very encouraging is the outlook from this point of observation. 
The "Plan for harvest work" suggested in the September TOWER, 
put into operation, is yielding fruit. It is undoubtedly proving a 
blessing to those engaged in the service, and it cannot fail to do 
some good to others. In either or both cases it is encouraging to 
remember Paul's assurance: "Ye know that your labor is not in 
vain;" good results are surely flowing from these sacrificings and 
self-denials. The isolated workers should know for their 
encouragement, that hundreds of earnest disciples in the various 
States of this country, and in several in Europe, are preaching the 
gospel by word and by the printed page seeking out the "meek" 
(Isa. 61:1,) who only have "an ear to hear" at present. 

And the truth is breaking through the clouds of tradition and error 
which so long have hindered many from beholding the light of the 
knowledge of the glory of God, as it shines in the face of Jesus 



Christ our Lord. (2 Cor. 4:6.) Pulpit utterances are being moderated 
and many are beginning to see dim outlines, as did the physically 
blind one whom Jesus anointed (Mark 8:24). Almost unconsciously 
to themselves the light of the now dawning Millennial Day is 
breaking into all reasoning minds. 

And if we can see a little of the success from the lower plane of this 
TOWER of observation, what must be the view from the Tower on 
high, where the great King of Kings notes the progress of "the 
battle of the great day," between truth and error, light and darkness, 
God's Word and human traditions. Ah! he sees as we cannot, how 
fully his grand glorious purposes are being accomplished. Error 
shall fall while truth shall rise triumphant. Satan and all the 
delusions wherewith he has blinded men and defrauded Jehovah, 
shall give place to the knowledge of the Lord, which spread abroad 
at the rising of the Sun of Righteousness, shall fill and bless the 
whole earth. 

And the FAITHFUL ONES who despite the sneers and scoffs and 
the allurements of the world, the flesh, and Satan are 
OVERCOMING these, saying, "Wist ye not that I must be about 
my Father's business" what of these, are they seen by the eye of 
the Chief Captain? Will their tremblings and difficulties and 
sacrifices endured from love of the Father and a desire to please 
him and honor him will these be forgotten? I tell you, nay! He 
knoweth each one and by these difficulties he is but permitting your 
testing to see whether you can safely be entrusted with the great 
honor and glory he has to bestow. As he sees your spirit of self 
sacrifice overcoming obstacles, he looks lovingly upon you and 
says, Ah! there is one who loves me more than self; I can trust him- 
-"They shall be mine in that day when I make up MY JEWELS." 
(Mai. 3: 17.) He shall sit with Christ in the throne. He is an 
OVERCOMER who loved me more than the things of this world, 
and my approval more than the approval of men. He shall not 
merely enter into joys but shall share the joys of his Lord. (Matt. 
25:21.) 

How refreshing to us is the spirit manifested in the extracts below 
from a few of the many letters received, and the master who 
knoweth the heart, sees many others of his faithful, laboring more 
obscurely than some of these, from whom we seldom hear, and to 
him their efforts are just as pleasing though the result be smaller, 
perhaps scarcely perceptible. 



R795 : page 1 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Chicago, 111., Oct. 24th, 1885. 

DEAR FRIEND AND BROTHER: The WATCH TOWER came 
duly to hand in good time. I had business at Illinois, where I was 



detained one week trying a suit against a coal company that had 
undermined and taken my client's coal, amounting to three 
thousand tons, and while there I made it my business to make 
acquaintances and introduce the "Herald of Christ's presence," as 
shown in ZION'S WATCH TOWER." It was welcomed by some, 
and some it astonished. I was careful in distributing it, having taken 
notice of your remarks as to how distribution should be made, and I 
have every reason to hope that you will hear from that quarter 
sooner or later. 

On my way out I attempted to distribute some among the 
passengers, and some few were glad to receive a TOWER; and 
when they got home and a little time to study its contents, I advised 
them to sit down and, with their Bible at their elbow, to prove every 
passage of Scripture it refers to, and if the Bible sustained the 
TOWER to accept it, but if not to reject it. But my efforts in this 
direction were soon interrupted by a News Man who politely 
informed me that I was interfering sadly with his business and 
requested me to discontinue my distributions, which I did, being 
careful to avoid anything like contention or trouble aboard the cars; 
notwithstanding, like Paul, being a free citizen, I knew the rights 
the law accorded me in such case. I landed at Lacon Saturday 
evening, and after tea I spoke in a private house and had a pleasant 
time reading, explaining the scriptures and answering questions. 
Sunday I was welcomed to the M.E. Church and spoke there at the 
Sunday School, and spoke somewhere every night I was there 
except one. One evening I spoke in the 

R796 : page 1 

Baptist Church. When I went in there was to appearance an 
indescribable coldness about the people, a want of vitality, mere 
matter of form. I spoke from Ephesians 1,4,7,9,13 and 14, and here 
it seemed as if the people had been waking out of a stupor in the 
short time I addressed them. Really it is true, the people are starving 
for the truth. I just wish I could have stayed there for a few months, 
but I could not on account of my court business here. 

Yours in the Lord, . 

page 1 

Senecaville, Ohio, Oct. 19, 1885. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-It is one year today since I heard the 
"good tidings," and from the dreary ways of skepticism and 
indifference turned to God and found light, and rest and peace. 

Though the year has been full of the things which long had brought 
care, and grief, and bitterness of heart, I have looked upon them as 
trifles compared with "the joy now set before me." I have found that 
"the gospel of Christ is the power of God unto salvation" from the 
besetments of the world, the flesh and the devil. 



The doctrine, in accord with both reason and revelation, which I 
first heard proclaimed by Bro. Adamson, I have tried to present to 
others in the form of "Food" and the TOWER, in written letters, in 
conversation, and in public speaking, both indoors and on the 
streets. 

"I love to tell the story- 
It did so much for me." 

Yet I fear I have not done enough though, I have seen a little fruit, I 
think, and some buds which promise fruit "in due time. " And on 
this very anniversary of the "happy day that fixed my choice," 
comes the October "View from the TOWER," with its 
encouragement to us when we do not see the result of our labor. 

In this year I have learned more about the word of God than in all 
my life before. He has "opened my eyes, that I may behold 
wondrous things out of his law." And what once seemed doubtful 
history, strange legends, and wonder stories that could not be 
accepted, has all become "Wonderful words of life." My daily 
prayer is: "O God, teach me thy will, and give me grace and 
strength to do it." Yours in the faith, . 



R796 : page 1 

HOW HELPS MAY BECOME HINDRANCES 
IN BIBLE STUDY. 

We are not disposed to undervalue means of grace, as they are 
ordinarily termed. In many cases the amount of blessing thus 
imparted is greater than human arithmetic can calculate; in others, it 
may be doubtful whether the apparent benefit is as real as it seems 
to be; and in some the influence is unquestionably bad. But as a 
whole, there can be little doubt that sermonizing, with all its 
weakness, is a public benefit, and a mainstay of the religion of our 
land, such as it is. 

Our object is not to depreciate the value of either books or men, 
regarded as teachers of Divine Truth; it is simply to show how 
easily those "helps" for such they certainly are when rightly used- 
may become "hindrances" if trusted in without discrimination,- 
substituted for personal responsibilities,-or merely leaned upon as 
pillows of indolence. 

Even of books specially intended to facilitate Scripture 
investigation, it may be asserted, without paradox, that they are 
sometimes at once both helps and hindrances; helps in one 
direction, hindrances in another. 

Such we believe to be the case, notwithstanding their acknowledged 
excellencies, with many "critical introductions" to the Bible. They 
help by the information they impart; they hinder, by the impression 
they leave that Holy Scripture can scarcely be understood 



R796 : page 2 

without a prolonged course of preparatory acquisition. 

We are not to be supposed, for a single moment, to look with 
contempt on any branch of inquiry. They all have their place in the 
course of a students preparation for life, and form part of that 
mental discipline by which the human mind is enlarged and 
strengthened. But, just as "critical analyses of the English 
language, "-which have little to do with a plain man's 
comprehension of his mother tongue-often create an impression on 
the mind of the untaught that some mysterious light is by such 
processes developed, so ordinary readers of Scripture are apt to 
conclude that, apart from critical investigations of the kind referred 
to, the Bible can never be properly understood. The eminent 
scholar, Dr. Maitland, thus wrote: 

"I must add my belief that the cumbersome apparatus of systematic 
interpretation ought to be placed among the impediments to the 
right understanding of the word of God. The learning and labor 
which have been bestowed on it seems to me to have been worse 
than wasted; and so far from its helping towards the understanding 
of the Word of God, it appears more calculated to puzzle and 
perplex the student, and to supply, to those who may desire it, the 
means of confounding common sense and perverting the plain text 
of Scripture. 

"These systematic schemes," he says, "are probably unknown to 
most readers of the Bible, and therefore, do not directly form an 
impediment to them; but it is obvious, that complex machinery 
which they never saw, and could not understand, may have a great 
effect on the manufactured article of which they are the consumers. 

Some persons, I believe, have thought that they put honor on the 
Word of God, and the language in which it is written, by telling us 
that there is something 'in the original' which no translation can 
reach,-something not transfusible, expressible. No doubt this is 
true as regards every language, and every book in every language, 
unless it is confined to the most common subjects, and written in 
the lowest style. 

In most cases the curious felicity of one language cannot be 
transferred to another without using such paraphrases or making 
such nonsense as is peculiarly infelicitous; but so far as regards 
meaning, where meaning is of importance, and the mode of 
expression of secondary consideration, or none at all, any theme 
written in one language may be made intelligible in another, 
provided the things spoken of are known to the translator and the 
person for whom he translates." 

For recent testimony in the same direction we turn to the University 
of Oxford, and there we find one of no mean eminence thus 
expressing himself: 



"Who would write a bulky treatise about the method to be pursued 
in interpreting Plato or Sophocles? No man, assuredly, who did not 
wish to create the impression that the meaning of these writers was 
beyond the comprehension of ordinary readers. And this is 
precisely what has been done in relation to Scripture. People have 
come to believe that without a formidable critical apparatus it is not 
possible to arrive at the meaning of God's Word; whereas, the 
reverse is nearer the truth. The plain and unsophisticated reader is 
more likely to get at the true interpretation than the learned student; 
for the true use of interpretation is to get rid of interpretations, and 
to leave us alone in company with the Author. 

"When the meaning of Greek words is once known, the young 
student has all the real materials, which are possessed by the 
greatest Biblical scholars, in the Book itself. The great thing, after 
all, is to perceive the meaning of words in reference to their 
context. Less weight should be given to Lexicons, that is, to the 
authority of other Greek writers,- and more to the context. It is no 
exaggeration to say that he who, in the present state of knowledge, 
will confine himself to the plain meaning of words, and the study of 
their context, may know more of the original spirit and intention of 
the authors of the New Testament than all the controversial writers 
of former ages put together." 

Once more we return to Dr. Maitland: "The Bible," he says, "has 
long been the subject of discussion by the learned and the 
unlearned; and some of each class have left no stone unturned to 
make it appear that certain parts mean what they certainly do not 
mean. 'Biblical Criticism' has been heaped upon the Word of God, 
and explanation after explanation too often only makes the matter 
darker than it was before. 

"Truth is single; and therefore one is right and the rest, how many 
soever they may be, are wrong. A good deal of the evil of this 
arises, I imagine, from vanity, coupled with the affectation of 
modesty. The commentator frequently knows not what to say, but is 
unwilling to confess this without showing that he knows what 
others have said. His own mind is altogether dissatisfied with their 
explanations, yet he recounts them, and without saying of some (as 
he really ought, if he mentions them at all), that they are mere 
nonsense, not worth a moment's notice, he effects to leave it to the 
reader to choose what explanation he pleases. A simple mind is thus 
bewildered, and perhaps almost led to a vague idea, that what has 
so many interpretations, all thought worthy of record has not, in 
fact, any very certain or definite meaning at all." 

And all this folly and confusion arises from attempts which have 
been too successfully made, to raise an opinion that the Bible is not 
to be judged of by the rules of common sense; forgetting the fact 
that learning can obscure as well as illustrate, and heap up chaff 
when it can find no wheat. 



The readings and the findings of the private Christian are often in 
advance of the expositions and instructions of the public teacher. 
When once this fact is fully recognized, the false notion-now all 
but universally held-that the one divinely appointed means of 
Christian edification is sacred oratory delivered from the pulpit, 
will be shaken to its foundation. It will then be seen that while 
popular speaking, when effective, is admirably adapted to awaken 
the attention of the careless, to interest the young and uninformed, 
to kindle the affections, and to move to action, it is altogether 
unsuited to advanced Christians; is incapable of leading them on to 
deep personal acquaintance with divine truths; and, after a season, 
all but certain to become a hindrance to spiritual growth. This 
happens because it is commonly abused by the indolent; because it 
occupies in the esteem of multitudes, the place of personal 
investigation, and because, being associated with united worship, it 
almost inevitably becomes the only living channel of religious 
impression. 

Nothing is more certain than this,-that whatever wants seem to be 
supplied to a man while in a passive condition, he will never seek to 
satisfy by active service. Yet it is quite as true in religious matters, 
as it is in everything else, that without labor and discipline, all 
direct instruction must be unavailing and useless. The most 
elaborate and manifold apparatus can impart nothing of importance 
to the passive and inert mind. It is almost as unavailing as the 
warmth and light of the sun, and all the sweet influences of the 
heavens when shed upon the desert sands. Such a mind, even if it 
be filled with the results of other men's labors, can only be 
compared to a well filled granary; it bears no resemblance to the 
fruitful field, which multiplies that which is cast into its lap a 
thousand fold. 

Hitherto we have proceeded on the supposition that the teaching 
thus imparted, although too oratorical, is on the whole, sound and 
sensible, but that it is not always so, is but too well known. An 
ingenious twist is often valued more than a true explanation. The 
words of 

R797 : page 2 

the text in such cases merely supply a theme, neither preacher nor 
hearers ever troubling themselves about its meaning. The reason for 
this course is, that the text is wanted merely for the purpose of 
communicating some moral or religious lesson, determined upon 
beforehand; or for the support of some cause which the preacher 
may be pleading, or to condemn some error which he has to 
combat. 

This sort of perversion is bad enough when united, as it often is, 
with deep earnestness, solid learning, and much oratorical power; 
but how intolerable it becomes, when combined with ignorance and 
folly, vanity and conceit, will be fully admitted by all who have 
been obliged to listen, as too many have, to expositions of 



Scripture, which from their astounding stupidity, are only 
calculated to excite men to laughter or scorn. 

Who has not heard sermons in which the entire teaching has been 
made to turn altogether upon mere emphasis, applied in the most 
arbitrary manner to a single verse of Scripture? Sermons, which 
remind one only of the sentence, dear to every school boy, "Do 
you ride to town today?" Since it is one which, according as this or 
that word is made emphatic, admits of five different meanings, and 
is capable of being considered in five distinct relations, viz. : to fact, 
to person, to mode, to place, and to time. Seriously, such is the 
treatment the Word of God too frequently receives at the hands of 
men who, themselves wanting common sense, are quite 
unconscious that others possess that divine gift. 

-H. Dunn. 



R797 : page 2 

PRIVATE JUDGMENT IN THE 
INTERPRETATION OF SCRIPTURE. 

Private judgment, properly understood, simply means Personal 
Responsibility. 

In the exercise of this responsibility, a man may, if he think fit, 
accept, with or without question, the decisions of Rome, the 
conclusions of the Fathers, the dogmas of the Puritan, the 
Speculations of Rationalists, or the current opinions which belong 
to the religious circle in which he has been educated, or may, at any 
given time, happen to move. But, in each and every case, his 
conduct is an act of private judgment, for the wisdom or folly of 
which, with all its attendant consequences, he is alone and 
individually answerable. 

Private judgment, thus viewed, implies a two-fold obligation, viz., 
first, that of a patient and diligent use of all the means placed within 
our reach for ascertaining truth; and secondly, the cultivation of 
those dispositions of heart which are favorable to spiritual 
discernment, and apart from which no man can rightly discriminate 
between truth and error. 

The former will include in the case of those who have an 
opportunity to investigate, a thankful appreciation of the labors of 
scholars, in relation both to the text and to the translation of Holy 
Scripture, and an examination of the commentaries of pious and 
learned men, so far as they may seem to us to be truthful and 
unprejudiced expositions of Holy Writ: the latter, as graces of the 
Spirit, must be sought, where alone they can be obtained, at the 
footstool of him who is the Giver of every good and perfect gift. 

To those we would add, a reverent listening to the voice of the 
Church which expresses itself in the lives and labors of holy men in 



all ages; a voice which is not the voice of the Priest, or the voice of 
a party, or the voice of the schoolmen, or the voice of the fathers, 
whether Greek or Latin, or the voice of England or Scotland, - 
Evangelical or Armenian, high or low, broad or exclusive; but that 
great silent testimony which issues from Apostles and Prophets, 
from martyrs and confessors, from poor and rich, from the palace 
and the peasant's cot, from the ignorant and the learned, from the 
living and the dead;-witnessing evermore to the truth of Christ's 
Holy Gospel,-to its influence over mankind, to its triumphs over 
the world, to its sole and exclusive power to enlighten, to solace, to 
sustain, and to save. Wretched indeed is the sophistry which would 
confound this sublime echo of the human heart responding to the 
Divine, with the decisions of a council or the dicta of a sect. 

Human nature craves for infallibility in religious matters, and it is a 
happiness, we doubt not, even to think that we have secured it. This 
craving is the fruitful source both of superstition and atheism; but it 
is incessant in some minds. God has, however, not chosen to gratify 
it. And because he has not, because he has thought fit to make our 
apprehension of divine truth to depend mainly on a right state of 
heart, men of all classes quarrel with his method. 

The mode in which this dissatisfaction manifests itself is various. 
Sometimes it is in the way of restlessness, and sometimes it finds 
expression in a reckless skepticism, followed by a predisposition to 
listen to any Church which professes to be infallible; and 
sometimes it carefully bars the door against all inquiry, and refuses, 
under any pretext, to be disturbed. 

Hence the timidity and terror which is so often manifested when 
any new form of religious thought is first broached in Christian 
circles. That which is stated may indeed be true, but whether it is so 
or not matters little. It seems to introduce an element of uncertainty 
in quarters where neither doubt nor question has ever been allowed 
to enter and therefore it must be disallowed. 

To all such we can only say, that for intelligent men to shrink from 
the investigation of truth of any kind, is, in fact, to evade the most 
important part of their moral discipline; that he who desires truth as 
the supreme good, cannot fail eventually to enjoy the blessedness it 
brings in its train; and that he who subordinates truth to what he 
calls peace, may in the end lose both truth and peace. 

--H. Dunn. 



R797 : page 3 



THE EARTHEN VESSEL. 

It is but an earthen vessel, 
But it lay so close to me; 



It is small, but it is empty, 
And that's all it needs to be. 

So to the fountain he took it, 
And filled it full to the brim; 
How glad was the earthen vessel, 
To be of some use to him. 

His own hand had drawn the water, 
Which refreshed the thirsty flowers; 
But he used the earthen vessel, 
To convey the living showers. 

And of itself it whispered, 
As he laid it down once more; 
Still will I lie in his pathway, 
Just where I did before. 

Close would I keep to the Master, 
Empty would I remain; 
And, perhaps, some day he may use me 
To water his flowers again. 



Selected. 



R797 : page 3 

THE PROVINCE OF PRAYER. 

This article is suggested by a letter at hand in which the Brother 
says: "I have read the articles, 'Our Mediator,' 'Our Access to God 
through the one Mediator,' 'An Advocate with the Father,' in the last 
TOWER. I was much pleased, both with the logical reasoning and 
the Scriptural evidence adduced," but he adds, "that he is at a loss 
how to harmonize those teachings with the command to 'Pray for 
your enemies,' 'Pray ye Thy kingdom come,' and Paul's exhortation 
to 'Pray for all men -for kings,' etc." The Brother asks: "Is not the 
principle the same in all prayer 'Imperfect human beings 
attempting to direct the All- wise Jehovah?'" We answer: 

There can be no doubt that for the ignorant and weak finite beings 
to attempt to use prayer or any other agency to thwart the plans and 
change the arrangements of the Almighty, and to attempt to instruct 
the All-wise, would be improper. Such cannot be the province of 
prayer. This we hold to be an axiom. But if this be beyond its 
scope, what is the purpose and intent of prayer; what are its 
privileges and its limits? 

The privilege of praying to God, of holding communion with him, 
is a great privilege and an evidence of his favor. God permits and 
arranged to grant us this privilege, not that he might be informed of 
our desires, for we being imperfect our desires are not perfect, so 
that "we know not what things to ask for as we ought," and he does 
for us better than we know how to ask or think. Nor does God 



permit us to pray to him that we may inform him regarding matters 
here; for he knoweth the end from the beginning as well as every 
intervening step. But he has instituted prayer for our benefit and 
comfort and instruction. 

The OBJECT of prayer is to bring the heart and mind of the child of 
God, whether in joy or sorrow, into contact with the heart of God, 
that he may be enabled thus most fully to realize the fatherhood of 
God, his love and care and his deep interest in every item of our 
welfare; that in deep affliction we may unburden our hearts to God 
and thus have forcibly brought to our attention his love and care 
and wisdom-for our encouragement, not his; for our strengthening, 
not his, and for our joy. This opportunity is not for us to instruct 
Jehovah how to arrange matters for the best, but it is to bring our 
hearts to realize him as the centre of wisdom and power, that 
having unburdened our hearts, we may be prepared to listen for his 
answer and advice through his word. And he whose knowledge of 
prayer is confined to the meagre information he has imparted to 
God with "much speaking," and who has never learned to listen for 
the answer to his prayer at the word of God, has as yet measurably 
failed to appreciate the object of prayer. 

Earnestness in God's service will bring his children to him 
frequently, to 

R798 : page 3 

realize at his feet his sympathy with them in the difficulties, 
discouragements and trials of life, as well as to ask his guidance 
and overruling of every affair of life, through his word, and to 
hearken to his wisdom, which will enable us to serve him 
acceptably. 

The PROVINCE of prayer is to ask for such, and only such things, 
as God has already declared himself well pleased to grant. And 
while we may freely speak to him as a Father, and tell him how we 
understand his word, and the confidence and trust we have in its 
ultimate fulfilment, yet we must not only avoid telling the Lord of 
our will and our plan, and what we would like; but we must avoid 
and put far from us any such spirit, and must recognize and bring 
ourselves into full accord with his will and his plan of 
accomplishing it. If this thought were appreciated, it would cut 
short some of the "long prayers," "much speaking," and "vain 
repetitions" by which some endeavor to instruct the Lord in their 
wishes regarding every matter under heaven. It would send them 
speedily to the word of God to search diligently the plan of God 
that they might labor as well as pray in harmony with it. While 
assuring us that the Father careth for us, and is well pleased to have 
us come to him with sincere hearts, the Master informs us of the 
conditions upon which we may expect an answer. He says: "If ye 
abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will 
and it shall be done unto you." (John 15:7.) These are the 
conditions for sure answers to our prayers. What is it to abide in 



Christ? It implies first that our WILL has been wholly consecrated- 
swallowed up in the will of Christ. And more, that the will is in this 
condition at the time of the prayer, abiding in Christ. And if the 
suppliant's own will is gone and he is now controlled entirely by the 
will of Christ, he surely would consult the words of Christ and there 
seek information as to what his will is before framing a petition to 
the Father in Christ's name. And if this be his case, if the will of 
Christ is governing him, and the words of Christ are abiding in him, 
such an one is prepared to ask any and everything he may WILL to 
ask. 

His requests would probably be as simple as was the Master's 
petition when he prayed, "Not my will, but thine be done. (Luke 
22:42.) In such a condition prayers are always answered; but in 
such a condition the prayers would be very modest. Our prayers 
under such circumstances would be more a thanksgiving for our 
blessings, an expression of confidence and trust, and the committal 
of our way unto the Lord, confidently realizing the promise that to 
us under such conditions, ALL THINGS [even seeming disasters 
and troubles] shall work together FOR GOOD. Hence whatever 
came, such an one could realize his prayer answered. He could 
rejoice evermore because he is prepared to rejoice in tribulation as 
well as in prosperity, in the path of service. He has no will to 
oppose whatever God permits, knowing that it will work out good. 

Such could not pray for anything of their own will, for they have no 
will except God's; then abiding in Christ, and his words in them, 
would prevent any other petition. They could not pray for the 
immediate conversion of the world, for though they know that "God 
will have all men to be saved and to come to a knowledge of the 
truth," they also know that the present age is not in God's plan 
devoted to this work, but solely to the selection, under SEVERER 
trial, of those who shall be God's instruments for blessing all the 
families of the earth in God's arranged time. 

We cannot single out an ungodly friend and request God to work a 
miracle on him, and bring him into the "Church of the first-born," 
though we may pray for wisdom to "rightly divide the word of 
truth," that if possible the light of the knowledge of the glory of 
God might thus shine into the understanding of that friend. This 
would be in harmony with the Word. Jesus said, "Be ye wise as 
serpents, and harmless as doves," and instructs that "If any man 
lack wisdom, let him ask [it] of God, who giveth liberally and 
upbraidethnot." 

We may not ask for riches and honor; nor for fine food and fine 
clothing. To seek or pray for these is contrary to the Spirit of the 
Master. But we may ask, "Give us this day our daily BREAD," 
assured that the Father knoweth best what kind is best, and what 
things are needful to us as seen from his standpoint which embraces 
our interests spiritual as well as temporal, future as well as present. 



We may not pray for the increase in numbers of any of the many 
sects of today, well knowing that Jesus would not approve of thus 
fettering with human tradition those whom he calls to liberty; and 
that he does not approve, but would condemn the sects of today as 
he did those of eighteen centuries ago, saying, "Beware of the 
leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees," and declaring to 
them, "Ye do make void [useless and ineffective] the law of God by 
your traditions." 

We can neither labor nor pray for the advancement and growth in 
power, wealth, influence and numbers of any of these sects, 
knowing their very existence to be contrary to God's Word, and 
their advancement a hindrance to the light of truth. 

Nor can we today either labor or pray for the perpetuation of the 
governments of this world, for the word of Christ abides in us, and 
we are therefore not in darkness, but we know that "the times of the 
Gentiles" are about fulfilled; and the time for the establishment of 
God's kingdom is at hand. For that new kingdom we may pray, 
"Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth," patiently awaiting 
the fullness of God's due time. So surely as we are children of the 
light, not left in darkness that that day should come upon us 
unawares, we know that the success of the heavenly kingdom for 
which we pray, means the destruction of all these kingdoms of 
earth. (Dan. 2:44.) 

We cannot pray our Father to grant abundant harvests, send rains, 
prevent famines, drouths, wars and pestilences, for we find no 
example in the Master of such presumption, and realize from his 
words (Luke 21:9) that God will permit these things until the reign 
of Christ is inaugurated. And further, we are informed by the 
Master that the present day will be one of trouble caused by the 
new Prince binding the strong ruler of earth and spoiling his house. 
(Matt. 12:29) Hence we pray for none of these things, but with trust 
and peace look with patience into the future, praying, "Our Father- 
thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as in heaven." In all 
things "Thy will be done, "-and even in the midst of the present 
necessary unrest and trouble we rejoice in confident hope, knowing 
that all things are so overruled as to work out the accomplishment 
of our Father's grand designs, revealed to us in his Word. 

Instructed by the abiding words of Christ, and realizing the 
covenant of sacrifice to be even unto death we cannot ask release 
from pain and trouble and death, but with Jesus we can only ask 
that if it be possible, the cup of shame and misrepresentation might 
pass, that we suffer not as evil doers; and yet with him we must say: 
"Not my will but thine be done!" "Father, glorify thy name!" 

These may pray for the healing of others, but not for themselves. It 
was truly said of the Master, that he saved others, but he could not 
save himself and be a sacrifice too. Yet, in requests for the healing 
of others we must remember that the time for full restitution of life 
and health to the world has not yet fully come. Jesus did not heal all 



the blind and impotent in Judea, and what healing he did was 
merely to show forth the glorious power and blessing of his coming 
glorious reign which has not yet fully dawned. Hence our prayers 
for the sick should be with full confidence in God's ability to heal, 
yet not demanding it, always letting the words of our Lord abide in 
us-"Thy will be done." 

To pray in other than this spirit is to "ask amiss," to ask for things 
to be consumed upon our own lusts [desires] (Jas. 4:3.) Desires for 
ease, for earthly prosperity, for a sect and its growth and honor; all 
these are earthly lusts contrary to the Spirit and Word of Christ. 
Thus the word lusts is used by the Apostle in the above instance. 
Most prayers seemingly are of this sort, and therefore amiss. 

Those who abide in Christ, and in whom his word abides, can pray 
for their enemies and those who despitefully use and persecute 
them, though they cannot pray God to open their blinded eyes at 
once, or in their way; but realizing from the indwelling word of 
God's promise, that the blinded eyes shall all be opened to the truth, 
they can abide his time, but going to God in prayer they may 
express their forgiveness of the persecutor, their interest in him, and 
their patient waiting for the day when "the knowledge of the Lord 
shall fill the whole earth," and his will be done on earth. 

When in harmony with Paul's exhortation (1 Tim. 2:1,2) these pray- 
-"For all men; for kings and all that are in authority," their prayers 
will not be that those kings may be continued in power and control; 
for they well know that this would be in direct opposition to God's 
expressed plan, which is to break in pieces and consume all these. 

And though these may labor toward it they cannot expect and pray 
for the conversion of "all men," "kings," etc., well remembering the 
Master's prayer- "I pray not for the world but for THEM which 
thou hast given me,. ..that they all may be one, that [then] the world 
may believe" in its due season. (John 17:9,21.) In none of Jesus' 
prayers did he ever pray for Caesar, or Pilate, or Herod; nor did he 
make any special effort to reach these, with the gospel message, 

R798 : page 4 

remembering how it was written, "The Spirit of the Lord God is 
upon me because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings 
unto the MEEK." (Isa. 61:1, and Luke 4:18.) And when he gave the 
disciples a formula of prayer it contained no prayer for kings and 
rulers of this age, nor for "all men" except 

R799 : page 4 

as this is implied in the expressions of forgiveness of debtors, and 
the prayer for the coming kingdom which will bless all men. 

What then could we pray for "as we ought," and not ask "amiss," 
for all men and for kings? Very little, indeed, other than the prayer 
for the blessing of all, implied, when we pray, "Thy kingdom 
come." Our prayer to God for kings, etc., must be merely that he 



would so overrule and direct by raising up or casting down among 
the nations, as would be most in harmony with his wise plans, for 
the blessing and development of the Church now being selected. 
For though God has given over the world to the rule of the Prince of 
this world and his faithful agents until the full end of Gentile 
Times, when he shall come whose right the dominion is and shall 
take the dominion under the whole heaven, associating with him his 
faithful followers according to his many promises (Dan. 
7: 14,18,22), YET God has not given present rulers unlimited 
power. He will suffer them to take their course only so far as it does 
not interfere with his plans-there it must stop. The wrath of man 
shall not work ruin to the plan of God, for God will cause the wrath 
of man to work to his praise, and all that will not so work he will 
restrain. (Psa. 76:10.) And this is what the Apostle has in view: 
Pray God's guidance and direction over all the affairs of life and 
over rulers TO THE END THAT the piety and sobriety and growth 
of the Church may be conserved. Verse 2. 

Thus considered, not merely as a begging arrangement, nor yet as 
an occasion for instructing the Lord as to our wills; but considered 
as a season of union and communion of heart with our Father in 
which we may relieve our burdened or perplexed hearts by there 
realizing divine sympathy, calling to mind divine promises, 
reviewing divine care, and expressing our confidence in God's 
many promises, thus bringing those promises afresh and closely to 
our hearts, as though God now audibly uttered them in our hearing- 
-thus considered, how proper, yea, how necessary, is prayer to the 
true child of God. He cannot live without it. To break off this 
communion would be like stripping a tree of its leaves: it would 
stunt and hinder its development. 

But to suppose that Christian life depends solely upon prayer 
without earnest study of God's word, is like supposing that a tree 
could flourish from its leaves only, without roots and soil. Both are 
needful: good soil and roots will produce leaves and fruitage, and, 
likewise, the promises of God's word absorbed by us will naturally 
lead to good works and to communion with God in prayer, without 
which our fruits would soon wither and disappear. 

No wonder, then, that Jesus both by precept and example said, 
"Watch and pray" (Matt. 26:41), uniting the two conditions needful 
in our development. Some pray and neglect to watch; others watch 
and neglect to pray; both these errors are serious, and it is not 
possible for us to decide which is the most serious neglect, since 
either would work disastrous loss of the great prize for which we 
are running. 

PRAYER NOT A CEREMONY. 

No where is prayer defined as a duty, though its necessity is 
stated. The Father desireth such to worship him as worship in spirit 
and in truth (Jno. 4:23); and it would be contrary to this principle to 
define prayer as a duty, and stipulate a set time or place or formal 



manner. The earnestness of the service and the peculiarity of the 
circumstance, will regulate the frequency and the matter. 

But though "Family Prayer," "Morning Prayer," "Evening Prayer," 
nor any other stated time of praying is not specified in Scripture, 
who among God's children has not experienced the blessedness of 
communion with the Lord in the morning of each day asking his 
guidance of its affairs, and realizing and expressing to him our 
confidence in and reliance upon his promises. This does not remind 
the Lord of his obligation contained in these promises, but it does 
remind us of those promises and thus strengthen and prepare us for 
the events of the day. Likewise, how impossible it is for a child of 
God, remembering and impressed by the events of the day, as to the 
Lord's wisdom and care and the surety that all things shall work for 
good how impossible, we say, for such an one to retire to rest 
without thankfulness of heart to him upon whose power and 
promises they have leaned throughout the day: and how appropriate 
to bow the knee as well as the heart to render homage as well as 
thanks. 

Hence no form of prayer is furnished in the Scripture. Even the 
Master, when asked by the disciples for instruction on this subject, 
gave them not a form to repeat, but merely an idea or example of 
how to arrange their prayers to God. He did not say, Pray this 
prayer; but "after this manner pray ye." Our prayers, then, should be 
after this manner not an assortment of extravagant demands, but 
the simple expression of the earnest heart. First acknowledging and 
paying homage to God as our Father the Almighty and hallowed 
One. Secondly, expressing our expectations and trust that his 
kingdom according to promise is coming, and our eagerness for it, 
and the time when his will shall be done as in heaven. Thirdly, our 
reliance upon him, for "daily bread," which he has promised us. 
Fourthly our acknowledgment that our ways are not perfect and our 
reliance upon his favor [granted through Christ Jesus] for 
forgiveness; and our willingness to exercise forgiveness toward our 
debtors. 

FAMILY PRAYER. 

Though not enjoined specifically, how appropriate that husband 
and wife should blend their hearts and bow their knees in divine 
worship, and in submission to the divine will. How much this must 
tend to unify those hearts and lives. How blessed must such an 
example be to the children. How appropriate that the little "olive 
branches" be trained to look to their Creator in the days of their 
youth, not with formal and long prayers, but with the evidence 
before them of parental trust in and love for the giver of every 
good, as expressed in a simple, earnest, trustful prayer after the 
MANNER of the Lord's illustration. As children see their parents 
recognizing and bowing to the superior will and wisdom of their 
heavenly Father, they learn from the example the lesson of 



obedience and submission to parental authority while learning to 
know and reverence their Creator. 

As soon as children come to reasoning age, their attention to the 
daily family prayer, whether it be morning or evening, should be 
placed on the same plane that God places it before us: not of 
CONSTRAINT, but of a willing mind, out of thankful and loving 
hearts. Such an influence and example will make home and parents 
and sacred things dear to children in after life. The true worship of 
God is profitable both for the present and future life. 

UNCEASING PRAYER. 

With the climax of Christian growth, the climax of worship is 
reached, and the earnest child of God will presently experience the 
meaning of the Apostle's words: "Pray without ceasing. In 
everything give thanks." 1 Thes. 5:17,18. Communion with God 
and the feeling of continual trust in his goodness and care, will 
become interwoven with all the affairs of life, so that to thus pray 
without ceasing, and be continually thankful, will become as 
natural as breathing. But this continual prayer and thanksgiving can 
never take the place of the formal recognition of worship of God, 
either to our own hearts or to our families. 

PRAYER IN THE CHURCH. 

What is true of our families is not less true of God's family, of 
which we are members-the body of Christ. To bind us together in 
love, God has arranged to make the various members more or less 
dependent on each other for the blessings he is willing and ready to 
bestow. Thus he would unify the body of Christ in his method of 
providing spiritual food, as the human body is dependent as a whole 
upon its various members for the natural "daily bread" which God 
thus supplies. 

This being true, we should not only neglect not the assembling of 
ourselves with those of like precious faith, personally when we can; 
and at least through the medium of the printed page, but when 
assembled how sweet and refreshing, and how appropriate, to ask 
our Father's blessing upon the meeting; that the spirit of love may 
pervade the members of Christ's body there assembled, and that the 
truth might be discerned by sincere and truth-hungry souls, so that 
all might be more and more filled with the self-sacrificing spirit of 
that truth, and thus be built up in the most holy faith and love, and 
made meet for the Master's service both now and hereafter. Can it 
be doubted that to the extent that such prayer is the expression of 
the sentiment of all, it will bring an answer at the moment of its 
utterance, by impressing upon all solemnly the object of the 
meeting and the blessings to be expected and enjoyed? It is ever 
thus; as we draw nigh to God in prayer we bring the blessings 
promised nigh to ourselves by bringing our hearts into a condition 
of readiness to enjoy the blessings promised the seeker. 



While the offered prayer is to God it should not be forgotten that in 
harmony with the foregoing statement (that the prayer influences of 
all who join in it) that Jesus and the Apostle indicate that it should 
be uttered in such a voice and manner as to enable those about to 
appreciate and intelligently join it. Jesus said, in connection with 
one of the few of his recorded sayings, "Because of them that stood 
by I said it. " (John 1 1 :42.) Paul exhorts those who lead the 
company in prayer to seek to do so in such a manner that all may be 
able to hear and acquiesce in it. (1 Cor. 14:14-17.) And in all things 
whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. 



R800 : page 4 

ROMAN CATHOLICS REBEL. 

So complete is the submission of Roman Catholics to their priests, 
that such a thing as a Roman Catholic congregation asserting any 
rights, is almost unheard of. But contact with freemen and the 
exercise of liberty on other subjects is having an effect, and the 
indications are that the church of Rome must ere long bend or break 
under the weight of this influence. She will undoubtedly do both, 
bend a little first then break and lose her power over her faithful as 
her daughters are doing. 

The following clip from a Chicago daily explains itself in harmony 
with the foregoing remarks: 

"A movement of unusual character has taken place in the large and 
wealthy Roman Catholic parish of St. Mary's, at Aurora, 111. Some 
time ago the parish revolted against the Rev. Father Welby, its 
pastor, giving as a reason the fact that the priest would not permit 
the congregation to superintend its own financial affairs, but 
collected all the money and spent it at his own pleasure, without so 
much as making a report to those who contributed. At that time the 
congregation appealed to the Archbishop to remove Father Welby 
and replace him by a pastor who would accept a stipulated salary, 
"as other preachers do," and permit the congregation to manage its 
own affairs. The Archbishop referred the matter to the Vicar 
General, and that gentleman visited this city and from the pulpit 
soundly berated the congregation as a lot of ignoramuses and 
concluded by saying that Father Welby would be kept here until the 
congregation bowed in submission to his authority. The Vicar 
General subsequently said in Chicago that Father Welby would be 
kept in Aurora until the congregation accepted his word as law, if it 
took until his dying day. Notwithstanding these promises Father 
Welby was removed from Aurora in two weeks and the 
congregation was left for a time without a priest. Last Sunday, 
Father Leyden, of Woodstock, occupied the pulpit and announced 
his intention to control, not only the spiritual but the temporal 
affairs of the church. The result of this announcement was a 
meeting of the congregation at which a more compact organization 



was effected, and a resolution unanimously adopted by a rising 
vote, asserting the right of the congregation to control its own 
temporal affairs, and demanding that Father Ley den either accept a 
stipulated salary, or withdraw from the pastorate. The case is 
attracting unusual attention. 



R800 : page 4 

IS FAITH IN CHRIST ESSENTIAL? 

-FAITH OR WORKS? 

THE OPINIONS OF EMINENT PRESBYTERIAN AND 

METHODIST THEOLOGIANS AS TO THE FATE OF THE 

HEBREW PHILANTHROPIST, SIR MOSES MONTEFIORE, 

DECEASED. 

The death of the eminent Jewish philanthropist has raised a 
question among some of the religious journals concerning his 
future. All agree that he was a godly man as well as benevolent. 
Nor were his kind deeds done solely to his own people. His heart 
was large enough to sympathize with all classes of his fellow-men 
in need. And many Christians shared in his bounty. Moreover, he 
died like a man at peace with God. The Christian Register 
(Unitarian) refers to this case in this way: "Judging the tree by its 
fruits, how few professed Christians might dare to compare their 
life with his ! Yet, according to the doctrine which still holds the 
mind of Christendom in bondage and darkness, this great, pure, 
faithful soul was fatally self-deceived, and has passed to endless 
sorrow. When will so-called believers dare to interpret all narrower 
Scriptures in the light of Peter's great discovery- that 'he that 
feareth God and worketh righteousness is accepted of him'?" 

R800 : page 5 

In the Independent, of September 17th, A.A. Hodge, D.D., for the 
Presbyterian Church, and Daniel Curry, D.D., for the Methodists, 
endeavor to free their respective systems from the narrow view 
which would exclude such a man from salvation. Dr. Hodge 
concedes that while participation in the benefits of Christ's 
redemption is "generally conditioned upon personal recognition and 
confession" of Christ, and while this is essential whenever 
intellectually possible, it "is not absolutely essential, as is proved in 
the case of infants and of idiots. On like grounds of principle, it 
might hold true in the case of some exceptionally enlightened 
heathen. The charitable formula of 'invincible ignorance,' used and 
greatly abused by Romanists, rests ultimately upon a true principle, 
and has always been practically, more or less, recognized by 
orthodox Christians." He then goes on to argue for a favorable 
judgment in Sir Moses Montefiore's case because, either through 
intellectual bias, or through national Jewish prejudice, the true 
Christ was never apprehended by him, only a distorted image, and 



therefore never consciously rejected. "Or, very probably, loving and 
embracing the real Jesus in his heart, his intellectual bias and 
national and social position may have so modified his expression of 
Christian faith, as to render it unrecognizable to us." 

Dr. Hodge's principles here are wide enough to embrace many other 
cases than that of this pious Jew. His article is a gratifying instance 
of a growth of a "wider hope" even among theological circles where 
it has been put under the severest ban. Certainly there is growth 
here away from the severe statements of the Westminster 
Confession, upon which the Christian Register seems to have based 
its cavil. For instance, it affirms (p. 212), "They who have never 
heard the gospel, know not Jesus Christ, and believe not in him, 
cannot be saved, be they never so diligent to frame their lives 
according to the light of Nature, or the laws of that religion which 
they profess; neither is there salvation in any other but in Christ 
alone, who is the Saviour only of his body, the Church." 

It is difficult to make the above concession of Dr. Hodge, in respect 
to "some exceptionally enlightened heathen," accord with the 
statement just quoted. This proves that even he is progressing at 
some points beyond the "Standards." It is certain that, with the large 
Christian heart we know him to possess, he must seek relief 
somewhere. 

In our view, however, this relief is found in a more consistent way 
than by a strained interpretation of the standards. It is better to 
confess that there are some lines of Scripture truth bearing upon 
this point which they do not include. It would be more consistent 
for Dr. Hodge to hold that, while the salvation of the elect proceeds 
within the narrow limits which the Calvinistic system has traced out 
from Scripture, provision is made for other and wider operations of 
grace, of which they are the chosen instruments, outside these limits 
and beyond this present age. The purpose of the choice of the 
Church of the first-born is that they may be kings and priests unto 
God in carrying out his gracious purposes towards the later born. 
The enigma of the future of pious Jews and heathens would not be 
so hard to solve on this principle. Better than the opening wide the 
door into the church, by such accommodating expositions of the 
terms of admission, is that view which regards it as a body of called 
and chosen and faithful ones, who enter only by the door and walk 
in the strait and narrow way of the cross, thus offering themselves 
in sacrifice, not merely to secure their own salvation, but as a 
means of blessing for others,- baptized even for the dead. 
Whatever hope we may have for others, outside the Church, must 
be sought in the wide promises of God that in this chosen seed all 
the families of the earth are to be blessed. 

There is still another principle bearing upon this subject which has 
been too much overlooked, and which needs now to be brought out 
of Scripture with fresh force and urged upon the attention of the 
Church and of all men. And that is that the one ultimate standard of 
admission to blessedness in the future, is character. The saints of 



this dispensation will not reach their high station except as they 
become holy and without blemish before him in love. And our God, 
who is a consuming fire, must burn against all our evils and faults 
of character, that we may be found "of him in peace, without spot 
and blameless. " And so also all the Scriptures which refer to the 
judgments and administrations of the future are most emphatic 
upon this point of righteous character. On whatever level men may 
hereafter be brought into the Kingdom of Heaven, whether as 
princes or subjects, this is the standard. The Old Testament upon 
every page asserts that only such shall ascend into the hill of the 
Lord. (Psalms 15,24.) The Lord's judgment of the nations (Matt. 
25.) is all upon this principle. The righteous go into life eternal. The 
dead, at the resurrection, are infallibly sorted in the same way. 
"They that have done good unto the resurrection of life; they that 
have done evil unto the resurrection of judgment." Now, while it is 
true that no man can merit salvation by good works, and much less 
a place in the Church of the first-born, it is also true that no man of 
unrighteous character can enter into the kingdom of God. And it 
must, therefore, be true that men of righteous and merciful life, 
whether Jew or Pagan, must go into the life to come with a 
character much more nearly approximating to its perfect standard 
than that of unrighteous men. Cornelius, who feared God and 
worked righteousness, was accepted before him. He was not fit for 
the church until Christ had been revealed to and in him. He was not 
even "saved" (Acts 4:12) until Peter came to tell him the way. But 
he was in that receptive condition which made Christ welcome to 
him, when made known, as the flowers welcome the sunshine. And 
so Sir Moses Montefiore, if ignorant of the true Christ, must come 
to the same recognition of him in order to be saved. But we are not 
tied down to any such arbitrary and narrow views of God's dealings 
as to suppose that such a receptive soul, if blind to the light in this 
world, could never receive it in the next, or that his future 
administrations proceed 

R801 : page 5 

upon such narrow lines as to make no room for such cases, and no 
account of good character developed under such circumstances. Let 
the case of Cornelius and the parable of the good Samaritan teach 
us that the eyes of the Lord are open upon all the ways of the sons 
of men, beholding the evil and the good, and that, if not in this 
world, then in the world to come, every one shall receive according 
to his ways and according to the fruit of his doings. The promised 
resurrection of the dead, which is the era of judgment, will furnish 
the amplest scope for all such righteous adjustments as seem to us 
to be now lacking. 

In Dr. Hodge's article, above referred to, there is a distinct assent 
given to the view that men may be saved who may have accepted 
that form of truth and goodness of which Christ is the expression, 
who yet have never heard of the historic Christ. We have already 
said that he here steps outside of the Westminster standard which 



distinctly states that men who have never heard the gospel do not 
know Jesus Christ, and therefore cannot be saved. Upon this point, 
we must side with the Andover Review in affirming that this 
immediate opening of the door of heaven to devout men of every 
nation who strive to live up to the light they possess, is more 
dangerous than the theory which supposes that by the grace of God 
such men may be brought to a true knowledge of Christ after death. 
When Dr. Hodge apologizes for a conscientious Jew that "what he, 
through national prejudice, may have failed to appreciate was not 
the real Christ, but a distorted reflection cast by the so-called 
Christian world of the day," he admits a principle upon which 
conclusions may be based, which we are sure, he would not accept. 
There are many others failing to acknowledge Christ who may hope 
to be excused at last on similar grounds. A distorted image of Christ 
lies indeed in the minds of all men to whom the Holy Spirit has not 
revealed him. 

Our general objection to all these views which makes the entrance 
into heaven more wide and easy than the straight and narrow way 
of the gospel is that, in order to make room for such high-minded 
souls to escape from everlasting torment, they lower the claims of 
God's holiness. This is far worse than the view that, after judgment, 
resurrection will open out to such another door of hope. For this 
view may be held without any abatement of the testimony of 
Scripture that without holiness no man shall see the Lord, that our 
God is a consuming fire, and that there is no other name given 
under heaven or among men whereby we must be saved. 

-Words of Reconciliation. 



R801 : page 5 



THE REVEALING. 



"There is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that 
shall not be known. What I tell you in darkness, speak ye in light; 
and what ye hear in the ear, preach ye upon the housetops." Matt. 
10:26,27. 

The greater portion of divine truth has been expressed under 
cover, so that its full import is not always discernable. The Bible 
abounds in symbols, figures and allegories, and the same is as true 
of Jesus' teachings as of any other portions of the Word. He opened 
his mouth in parables and dark sayings, so that those who heard 
him, and even his disciples, often said, We cannot tell what he 
saith. But the above assurance of Jesus is that all will in due time be 
made manifest. 

Several objects have been served by the hiding, and gradual 
unfolding of truth-first, the successful development of God's plan; 
secondly, the saving of his children from discouragement because 



of the length of time involved; thirdly, the trial of the faith of those 
who believe. 

The revealing of truth, as we have seen, has gradually progressed 
from age to age, and God's children in every age have had a 
sufficient revelation of truth to enable them to carry out their part of 
his plan, including such knowledge of future things as would 
encourage and help them. It has also been a part of God's plan that 
truth once revealed, expounded, or made manifest, should not be 
lost or forgotten, but that it should be treasured up and recorded for 
the generations following. Hence, all his children of every age have 
been taught to bear witness to the truth, both to their own and 
succeeding generations, according to their ability and opportunity. 
And it is through the faithfulness of past witnesses -the Patriarchs, 
Prophets, Jesus, the Apostles, and some of later date, that we have 
our present knowledge. 

To us, as to them, comes the commission "What I tell you in 
darkness, speak ye in light; and what ye hear in the ear, preach ye 
upon the housetops." With the blessed knowledge always comes the 
responsibility of making it known. Strange to say, the good news is 
seldom well-received, and never has been. It is hated, ridiculed and 
rejected by those it comes to bless; and those who bear witness to 
the truth are persecuted, many of them even unto death. This has 
been the case in every age. Every witness has to some extent 
suffered for his testimony, and it is still the case. When all is 
revealed, nothing will remain covered; then the knowledge of the 
Lord shall fill the whole earth. Every type, and figure, and parable, 
and dark saying will in due time bear a testimony to all. 

And while it will be thus with the truth, it will also be true of those 
who bear the truth, and indeed of all men, good and bad; for there is 
no character now covered that shall not be revealed. Upright and 
godly characters are now hidden under misunderstanding and 
misrepresentation, while many base and detestable characters are 
hidden under a fair, deceiving exterior. "The disciple is not above 
his master, nor the servant above his lord.... If they have called the 
master of the house Beelzebub, how much more them of his 
household. " 

It is a matter of comparatively small concern what men may say of 
us now. They will say hard things of us even against their own 
convictions, though not unfrequently because they believe them; 
and this the faithful witness must endure; and while he should take 
heed to let the light of truth shine through a transparent character 
and a clear and positive testimony, he may commit his way unto the 
Lord, for "he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy 
judgment as the noon-day." "Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for 
him." Psa. 37:5,6,7. 

In the issue of Feb., '85, it was shown from Bible testimony that 
character will in every case in due time be revealed and meet its 
just recompense. The masks will all be taken off, and every man 



will be estimated both by God and man according to the real merit 
of his motives. Already we see this revealing of character and 
motives in the church. Trial and persecution for the truth's sake is 
making it manifest. For instance, how many whose works once led 
us to esteem them as very zealous for the Lord's cause, now prove 
to be rejectors and even opposers of his truth, because of its 
unpopularity. Such declare plainly that their chief incentive to good 
works is the praise of men, or the success of some sect or scheme of 
their own. What a low incentive, and how unworthy of a child of 
God. But they have their reward, while we choose to wait for ours. 
And so says Paul: 

R801 : page 6 

"Every man's work shall be made manifest; for the day [of trial] 
shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire [trial] ; and the 
fire shall try every man's work, of what sort it is." 1 Cor. 3:13. 

Those found worthy in the trial, whose motives are those of true 
zeal and love for the Lord's cause, will receive the great reward. For 
such characters he is now searching and applying the tests. In 
similar ways character will be made manifest in every case in due 
time. It is particularly true now of the Church, because this is its 
day of trial; and it will be true of the world also in its judgment or 
trial day-the Millennial age. 

And further, not only will the character and motives of every man 
appear in their true light, and the truths of the Bible, hitherto 
covered and hidden under types and symbols and dark sayings, be 
revealed, but truth in every sense must be made manifest. The 
truths of nature, God's other great book, will also come to light, and 
are coming to light now more rapidly than ever before, [see last two 
issues, "The Undefiled One,"] and science and God's written 
revelation will be seen to be at perfect agreement; both being 
ordained for the blessing and elevation of mankind. The light from 
our Lord's presence will probe and penetrate every secret thing, 
rewarding the good and purging out the evil. Already men are 
beginning to be blessed by the increasing light on every subject. 
God's due time has come to turn on the light, and it is touching 
every department of human interest-religion, science, philosophy 
and art. In religion it is revealing the true and exposing the false. 
Every branch of science and philosophy has already felt its genial 
touch. Notice, for instance, the great advancement in the science of 
medicine, and how the world is being blessed by it; the great 
discoveries in nature and the wonderful inventions of art. Mark also 
the growth of general intelligence and the blessings it is bringing 
with it. 

Yes, the truth-the light-is God's means of blessing. Praise and 
honor and thanksgiving to him who is turning on the light! Time 
was when it was but a faint, glimmering ray-and, thank God, the 
world was never left without a ray- but according to his infinite 
wisdom and love he has been turning it up higher and higher age 



after age, and now he has sent his Anointed, the great source of 
light, and soon the blessed rays of light shall flood the world. It is 
only obscured now by the clouds and darkness that are round about 
him; but even through the darkness comes the lightning flashes of 
his truth. MRS. C. T. R. 



R786 : page 6 



HUMILITY WELL DEFINED. 

To be humble is not to think meanly of one's self. Christ was 
humble; but he knew he was Lord and Master, and told his disciples 
so. To be humble is, knowing your character and abilities, to be 
willing to take a lower place, and perform a menial service. A 
private may know more than his superior officer; he is humble if, 
knowing that, he is willing to work faithfully under him. 



R786 : page 6 

THE world is preparing day by day for the Millennium, but you 
do not see it. Every season forms itself a year in advance. The 
coming summer lays out her work during the autumn, and buds and 
roots are fore-spoken. Ten million roots are pumping in the streets; 
do you hear them? Ten million buds are forming in the axils of the 
leaves; do you hear the sound of the saw or the hammer? All next 
summer is at work in the world; but it is unseen by us, and so the 
kingdom of God cometh not with observation.-Sel. 



R802 : page 6 

GROWING IN GRACE. 

Bristol, England. 

MY DEAR BROTHER:-Your letter of Aug. 28th came duly, for 
which receive my warmest thanks. I was both strengthened and 
refreshed by it. Just at the time it arrived I was well nigh weary of 
"the way," fightings without and fears within; finding that when I 
would do good, evil is present with me, and being defeated at 
nearly every point. I find now that I had left my place of security - 
abiding in him and therefore was exposed to the wiles and malice 
of the enemy. My armor was not firmly buckled on; but he has so 
tenderly and lovingly quickened me through your letter and 
restored unto me the "joy of his salvation," and is now upholding 
me, that I am as a giant refreshed and more conscious than ever that 
he that watcheth over Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps. Blessed be 
his name. 

I inclose a pamphlet for your perusal, and will tell you why I wrote 
it. I was a member of the "Brethren," and as such used occasionally 



to give a "Gospel address" on Sunday evening at their meeting. I 
know now that it was not the truth that I preached, but tradition. For 
a long time my mind had been exercised concerning the truth of 
orthodoxy, and on one Sunday evening in the spring I went and 
preached upon 2 Cor. 4:3-6, dwelling particularly on the fact that 
the Bible was the Gospel referred to. That was the third time in a 
few weeks that I had spoken about the same words, insisting that it 
was the truth or else a forgery -no middle path. During the 
following week the truth shone clear; the eyes of my understanding 
being opened I saw clearly that eternal "torment" was blasphemy. 
During that same week I was invited to address a meeting on the 
following Sunday. I knew not what to do; if I went it would be out 
of the abundance of the heart that the mouth would speak; but being 
afraid that I might cause confusion, and so hinder the reception of 
the truth, I cried to the Lord for guidance, and decided not to go 
without first acquainting the brother who invited me of my change 
of views, knowing that Paul "saw them that were of reputation 
privately, lest he had run in vain," and also that although free from 
the error, I was not then, as now, built up in the truth and able to 
offer clear evidence for my decision. This led to a correspondence 
and some interviews. I showed my evidence, and they called it false 
doctrine. I asked one to read "Food;" he did so, and tried to prove it 
wrong, but failed. 

I was counseled to send in my resignation. At first I had intended 
merely to say that my views were changed concerning certain 
doctrines, and that I resigned; but thinking it would be a good 
opportunity for boldly declaring what I believed to be the truth, and 
to witness for it, I wrote the enclosed paper, and on showing it to 
my brother, who has been quickened by the truth, and who is as 
devoted to the cause as myself, he expressed a wish to have it 
printed, and bore all the expense of 1,000 copies for free 
circulation. I put in an extract from the TOWER, as it bore so 
pointedly on the subject, and trust you will approve of my attempt 
to spread abroad the truth by referring the readers to the TOWER 
for further reading. I have enclosed two copies, and shall be most 
grateful if you will please correct anything that you perceive wrong 
there, and return it at your earliest convenience. I may add that my 
resignation was not accepted by the "Brethren," but they held a 
church meeting and solemnly excommunicated me. But "What shall 
separate us from the love of Christ?" 

Very truly yours in Christ, . 



The article below is in substance the Tract published by the 
Brother to which reference is made in the above letter. It brought 
we are sure a blessing upon the Brother who wrote, and also upon 
the Brother who had it published, as every sacrifice of time and 
money made purely for the truth's sake brings a blessing on the 
sacrificer. 

This Brother's case reminds us forcibly of Jesus' words in Luke 
18:13,14. Though steeped in sin, he was more easily reached by 



God's Word than many Pharisaic professors about him covered with 
the filthy rags of self-righteousness, and bound and blinded by the 
human tradition of some popular sect. Thank God that the day is 
dawning, in which all this blindness and the blinding influences 
will be removed forever. 

[To appreciate the article below fully, turn to and examine all texts 
cited.- EDITOR.] 

R802 : page 6 



THE BIBLE VS. "ORTHODOXY." 

To the Reader.-My mind having been greatly exercised by the 
following doctrines of so called "Orthodoxy," I searched to see 
what the Scriptures say, with the following result. When I penned 
these lines, I had no intention whatever of having them printed, as 
they were simply written to send to the pastor of the Chapel where I 
used to worship, but showing them to a brother in Christ, he 
expressed his wish to have them printed. This has been done, in the 
hope that any who have been seeking for the truth, may by the 
grace of God, be assisted in finding it, and realize as I myself do 
most gratefully, "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make 
you free." 

I am yours in the love of God, and in the glorious liberty of the 
gospel of Christ, 

G. C. 



IMMORTALITY OF MAN. 

I find no scripture to lead me to believe this doctrine; quite the 
reverse, man is never described as having an endless existence. 
"Your fathers, where are they, and the prophets, do they live 
forever?" Zech. 1:5, and as to man having a conscious existence 
after the breath leaves the body, I do not believe it, not until the 
resurrection, "for in death there is no remembrance of thee." Psalm 
6:5. "His breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth, in that very 
day his thoughts perish." Psalm 14:6, "There is no work, nor 
device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou 
goest." Eccles. 9:10. "Then shall the dust return to the earth as it 
was, and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it. Eccles. 12:7. 
"If Christ be not raised, ye are yet in your sins, then they also which 
have fallen asleep in Christ are perished.... what advantageth it me 
if the dead rise not, let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die." 1 
Cor. 15:17,18,32. If there is consciousness after the breath leaves 
the body, there should have been consciousness before the breath 
entered in, (kindly examine this). I know that Luke 16:23-31, may 
be argued against this, but are you sure that our Lord is speaking of 
individuals here and not nations, Jewish and Gentile. He was 
speaking to the Pharisees, verses 14,15, kindly compare rich man, 
verse 19, (Jewish nation), with Ezekiel 16:1-14, and the same 



denunciation is uttered in Matt. 21:41-43, and its accomplishment 
recorded in Rom. 1 1. Abraham's bosom, (place of favor); Gentile 
brought in, Israel broken off, and a gulf fixed, until the fulness of 
the Gentiles be come in. The Jews as a nation are dead, and being 
cast abroad in the earth, they are being tormented in the flame of 
persecution. Wherever they are, there is being fulfilled the 
prophecy of Moses, and our Lord Jesus, Deut. 8:19,20, Deut. 28:62- 
68. The Gentile also ceased to be a beggar, (poor) and they were 
brought into a place of favor, (for description of Gentiles as beggars 
or dogs, see narrative of Syro-Phoenician woman, Matt. 15:20-28). 
Immortality is one of the promised blessings, and is not possessed 
by natural man, else if possessed by him, why seek for it? Compare 
Rom. 2:7 with 1 Cor. 15:53,54. 

THE DOCTRINE OF THE TRINITY. 

I find no Scriptural proof of this doctrine quite the reverse. "To us 
there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in 
him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by 
him." 1 Cor. 8:6. 1 am convinced that God the Father and our Lord 
Jesus Christ are two beings, not one. I find no Scripture speaking of 
the Lord Jesus as "God the Son," but as the "Son of God." Part of 1 
John 5:7, is evidently spurious (left out in the Revised Version), 
and manifestly inserted to support the doctrine of the Trinity. In 
John 8: 16-18, he says, "I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent 
me. It is also written in your law the testimony of two men is true, I 
am one that bear witness of myself, and the Father that sent me 
beareth witness of me." You may quote "I and my Father are one," 
undoubtedly they are one in purpose and nature, but not in being, 
and he also prayed that the members of his body "all may be one in 
us" (John 17:21), even as we are one (verse 22). So "God is light;" 
Christ said, "I am the light of the world," also "ye are the lights of 
the world," all partaking of the same nature, but not one in being, 
and differing in degree. 

Were I to believe that God and Christ are one being, I am shut in to 
the fact that all the members of the body of Christ will ultimately 
lose all personal identity in Christ, and he in God. Or else if Christ 
be equal with God, as the members of his body will have glorious 
bodies like his (Phil. 3:21), be co-heirs with him (Rom. 8:17), have 
power with him (Rev. 2:26, and 3:21), and be partakers also of the 
divine nature (2 Peter 1:4); in fact to be like him (1 John 3:2), they 
will eventually be equal with God too. Such creature glorifying, and 
God dishonoring doctrine is not of God, according to 1 Cor. 
15:27,28-"For he hath put all things under his feet." But when he 
saith all things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted 
who did put all things under him, and when all things are subdued 
unto him, then shall the Son himself be subject unto him, that put 
all things under him, that God may be all in all. His equality is 
plainly taught in authorized version of Phil. 2:6; "Who being in the 
form of God (spiritual form), thought it not robbery to be equal 
with God, but in margin of the Revised Version and in note at end, 



where the American translators retain the marginal reading of this 
same passage, the exact opposite meaning is given he "counted not 
the being on an equality with God a thing to be grasped. " This is in 
harmony with the whole passage and the result, verse 9 "God also 

R803 : page 6 

hath highly exalted him." Had he been on an equality with God 
before, how could he have been highly exalted after? This 
harmonizes too with Prov. 8:24. "When there were no depths I was 
brought forth." Col. 1:15. "The firstborn (chief) of every creature." 
Rev. 3:14-"The beginning of the creation of God." John 1:1 -"In 
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the 
Word was God." This is clearly explained in 1 Cor. 8:5,6-"For 
though there be, that are called Gods, whether in heaven or in earth, 
(as there be gods many, and lords many), yet to us there is but one 
God the Father," and the same word in the original, "Theos," I see 
is used in 2 Cor. 4:4, in reference to Satan as the god or ruler of this 
age; so there is no conflict, but harmony. And in John 5:18, the 
Jews asserted, that he made himself equal with God, which he most 
emphatically denied in verse 19: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, the 
Son can do nothing of himself." Now use that expression in 
reference to the Father, and the denial is apparent. Would any say 

R803 : page 7 

of the Father, "the Father can do nothing of himself?" 

RESPECTING THE WEEKLY PARTAKING OF THE LORD'S SUPPER. 

I find no Scriptural evidence for this anywhere. In Acts 20:7, a 
meal is evidently spoken of, as in chap. 2:42-46. 1 find no command 
or example from our Lord or any of his Apostles, for a weekly 
observance; and I am convinced it is a yearly observance. In 1 Cor. 
5:7,8- "Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, let us keep the 
feast." Our Lord altered the manner, but not the time. The early 
church met on the first day of the week. -John 20:19, but no 
mention is made of the feast. In Luke 22:15, the Lord said, "With 
desire have I desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer;" 
verse 19, "this do in remembrance of me," verse 22-"this cup is 
the new testament" or covenant. How often the old covenant was to 
be celebrated is plainly stated, Ex. 13:10, "Thou shalt therefore 
keep this ordinance in his season, from year to year," and as He has 
not altered the time, I dare not. Paul said, "as often as ye eat this 
bread, and drink this cup, ye do show forth the Lord's death till he 
come." The cup was not mentioned in connection with the First-day 
gatherings and meals in the accounts in Acts. And as Israel, when 
they ate the passover yearly, did show forth the death of the lamb, 
their passover, so with us in the antitype: we do show forth that 
which was accomplished by which God injustice passes over us; 
and as there is but one anniversary of a birth or a death in a year, 
how strange to celebrate it weekly. And though we are not 
commanded to observe it at all, we being not under THE LAW, but 



under favor, yet it is our privilege or favor to observe the 
ANNIVERSARY. 

ETERNAL TORMENT. 

This I believe to be the most blasphemous and God-dishonoring 
doctrine ever preached. Let us examine it briefly from three 
standpoints. 

1st. If eternal torment is the punishment of the ungodly or finally 
impenitent sinner, then he who took the sinners' place must bear the 
sinners' penalty (Isa. 53:6 "The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity 
of us all), viz.: eternal torment; and as Christ did not bear that 
(eternal torment), what does it say then but that Christ was not the 
sinners' substitute. Such a gospel as that, though an angel from 
heaven should preach it, I dare not believe it. But what do the 
Scriptures say but that "the wages of sin is death," that "Christ died 
for our sins according to the Scriptures," as he explained to the 
disciples going to Emmaus. (Luke 24:25-27.) Yes, thanks be to our 
God, "he came to seek and save that which was lost." Mankind had 
lost life. The sentence of death having passed on all men, he said, 
"My flesh will I give for the life of the world." The Psalmist is clear 
on this point: "Who redeemeth thy life from destruction." (Psa. 
103:4.) So, as by man came death, by man came also the 
resurrection of the dead" (1 Cor. 15:21); "some to a resurrection of 
life (glorified), and some to a resurrection of judgment (discipline) 
(John 5:29)-not damnation, as in the old version, but judgment 
(discipline), as in the revised version. Then, and not till then, will 
be the world's probation; then, in the time of restitution (Acts 3:21- 
23), "he that will not hear that prophet (Christ) shall be destroyed 
(second death) from among the people; not preserved in torments 
and disobedience, but utterly destroyed everlasting punishment - 
DEATH being the wages or punishment. 

2d.-What a door is opened to the atheist by this horrible doctrine, 
eternal torment. He will argue thus, and rightly, too: You represent 
that God is just, yet when he sends his Son in the flesh to bear the 
punishment for sin (Isa. 53:6), his sufferings terminate at death, but 
the sinner's go on through the eternal ages. 

3d.-Weak Christians may reason thus: If eternal torment is the 
punishment for sin, as Christ did not bear that, how do I know but 
what I shall have to suffer it? But thanks be to our God, he can be 
just, yet the justifier of him that believeth on Jesus. The sentence 
was death, my dear Lord and Master died that I might live, and he 
gave his word, that believing, I might have life through his name 
(John 20:31); and, thank God, this is the word by which the gospel 
is preached unto you. (1 Pet. 1:25). 

We close with an extract from ZION'S WATCH TOWER, as 
follows: 



MORTAL AND IMMORTAL. 

"These words are usually given a very uncertain meaning. Wrong 
ideas relative to their meaning produce erroneous views of subjects 
with which they stand connected in general and scriptural use. The 
definition of mortal is a state or condition of being liable to death, 
not a condition of death, but a condition in which death is a 
possibility. The common but erroneous idea of mortal is a state or 
condition in which death is unavoidable. The common definition of 
immortal is more nearly correct. The word immortal signifies not 
mortal, hence the very construction of the words indicates their true 
definition. It is because of the prevalence of a wrong idea of the 
meaning of the word mortal, that so many are confused when trying 
to determine whether Adam was mortal or immortal before the 
transgression. They reason that if he was immortal, God would not 
have said, "In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die," 
for if immortal it would be impossible for him to die. To this we 
assent, it is a logical conclusion. On the other hand say they, if he 
was mortal, (their idea of mortal a state in which death is 
unavoidable) wherein could consist the threat or penalty of the 
statement "Thou shalt surely die!" since if mortal, (according to 
their idea of the term) he could not have avoided death anyhow. 
The difficulty, it will be perceived, is in the false meaning given to 
the word mortal. Apply the correct definition and all is clear and 
plain. Adam was mortal, (i.e. in a condition in which death was a 
possibility). He had life in full and perfect measure, yet not inherent 
life. His was a life sustained by "every tree of the garden" save the 
one tree forbidden, and so long as he continued in obedience to, and 
in harmony with, his Maker, his life was secure-the sustaining 
element would not be denied. Thus seen, Adam had life, and death 
was entirely avoidable, yet he was in such a condition that death 
was possible he was mortal. The question arises then, if Adam was 
mortal and on trial, was he on trial for immortality? The general 
answer would be, Yes. We answer, No. His trial was to see whether 
he was worthy or unworthy of life. Since it was nowhere promised, 
that, if obedient, he should have a prize, we are bound to leave all 
such speculation out of the question. He was promised a 
continuance of the blessing then enjoyed so long as obedient, and 
threatened with destruction if disobedient. Nowhere in Scripture is 
it stated that man is immortal. While on the contrary, it is a quality 
which is ascribed only to the Divine Nature to Jehovah, to Jesus, 
in his present highly exalted condition, and to the Church, the "little 
flock," the "Lamb's wife," and "joint heir," when glorified with him. 
And not only is this true of the English word "immortal" and its 
corresponding word "incorruptible," but it is equally true of the 
original Greek term which these translate. 

Some years ago a dear friend of mine wrote to me, saying he had 
heard I had taken hold of some strange views regarding the doom of 
the finally impenitent, and he would like to know what these were. I 
replied it was quite true that my mind had been changed on this sad 
subject. I no longer believed in the eternity of future torment, but 



held that the wicked would be cut off everlastingly after the 
Judgment of the Great Day, (the Millennial day). I said that this 
light that had broken in upon me from God's word, had made our 
Father in heaven dearer to me than ever, and the Bible a clearer 
book than it had been before. My friend immediately answered that 
he was satisfied with the orthodox belief upon the matter, and he 
was sure I ought to be. In order to win me back to the old path he 
would like to have a debate with me by correspondence. And as I 
much appreciated his candor, kindness and Biblical knowledge, I at 
once asked him to begin the discussion by proving from the Bible 
the natural immortality of man. This would be the right course I 
said, as he was going to take the side of orthodoxy, and that 
affirmed that all men live for ever. In a day or so a note came 
informing me that my proposal was accepted; that many passages in 
God's word, stated that man was an immortal being, and that he 
would prepare a list of them for me. I knew full well he could not 
prepare such a list; however, I waited patiently to see what he 
would further say. About a fortnight after I received a letter inviting 
me very urgently 

R804 : page 7 

to go and see my friend, for he found himself in a dreadful 
difficulty regarding the task he had undertaken. Being able to 
arrange it I paid the requested visit. I never shall forget his look 
when he said that, to his amazement, he could not find a single 
verse in all the Book, which declared man to be immortal; on the 
contrary in his search many turned up which taught the mortal 
nature of man. He further said that the few passages which at all 
give plausibility to the ordinary view of future punishment 
appeared now most unsatisfactory to him; and a little further 
conversation revealed to me the fact that he already had received 
the truth of "Immortality in Christ alone." HOW HAD HE COME 
TO SEE IT? Simply by searching the Scripture on the subject. 
"These," said Jesus, "testify of Me." My friend had gone to them 
with the theory that he had received from the instructors of his 
childhood, and had searched for it in vain. Then throwing all 
prejudice overboard, he had sought Truth, and was rewarded. He 
was, by the truth, made free from former error. 

Should any readers desire further reading matter on these and other 
long neglected Truths, they may obtain it "free" by addressing, 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER, ETC. 



R804 : page 7 

A DEBTOR'S OBLIGATIONS. 

AN INTERESTING AND PECULIAR CASE. 
A brother in England writes as follows: 



DEAR BROTHER R :-I want advice. It is the desire of 

my heart to come over and see and talk with you and profit by your 
instructions; but at present that is impossible, but I may hope to 
some day (God willing); but as I cannot see you I will do the next 
best thing, that is write for help. Before I was converted I was a 
great rascal gambler, drunkard, thief; but when brought to the 
knowledge that Jesus had died for me, that his precious blood 
cleansed me from all sin, I rejoiced in his salvation and was happy. 

Some months after at a meeting a sister quoted the words, "Owe no 
man any thing," and said that if any had stolen anything previous to 
their conversion (doubtless thinking they had not done so after) 
they should replace it. I had never heard of this before, and was 
greatly disturbed. I had robbed my father and many others. I was in 
London at the time, and wrote immediately and told my father of 
my misdeeds. He was aware of them, to a certain extent. I knew not 
the full amount myself, as it was over a series of years; but I 
confessed as fully as I knew how, and he very kindly answered that 
whatever I had robbed him of he freely forgave me, and ever since 
then I think he has looked upon me as rather weak in mind. I went 
to some, and repaid and wrote to others. Among others was the 
Metropolitan Street Railroad Company of Boston, U.S.A. I was 
conductor of one of their cars for ten months, and defrauded them 
of a considerable amount; I know not how much. 

Just then a work of C.G. Finney, the American revivalist, was 
placed in my hands. Therein he said that unless everything was 
returned that had been stolen (as far as the memory would serve) 
God could not forgive the sinner. I was nearly mad, my joy 
vanished, I was entangled in the bondage of the law, and for three 
days was distracted; until a dear brother came and conversed with 
me, and the bonds were cut asunder. I wrote acknowledging my 
fault to the M.R.R. Co., Boston, saying that although I had not the 
means then, should I ever have it I would send such a sum as would 
assuredly cover all my theft. I cried to the Lord to teach me his 
way, and enquired of all who I thought could help me, and although 
many gave their opinion, some one way and some another, yet none 
offered me evidence to convince me from the Scriptures, and that is 
my present difficulty. The question is, "What is our Father's will in 
this case?" The evidence, to my understanding, is conflicting. Mind, 
dear brother, I do not say the evidence is conflicting, but only that, 
to my mind, it is; and I want my understanding enlightened to know 
the will of God more perfectly. Paul said, "Let him that stole, steal 
no more; but rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing 
that is good, that he may have to give to him that needeth." (Eph. 
5:28.) And although the Lord Jesus commended Zaccheus for 
restoration, that was under the old dispensation, as the sacrifice was 
not yet offered, and so the full benefit was not enjoyed according to 
Heb. 9:14-17, and as they that believe are justified from all things 
"without works," all covered by the precious blood (sacrificed life) 
of Jesus. I have thought thus, as God says, "Your sins and iniquities 
I will remember no more," can it be that he, by his Spirit, is leading 



me to think of restoring, and in doing so try to add to the work of 
Jesus? or is it the enemy, as an angel of light, bringing me into 
bondage again and casting a slur on his work of redemption. (Heb. 
9:14,15.) I have acted thus; when my Lord bought me he bought me 
thefts and all, and to him I owe this, for I through law am dead to 
the law, and I have by his grace acted upon Eph. 5:28, as he has 
given me more than to supply our need, myself and family, so have 
I distributed it according to the best of my judgment, not having 
saved anything whatever. But I am not at rest; I want "Thus saith 
the Lord," and that alone will satisfy. There are many that I know 
that are in the same difficulty. Could you find room in the TOWER 
for an article on this? You are perfectly at liberty to use this 
information in any way you please, not even keeping back the 
name, if you think that by doing so the Master will be honored. It is 
the crime I am ashamed of, not the confession of it. I have often 
thought if restoration is our Father's will, what a life of bondage a 
converted thief would have, in most cases utterly unable to restore, 
and with a heavy load all his days. Can it be so, or is it, "If the Son 
make you free, ye are free indeed"? Praying our heavenly Father to 
uphold you in every way, and give you boldness to speak the truth, 
and to preserve you to the end, I am, dear brother, your's very 
affectionately in the best of bonds, 

.THE EDITOR'S REPLY. 

DEAR BROTHER: Your confession and abhorrence of former 
sins and your tenderness of conscience, relative to your duty in the 
matter of making restitution 

R804 : page 8 

for wrongs done by you in the past, is to us a refreshing evidence of 
your present spirit being holy-in harmony with God's Spirit or 
mind on the subject. 

Your reasoning above covers both sides of the question, so that I 
need only mention my opinion thereupon relative to the mind of the 
Lord in your case. 

In my mind, we should consider the teaching of the above 
Scriptures to be that when you entered into Christ- when you, 
realizing your justification in God's sight through the ransom given 
by Jesus, consecrated or sacrificed yourself wholly to his service, 
then all things past were reckoned DEAD-past hopes, aims, debts 
and ALL. You were from that moment, in God's sight, a "new 
creature," free through Christ's ransom from all things past, and 
bound by your covenant of sacrifice to a new service. Old things 
then passed away, and all things, so far as you were concerned, 
became NEW by this your reckoned death. 

You should treat your former self, and all claims against it, as 
though you were actually dead. And from that standpoint I suggest 
that you take an account of all your property of every kind, and so 
far as it goes, use it in making restitution to those whom your 



former self had wronged, and then start out anew. This, of course, 
applies specially to wrongs such as that against the railroad 
company mentioned, and would not, in my judgment, apply to any 
debts contracted for your sustenance and clothing: these should be 
paid in full, as they were personal favors which you contracted for 
your necessities. 

In this connection, too, it should be remembered that the very 
object of this reckoned cancellation of former liabilities is, that you 
may be reckoned henceforth a "new creature" in the service of 
another-Christ. Therefore if your time future shall be spent in labor 
for earthly wealth or superfluous comforts or luxuries, thus 
renouncing virtually the new life of sacrifice, now proposed and 
commenced, THEN you would be no longer free from the above- 
mentioned obligations: for inasmuch as your former self would 
thereby be revived, brought to life again, its debts and obligations 
come to life also. In either case, you are accountable for those debts 
and wrongs so long as you live to human aims and ambitions; and 
only freed when you become dead toward these and alive in the 
service of God as a new creature. Nothing but death cancels such an 
obligation so far as man is concerned. Your responsibility ends 
when you have made restitution to the extent of your ability at the 
time of your reckoned death. Christ, to whose service you give 
yourself, agrees to cancel all your debts of every kind, to God and 
man, which you are unable to settle when entering his service. And 
in the blessings of the Millennium, he will far more than 
compensate the world for all such obligations of those who entered 
his service. This line of reasoning harmonizes with that of the 
Apostle. Compare Rom. 7:4 with Gal. 2:18-21. 

Nor would we advise you to publish or expose the errors of your 
former self as you would not expose needlessly the faults of any 
dead man. Send what money you have to send privately to those 
whom you alone know that you have wronged. When you came to 
the 

R805 : page 8 

Lord you confessed to him, and have representatively confessed to 
the Church also, as we are exhorted "confess your faults to one 
another." 

This rule is recognized in our civil laws. A debt or a crime, so far as 
man is concerned, cannot reach us beyond death, and whatever he 
possesses may be claimed by his creditors; but his offspring are not 
held responsible. The Apostle's words are in place here as 
indicating your duty. "Let him that stole steal no more; but rather 
let him labor with his hands, that he may have to give." The case of 
Zaccheus was commended by Jesus, not because of the 
dispensation, but because true repentance must always be 
accompanied by restitution for the wrong to the extent of one's 
ability. Had Zaccheus not made restitution it would have been proof 
that his repentance was not sincere, for he had wherewith to repair 



the wrongs done. In your case you must do the same; i.e., make 
restitution to the extent of your ability; then you are free from all 
the remainder if you are never able to do more, BECAUSE OF 
service to Christ as his steward and servants, possessing only time, 
money and talent, reckoned his and being used in his service. May 
the Master bless you, and own and abundantly bless your endeavors 
to serve him according to your covenant. May you be not only dead 
to self and the world reckonedly, but I pray that the spirit of truth 
may more and more vivify or quicken your mortal body in God's 
service (Rom. 8:11), and thus may you be prepared for the fullness 
of the divine nature when the present mortal body shall give place 
to a spiritual and immortal one, in which you can serve the Lord 
perfectly. 



R805 : page 8 



QUESTION COLUMN. 



Ques. Since Jesus taught in the Jewish synagogues, should not 
we remain in and use what opportunities we can find for advancing 
truth in and with the various sects of today. Paul was a Pharisee, 
should not we be joined to the sects also? 

Ans.-The Jewish Church was composed in God's sight of Israelites 
indeed, but the Nominal Jewish church included the whole nation 
and embraced various factions or sects. The SECTS were not the 
Jewish Church, nor did Jesus or the apostles ever belong to those 
factions. Paul was indeed a member of the sect of the Pharisees, but 
from the moment of his conversion to Christ, he never affiliated 
with them, and only once owned the name when his life was 
apparently in danger, and his faith must have trembled. Then he did 
not lie, since the membership in the Pharisee sect was not so "tight" 
an affair as is membership in modern sects. He needed not to 
formally disconnect himself, and might without untruth refer either 
to his birth, or as in this case, he did refer to one feature of the 
doctrine of the Pharisees which was noted, and which agreed with 
the truth of the Gospel, viz., the doctrine of "the resurrection," and 
as touching this question, Paul held the views of Pharisees, though 
in a wider and more positive degree than they. 

The Lord's mission was twofold, viz., to Israel and to the World; to 
Israel first was he presented to give the true Israelites the privilege 
of becoming "Sons" (spiritual), and to as many as received him, to 
them gave he liberty to become the sons of God as many as 
believed on His name, which the Pharisee and Sadducee sects 
REJECTED. 

As a matter of fact, the Nominal Jewish church was flourishing and 
wealthy in Jesus' day, and the members many, while the TRUE 
Jewish Church, as God regarded it, was small few, poor and 
despised among them. Thus, "wheat and chaff" were together until 



their age was fully ripe and Jesus came to reap it. John, his 
forerunner, preached this "harvest message," saying, Repent! 
Reform! to the false and chaff-like. He added, Now, also, the axe is 
laid to the root of the tree, and every tree not bearing good fruit 
must be cut down and cast into the fire (of trouble and dissolution). 
He added, "There cometh one after me" (a Reaper and Garnerer) 
"whose fan is in his hand. He will thoroughly purge his floor. He 
will gather the wheat into his garner and burn up the chaff," etc. 

John's prophecy was fulfilled. Jesus and the disciples did a reaping 
and harvesting winnowing and separating work never done in that 
nominal system before, because only then were the fields white and 
the reapers sent forth to do their work. 

The truths which Jesus uttered were the sickle and fan, and did 
effectually separate a people prepared of the Lord -a remnant, the 
true Church as God regarded it though but a little flock. 

For a little while Jesus was able to enter the synagogues as a real 
Jew, but of none of the sects, but the synagogues being in the hands 
of sectarians, this soon ceased, and he not only could no longer 
teach the people in the synagogues controlled by sectarians, but he 
dared not walk (travel) in Jewry except at certain times when "the 
people" outnumbered and somewhat overawed the rulers and 
sectarians. Neither were Jesus' disciples allowed synagogue 
privileges. (See John 9:34. Compare v. 22.) 

When the blind man was CAST OUT for confessing Jesus, then it 
was that Jesus "found him" and graciously revealed himself more 
and more unto him, while the blind sectarians who retained control 
of the synagogues were the more blinded by their own prejudices. 
See verse 39. 

This result was but what Jesus had predicted early in his ministry. 
See Luke 6:22. The favor during which the trial or harvesting was 
to last was "one week" of years as predicted by the prophet Daniel 
and as fulfilled. Seven years from the beginning of Jesus' ministry 
in the midst of which he was cut off and the work "cut short." It 
was three and a half years so far as the Nominal Jewish Church was 
concerned, for the remaining three and a half were used merely for 
the benefit of Israelites indeed who were appealed to SAVE 
THEMSELVES FROM [out] that perverse generation. Acts 2:40. 

Yes, it was just five days before his crucifixion that Jesus formally 
rejected the Jewish Church Nominal. See Matt. 23:32-39, especially 
36-39. In sending forth the Apostles after his resurrection, the Law 
and the Jewish Church was ignored. "Go ye into all the world and 
preach this gospel to every creature." But he bade them begin at 
Jerusalem because three and a half years of Israel's favor time was 
yet unexpired. 

Now for the facts in application of this to your question: 

Jesus and his disciples were not at all OF THE SECTS, but they 
WERE THE TRUE CHURCH, JEWISH, and obeyed the Law until 



Jesus fulfilled its requirements and released his followers from its 
conditions. 

The Pharisees were born sons of Abraham, but Jesus and the Father 
recognized them as controlled by the devil in their sectarian 
blindness and prejudice and hypocritical maneuvering, praying, etc. 
He denounced them, and warned all their sectarian followers that 
they were being blinded and led astray by blind leaders of the blind. 
And Jesus and the Apostles did not fellowship these wolves. No 
sane man will claim that Jesus held communion and fellowship 
with such whited walls and sepulchres full of all manner of 
uncleanness. Nor were they really members of the Jewish Church 
though they controlled the synagogues. Jesus, the Apostles and 
followers and the man blind from birth, were members of the 
REAL Jewish Church "separated" from the company of the 
sectarians in the "harvest" by their advocacy of the TRUTHS 
THEN DUE. They were not separated from the real TRUE Jewish 
Church, but merely from the Nominal sectarian systems. They 
continued to be the real Church, and because obedient to truth to 
the extent of being "cast out" they were finally ELEVATED a step 
higher and became the gospel or Christian Church. 

Now let us draw the comparison between the harvest of that age 
and of this. 

During this age wheat and tares grow together UNTIL the 
"harvest" -the end or closing period of this age. And here, NOW, in 
this harvest greater and more important changes are to take place, 
inasmuch as this is the higher or antitypical age of which the Jewish 
was but the foreshadowing. 

Here, as at the former harvest, separation is the "harvest" WORK in 
order. But the Lord does not call on us to come out of THE 
CHURCH. Oh, no; ALL consecrated and obedient saints ARE THE 
CHURCH and we must not come out of it. It is "HIS BODY" and 
we must and do retain our membership in it. From what then do we 
separate? We separate from the Nominal sectarian systems which 
now rule the synagogues and stifle (even more than did their 
prototypes, the Pharisees and Scribes), and hinder free expression 
or examination of truth-all not in accordance with the "doctors of 
the Law." 

From these all will be driven if obedient to the truth. The truth 
makes evident their untruth so that which we are out of, separate 
from, is not from the Head; hence, not from the true body, but from 
false systems and sectarian bodies who, while acknowledging Jesus 
and his doctrines, really put (as did the sects at the first advent), the 
traditions (creeds, etc.) of men in place of God's word, and thus 
make void the word of God. 

In harmony with these thoughts is the command of Revelation, 
"Come out of HER my people," not out of the real but out of the 
Nominal Church, the mystery of error and iniquity, Babylon the 
great, the mother, of harlots and the daughters as well. 



R806 : page 1 



VOL. VII. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., DECEMBER, 1885. 

NO. 4. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 40 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS: -Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 
TAKE NOTICE. 



This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



R806 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

Some of our dear readers in England and Scotland noting the 
statements of the "View" in our October issue, have written us 
stating that the work and interest there is probably much beyond 
our appreciation or the number of names on our list; because there 
it is quite customary among the middle classes for several persons 
to take papers in partnership and read by turn. One Brother who 
takes seven copies reports quite an interest among the numerous 
readers who have become interested, one after another as the light 
spreads. Quite a number in this country, too, hasten to report good 
results from efforts and sacrifices made, in the spread of truth and 
the awakening of some who were asleep in Zion. 

The "new plan" for harvest work at the eleventh hour mentioned in 
our September TOWER is working successfully though some are 
discouraged because so few have "an ear to hear" what the spirit 
saith to the church in this, the Laodicean period. (Rev. 3:14-22.) 
These should not forget that nothing different should be expected; 
that according to God's word only a few, "a little flock" can see the 
truth amid the surrounding darkness with which the God of this 
world has enveloped the hearts and minds of men. The time when 
truth will be popular and when all can see and enjoy the light, is the 
coming age when the prejudiced blinded eyes are opened, and the 
Sun of Righteousness shining forth shall dispel the darkness, error 
and misrepresentation. Now your labor and sacrifice are made 
possible and the trial of your faith and fidelity is effected through 
and by these unfavorable conditions. We must overcome if we 
would as overcomers sit on the throne of Millennial glory with 
Jesus the great overcomer, our Head and Pattern, as well as our 
Redeemer. 

In our labor for any object we should labor wisely to procure the 
best results, and in this service of the truth wisdom is specially 
necessary, and in proportion as we see and realize its grandeur and 
importance, we shall seek to present it with the greater wisdom, if 
haply we might win some. Jesus' words should ever be remembered 
and practiced, "Be ye wise as serpents and harmless as doves." In 
the words of Paul we should "study to show" ourselves "approved 



unto God," workmen needing not to be ashamed, rightly dividing 
the word of truth, and wisely presenting it in such manner as to 
avoid choking the babes in Christ (1 Cor. 3:2; Heb. 5:4), and at the 
same time to give to them when and as they are able to receive it 
"meat in due season." Matt. 24:45. 

If any consecrated one lack wisdom, let him ask of God, seeking it 
by prayer and study, and he shall grow in grace as he grows in 
knowledge and in love. We multiply our efficiency as we daily 
study to show ourselves approved unto God, and practice what we 
learn. Some incline to think that all of the truly consecrated ones in 
the various sects have been reached by these harvest truths; but this 
is not the case. We have fresh evidence of this daily as one and 
another receives the light with rejoicing and enters the service of 
truth heartily. 

No, beloved; the truth will continue to reach other consecrated ones 
and to prepare them for the glory to follow. 

Let none put his light under a bushel, or wrap his one talent in a 
napkin. To do so is to prove an unfaithful steward and to be rejected 
as unworthy to be the bride, the Lamb's wife. 

So surely as some fail under trial of being "OVERCOMERS," some 
other one must be awakened and tested to take the place of the 
unfaithful one who puts his light under a bushel for fear of the 
reproach, the cost, and drifts into indifference and outer darkness. 
Hence the pointedness of our Lord's words "Take heed, let no 
man take thy crown." Take heed lest being on the race-course with 
the goal and crown in view, you should allow ease or any worldly 
interest to hinder your full and hearty sacrifice, and thus fail under 
trial to be an overcomer. We should grow in faithfulness as we 
grow in knowledge. 

The joyful mission given us is to spread the glad tidings. By our 
faithfulness we show our appreciation, and are given evidence in 
our own trial whether or not we love the Lord and the Truth more 
than all else. Thus God sifts and searches his children to prove the 
overcomers, to select those who shall be accounted worthy of joint- 
heirship with Jesus the great overcomer. Grace sufficient to keep us 
from falling and to present us blameless in his presence, even in 
this "Evil day" is provided, but in such manner as to fully test the 
thoroughness of our consecration. 

As an illustration of the fact that others are still to be reached, we 
will mention the case of Bro. Otto von Zech of this city. For a 
number of years past, Bro. Z. had labored as a minister of the 
German Evangelical Lutheran church, and verily thought that he 
did God service, and his conversion from error to truth and from the 
service of error to the ministry of truth, have been almost as sudden, 
though not so miraculous as Bro. Paul's. 

The November TOWER was God's instrumentality for reaching the 
eyes of his understanding and letting in a little of the eye-salve of 



truth, which soon brought distinctness of vision, because he applied 
it earnestly in the love of the truth. 

About one year ago we concluded to send a copy of the TOWER 
regularly to ministers of all denominations in Allegheny, and Bro. 
Z. got a copy regularly with the others. Having much reading 
matter, however, and being very busy with the duties of his office, 
he let the TOWER go into the waste basket unnoticed until the last 
number, to which his attention was called providentially, he 
believes. Thoughts which it suggested were the entering wedge and 
the result illustrates the words of Scripture, "The entrance of thy 
truth giveth light." 

Bro. Z. was rejoiced to find that our office was in his own city and 
hastened for further reading matter, which being received into a 
good and honest heart, quickly germinated and brought forth the 
fruit of sacrifice. Bro. Z. explained that for several years he felt an 
interest in the Scriptural teachings relative to the Millennial reign of 
Christ, but was hindered by the fact that he could see no way of 
harmonizing the general view concerning the Millennial reign, with 
other facts of reason and Scripture. He saw that to suppose that 
Jesus would come again in the flesh a man, and sit upon an earthly 
throne, etc., would be at utter variance with the general spirit and 
tenor of God's Word, and this together with the barriers thrown 
about him by the strait-jacket rules and doctrines of Lutheranism, 
had been sufficient to put a stop to progress in that direction. 

When he came in contact with the truth set forth in the WATCH 
TOWER publications it furnished the very connecting links which 
he had so long sought in vain, and one coil after another of the 
formerly tangled and knotty cable of truth became straight and 
strong and useful. 

The key which seemed to set all things straight came in his seeing 
the distinctions between the Church and the World, and God's 
provisions for both, and the two natures which these two classes 
will have even when each is perfected. He then could see the 
earthly Jerusalem with its earthly splendor, composed of the first- 
fruits of humanity, and the spiritual Jerusalem, much higher, the 
spiritual government with its glory that excelleth earthly and visible 
splendors composed of the Christian Church of overcomers, the 
first fruits of those who shall attain to spiritual being. 

What will he do? you ask. Will he leave all his old-time fishing 
tackle and become a follower of the Lord alone and be made by 
him a fisher of men? No, he will never leave the Lutheran Church, 
for he has already done so. Like Paul, immediately he conferred not 
with flesh and blood, but acted promptly on his convictions, 
recognizing in Christ the only Head and Ruler of the true Church 
which is his body, as against the false heads and laws which men 
ignorantly and deludedly place themselves under Luther, Wesley, 
Synods, Presbyteries, etc. 



He saw that he could no longer sprinkle unbelieving babes, and call 
that the baptism into Christ referred to in Rom. 6:3,4. He could no 
longer teach nor in any way sanction the teaching of errors which 
for long years had bound his own heart and hindered his growth in 
the grace and knowledge and love of God, and on the contrary he 
felt, if he would prove himself worthy of the light, he must let no 
moments go to waste, but use every talent to offset his former 
influence and teaching, and to bring to others the blessed truths to 
which his own eyes have recently been opened. 

In considering what he should do, he concluded that he could not, 
like Luther, step out and boldly announce the truth to his 
congregation or nail his articles of faith to the church door to be 
read; because the Lutheran daughter had learned a lesson from the 
Papal mother's 

R806 : page 2 

experiences at that time, and tied its ministers more closely and 
carefully, so that whereas Luther's oath was to teach the 
SCRIPTURE, Bro. Z's oath as a minister, like that of others serving 
sects instead of serving God only, bound him not to teach the 
Scriptures, but to teach 

R807 : page 2 

only such doctrines as Lutheranism has endorsed. Bro. Z's only 
course, therefore, was to resign his office to the HEAD of the 
Synod to which he belonged. This he did, and took a commission to 
preach the good tidings from a far higher authority than 
Presbyteries, Councils, Conferences, or Synods and their heads; 
even from him whom God gave to be head over the church which is 
his body. He gave to all his consecrated followers authority to 
preach the good news of a new covenant, another chance to all 
mankind to gain everlasting life. Their first chance having been lost 
by their father Adam, the second is secured by the death of Christ. 
This new covenant, sealed by his blood, all the followers of the 
Lord Jesus are commissioned to preach, "Go ye into all the world 
and preach the Gospel to every creature." Mark 16:15. 

Bro. Z. prepared a brief statement of his course in leaving the 
Synod and his present views, which has been printed and sent to his 
ministerial associates in the Lutheran Church and given to his 
congregation. It is in German, and as we have printed twenty 
thousand copies to be used as a tract among our German- speaking 
friends, we invite those who can use them judiciously to write to us 
for them at once, stating how many they can use to advantage- 
wisely. This may be the Lord's movement in preparing for an issue 
of the TOWER translated into German. Where he leads we will 
endeavor to follow, as he opens the way. 

Our brother's dear wife willingly shares the sacrifices which this 
step involves, and together they are anxious to make their calling 
and election sure. In thus promptly following the good Shepherd 



whose voice they both recognize, they resign all visible means of 
support for themselves and five young children, relying simply and 
only on the Lord's promise and their own honest hearts and willing 
hands to supply their necessities in whatever way he may indicate, 
assured that his promises never fail. 

May the Lord give grace and strength to these and all the anointed 
ones, that they may be enabled to run with patience to the end of 
the brief course of sacrifice, and afterward crown them with eternal 
glory. 



R807 : page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Torkard, England. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The Lord has graciously 
provided me with a "companion." It happened in this wise. I was 
staying for a week at a "convalescent home. " There were sixty 
inmates; but my way was not opened to do work until the day 
before I came away I put a copy of "Food" into an old gentleman's 
hand, asking him to read it and if he liked it to send to me his 
opinion upon it. A week or two after I was made aware that the 
seed had been dropped in splendid ground. The old gentleman 
cannot tell his thanks; says it is what he has been looking for for 
many years. He has seen much of the "Behind the Scenes" life of 
the churches Methodist, especially; he was sick at heart and almost 
an infidel. The only hope he could hold out to himself was that 
there must be a God: but he couldn't see that God was a loving 
Father. Now if you could see the joy and gratitude that lights up his 
countenance you would be repaid for all the labor you have been 
privileged to perform, and yet I doubt not he is one of a goodly 
number. His life he says is lit up with a new light. He can feel the 
Rock underneath his feet at last-he has been trying to find this for 
many years. Now he is fully satisfied that the Lord is good, that 
"God is love." He sorely wants to get hold of Young's 
Concordance, and so do I. Can't you send them over? If they cost a 
dollar postage it will be much cheaper than we can get them here. If 
you can, please do so. Enclosed you will find P.O. If they cannot be 
sent you must put the money to anything you think well. Only 
please send word what can be done, if you possibly can. 

Now we want very badly to know what "plan" you have in hand for 

those who have time on their hands. Brother has all his 

and wants very much to get to some definite work although he has 
not by any means been idle since reading "Food" and "Tabernacle." 
I have loaned him my papers for back years. He will write to you 
himself directly when we hear from you. 

I am so thankful for a companion to correspond on points dealt with 
in TOWER, &c. It is a grand means of establishing one, almost all 



has had to be done by letter so far, but D.V. we hope to have a 
week together soon. I bless God and pray for you and the brethren 
daily. Also for the dear ones who are still in Babylon, for there 
seem to me many whom the Lord loves and favors, still in sectarian 
bonds. I am thankful to say I've not had it all smooth since 
resigning all membership and office in the old church, but I trust 
the Lord will keep me humble. My faith in God's present power to 
heal has been greatly enlightened and strengthened by reading the 
articles in last TOWER. Cures are being wrought in England. I am 
fully convinced that we are in the "day of the Lord." Oh! may he 
keep us, and may we having put on the whole armor of God be able 
to use it and having done all to stand. The Lord bless you and use 
you ever more and more for his glory. With heartiest love, I am 
dear Brother, yours affectionately in Christ. 



page 2 



Howel Co., Mo. 

BRO. RUSSELL:-I enclose 50 cents for the WATCH TOWER for 
one year. I have already received four numbers. I see in Vol. 7, No. 
1, your suggestion to the consecrated. My dear Brother, I have not 
been in possession of this new light long enough to know hardly 
what I am. I am like a man coming out of black darkness into a 
brilliant light (suddenly). I can't discern clearly as yet. I was raised 
in the M.E. Church, at twenty- five went off into infidelity, at thirty 
I got a book teaching annihilation to the wicked. In 1879, 1 became 
a member of the Missionary Baptist church; am one yet, but have 
been dissatisfied on account of the scarcity of spiritual food. I have 
at times wondered if any would be saved; and at times have thought 
we were all wheat; but never thought of the millennium as a day of 
joy only to those yet alive in the flesh at our Saviour's coming. Of 
course have wished that I could live until that time, but then I 
supposed we would all see him with the eye of flesh. I mean those 
alive. I can say and believe differently now. Standing on the 
TOWER, the whole Bible is in harmony. God is just and merciful 
and greatly to be loved, and our Saviour is a success not a Saviour 
to just a few, but to all, by the resurrection of the dead. Redeemed 
from the curse upon Adam for disobedience, each and every man is 
resurrected and put on trial for himself, and not for another. I feel 
that I can thank God with my entire soul or being for this teaching. 
If the world could only realize this, the knowledge of such 
goodness and mercy on God's part towards men would cause all 
men to love and serve him. My prayer for two years past has been 
for more light, and for humble and willing submission to God's 
will. I have tried to be as potter's clay in his hands, to be moulded 
by his pleasure, and I thank him now that my prayers have (I 
believe) been answered. I am very much interested in the 
Tabernacle Teachings, but have not a clear understanding of half of 



it yet, though I hope to before I stop. I do not see any stopping 
place; in fact it appears to be Plus Ultra all the time. But my letter is 
now very much longer than I would have written to any other 
Editor unless I was writing for publication, which I am not now. I 
feel great love and esteem for you and yours, and may our Master 
uphold and sustain you ever, is my earnest prayer. . 



R807 : page 2 



Lancaster, N.H., Oct. 31, 1885. 

DEAR SIR: I remember not long ago that one of your 
correspondents mentioned the disappearance of the books, "Food" 
and "Tabernacle," saying that they were apparently mislaid, but 
indicating that they might be mislaid on purpose. My experience is 
very similar. I have had twelve "Food for Thinking Christians," and 
I have but one left, and I am entirely unable to get any of the others, 
although I have asked for them repeatedly. Perhaps you will be 
interested in the history of one of them. I sent a copy of the "Food" 
to a Methodist minister, formerly stationed here. He read the book 
because I asked it as a favor, but all the result that I ever knew was 
the remark that "I must be losing my mind." However, the young 
girl who was the bearer, took it away with her to one of the large 
mountain hotels where she was to act as waitress. There were also a 
great many other young men and girls there, and strange to say, 
many of them were interested. It attracted their attention, one in 
particular, a Romanist; another a young man who, if I remember 
rightly, was to enter the ministry. He was so entirely carried away 
with the book that he knew parts of it by heart; but at the close of 
the season he begged to have it left with him, and he has it now. So 
if the minister did not appreciate it these did. It is discouraging to 
have some prominent orthodox Christian say to one, "I do not see 
what you find in that book so very interesting;" and that is what 
they say sometimes, and of others, they think the whole thing is a 
delusion and a snare. I know one has to think over it, but to many it 
seems of such unfathomable depths that they give it up after trying 
for a little to comprehend. If you will send me one more book, 
"Food," I will make one more attempt to interest some one. I know 
the books have been read, more or less, in every case except one a 
Unitarian. I do not know in this case. I have long thought I would 
write you and give account of all the printed matter you have sent 
me from time to time, but did not really think it worth while until I 
read from last paper where you speak of being encouraged by "the 
thousand postal cards;" so perhaps you may find something in this 
letter to encourage you somewhat. I have reached a good many 
after all, as I think it over. 

Yours respectfully, 



page 2 



Topeka, Kansas, Nov. 2, 1885. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL: Some of my letters and remarks may 
sound as though I was discouraged, but I assure you that I am not 
discouraged. I expect to work on, and not to sit down at ease nor 
think the victory won till I have obtained my crown. I believe that if 
my work and efforts are to make known God's truth to his honor, 
glory and praise, I shall be blessed at least, if not others, if I am 
faithful. I greatly rejoice in the hope that soon with Jesus and those 
who shall be heirs with him to the kingdom, I shall not only see 
many convinced of the truth in its purity, but that we will behold all 
systems of oppression and error crumble and fall through its mighty 
power. For this joy set before us we endure the cross and despise 
the shame. Yours in this blessed hope, 



Cairo, Mich., Nov. 3, 1885. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL: I have not been able to do much in the 
Master's service. I just got a number of samples of Z.W.T. when 
diphtheria became epidemic in this place, and two of my children 
were taken sick, but they have both recovered. One family here lost 
three children, another two, and some one by the scourge. We were 
quarantined for a while. Since I am allowed out I have gathered up 
some of the samples. I traveled all one day in the country, where I 
had twenty samples out, and only took one subscription; and on my 
way home at night, weary with my day's walk, and trying to take a 
kind of an inventory of the visible fruit of the day's labor, the 
adversary tried to discourage me. Well I soliloquised like this: If I 
were working for dollars and cents I should have a poor showing 
for the day's work, but thank God I was not looking at the things 
that are seen, neither was I seeking to lay up treasures in a bag with 
holes in it. The Lord blest me with these words-Be not weary in 
well-doing, for in due season we shall reap-upon this condition- 
"that we faint not." Oh, I am so glad that we have such a good 
Paymaster and a Captain who is able to lead us on to certain 
victory. I am glad that God reveals himself to me as an Almighty 
God, and one whose mercies are over all his works, and that the 
groaning and travailing time of creation is soon to be followed by a 
time of rejoicing. I find that the spiritual pulse beats very feebly 
among the people. I find people of the world and professors in 
general the same interested more in everything else than they are 
in the subject of religion. The great mass will not read anything on 
the subject, but there is now and then one who has a spiritual 
appetite, and is strengthened by the truth. I am hoping soon to get 
out and hold some meetings, and by the grace of God to stir up the 
minds of the people, so that they will be inclined to search and see 
whether these things are so. On the whole I am greatly encouraged 
in regard to the work here. Praying that God may strengthen us 



more and more to carry on the war against the powers of darkness, I 
remain your brother in Christ, 



R808 : page 3 



R808 : page 3 



GROWING IN GRACE. 



Unto him that hath thou givest 
Ever "more abundantly." 
Lord, I live because thou livest, 
Therefore give more life to me; 
Therefore speed me in the race: 
Therefore let me grow in grace. 

Deepen all thy work, O Master, 
Strengthen every downward root, 
Only do thou ripen faster 
More and more thy pleasant fruit. 
Purge me, prune me, self abase, 
Only let me grow in grace. 

Jesus, grace for grace outpouring, 
Show me ever greater things: 
Raise me higher, sunward soaring, 
Mounting as on eagle's wings. 
By the brightness of thy face, 
Jesus let me grow in grace. 

Let me grow by sun or shower, 
Every moment water me; 
Make me really hour by hour 
More and more conformed to thee. 
That thy loving eye may trace, 
Day by day, my growth in grace. 

Let me, then be always growing, 
Never, never standing still; 
Listening, learning, better knowing 
Thee and thy most blessed will, 
That I may reach thy holy place, 
Daily let me grow in grace. 



F. R. Havergal. 



DAVID'S SON AND LORD. 

"Jesus asked them, saying, What think ye of Christ, whose son is 
he? They say unto him, The son of David? He saith unto them, 



How then doth David in spirit [i.e., by inspiration] call him Lord, 
saying, The Lord [Jehovah] said unto my Lord [Master or Ruler] Sit 
thou on my right hand till I make thine enemies thy footstool,-If 
David then call him Lord, how is he his son?" Matt. 22:42-45. 

Some of our day, like the Pharisees of old, too indolent and too 
indifferent to search, are not able to answer this question, and are 
provoked by having such questions asked and they are not slow to 
brand such as "controversial and unprofitable questions." But let it 
be remembered that the Lord himself asked this question, and 
implied that in such an appreciation of the subject as would enable 
us to answer it lay a key to a clearer appreciation of himself and his 
mission. Therefore let us examine this important and profitable 
question and obtain the key and the knowledge therefrom. 

We find two general views relative to Jesus: one seems to reject his 
Lordship 

R809 : page 3 

entirely and considers him only as David's son and Joseph's son. 
Another class goes to an opposite extreme, and while 
acknowledging the Messiah as David's Lord, or Ruler, they 
virtually deny that he is David's son. They claim that the Messiah 
was a mixture of the divine and human natures, in fact that he was a 
mixture of three distinct persons in one person, and that because of 
this mixture of natures, he could be and was, at one and the same 
time both David's son and David's Lord. And their wonderful 
wisdom and faith (?) goes still further and claims that by virtue of 
this mixture he was both his own son and his own Father and Lord. 
A right exercise of reason fails to discern in this absurdity any 
answer to Jesus' question, How could David's Son be his Lord? 
Such an absurdity is nowhere taught in the Scriptures and nowhere 
illustrated in nature. Two natures cannot mix except to produce an 
imperfect thing. Such a ludicrous absurdity even the Pharisees 
would have been ashamed to advance, and they took the more 
sensible course of holding their peace and asking no more 
questions. 

But so strong is the faith (?) of the nominal Church on this point, 
that like the Pharisees of old, they would not dare to ask Jesus and 
the Apostles to explain how this could be, fearing that they might 
make manifest the absurdity of their traditions by a clear 
presentation of the truth. This theory virtually denies that Christ 
should be or was the Son of David, and implies that he only 
pretended to be such. They claim that he was not really a man 
during his earthly career of 33 years, but all that time was really a 
spiritual being, who merely went about in human form, appearing 
to be and pretending to be a man, but not actually such. Dare any 
thus charge him in whose mouth was found no guile? Both of these 
classes of theorists should carefully note that the Scriptures assert 
both things of Jesus. He must be both David's Son and David's 
Lord. He must be both the stem or branch out of David's roots, and 



in some way David must be seen to be a branch or shoot out of 
Christ as a root. This is pointedly expressed by Jesus himself in his 
last message to us we might say that his last words were "I am the 
root and the offspring of David." Rev. 22:16. 

In our September and October issues we pointed out how the 
"Undefiled One" was the offspring of David through his mother 
Mary, yet because the life germ came not from Joseph, and was not 
from the condemned Adamic stock, but was a life transferred from 
above, therefore he was when made flesh, separate from sinners and 
uncondemned the undefiled one in whom was no sin, but yet a 
man, of human nature, but not a sharer of our imperfection, except 
as during his ministry, he voluntarily took our sicknesses (Matt. 
8:17; Isa. 53:4). We shall not, therefore, here stop to show how he 
was David's Son, stem, or branch, considering that we have done 
this to your reasonable satisfaction, but shall proceed to show how 
he is David's Lord and Root; first, however, we pause to remark 
upon the unreasonableness of the claim, that while on earth, Jesus 
was only pretending to be a man, pretending to be tried and tempted 
like as we are, pretending to be weary, pretending to be hungry, 
pretending to be very sorrowful, pretending to pray, pretending to 
suffer, and to die. To refute this theory which implies false 
pretense, we simply refer to the Apostle's words that he who was 
rich became poor for our sakes; not merely pretended to be poor, 
but actually became poor, or of a lower nature. He humbled himself 
for the work, says the Apostle, taking our nature. (Eph. 2:7,8.) The 
necessity for his coming to earth at all, proves that he became a 
man, for as millions of bulls and goats slain for sin, as sin offerings, 
could not take away sin, so the sacrifice of millions of angels or of 
Jehovah himself, could never, according to divine arrangement, 
take away sin for the same reason: viz., they would no more be a 
corresponding price for condemned man, than would bulls and 
goats, because they are of different nature. As shown in our 
October issue, the Mediator-the man Christ Jesus gave himself a 
ransom [Greek antilutron-a corresponding price] which proves that 
he was a man, for nothing else would be a corresponding price; and 
it proves also that he was a perfect man, for nothing else would be a 
corresponding price for the sin and penalty of the first perfect man- 
Adam. (Rom. 5:17-19.) 

Coming to the consideration of the Lordship of Christ, it is in place 
to remind some of our readers, that our English word lord is used to 
translate a number of words having somewhat different meanings in 
the Old Testament Scriptures, the principal one of which is 
Jehovah, and always refers to the Lord of all other lords; other 
words used, signify master or ruler, or governor, etc. But in the 
New Testament, the Greek, like our English Bibles, makes no 
distinction, and whether Jehovah or an inferior master is meant, 
must be judged from the context; or by the Hebrew, where the 
expression is a quotation from the Old Testament. In the case under 
consideration, we have a quotation to deal with; Jesus quoted from 
Psa. 110:1, "The Lord [Jehovah] said unto my Lord [adon-master] 



sit thou, etc." It is well that we should remember also that angels in 
olden times, sent to bear messages to mankind, were addressed by 
men as Lord i.e., superior or master. In this sense Jesus before he 
became a man was man's superior; and when a man he was perfect, 
and hence still far superior to those about him; and in addition to 
this as the agent or messenger of Jehovah, he was a Lord, a master, 
a teacher, among men. Thus he said to his disciples, "Ye call me 
Lord and master and ye do well [or properly] for so I am." (John 
13:13.) But he was not then Lord in the sense which David's 
prophecy implied, and to which our Lord's question referred except 
in a reckoned sense, until he had finished his trial and sacrifice, and 
was raised from the dead. 

When we come to examine the Lordship of Jesus referred to by him 
in the text under consideration, we find that it has reference to a 
Lordship much beyond any of these suggestions. The sense in 
which it is used is made clear by Rev. 22:16, "I am the root of 
David," that is the father or progenitor of David. 

Adam was the original root from which humanity sprang as so 
many shoots or sprouts. The root was originally sound and perfect, 
"very good" but was blighted by sin. As a result, all the sprouts are 
weak and sickly, dead or dying. Jesus was, so to speak, a new graft 
into the human stock, whose vitality as a grafted branch, became a 
new root by burial or planting. [Those familiar with the culture of 
the grape-vine will appreciate this most and can see clearly how the 
new grafted stem could become the new root to a new and perfect 
vine of the same kind and quality of the buried branch.] 

Thus seen Jesus became the new shoot, stem, or BRANCH out of 
David when born of a virgin; but it was in his death, burial and 
resurrection that he became the ROOT by whose vitality David and 
all the withered, dying Adamic sprouts will be RESTORED- 
brought to all the perfection of existence which the original root, 
Adam, failed to bring to them through his own blight. Hence, Jesus 
is called the Life giver, the Restorer; and the time in which this, his 
great work, shall be accomplished, is called "The times of 
restitution." 

Thus seen, Christ becomes the Father of the human race during the 
Millennial age, for a life-giver is a father. Then he shall be called 
the "Everlasting Father" by the restored human race. Thus, he who 
as a man, was a son or offspring of David, becomes the root, the 
Father, the Lord of David, and as truly of others, as of David. Here 
applies the prophetic statement concerning the appointment of these 
ancient worthies- Abraham, Isaac, David, to honored service during 
the reign of Jesus and his joint-heir, his bride, his body, viz., 
"Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children whom thou mayest 
make princes in all the earth." (Psa. 45:16.) These who were once 
the "fathers" shall be Christ's children; instead of his roots, they 
shall be his branches. He who once, as the man Jesus, was the Son 
of David, shall as the restorer and life-giver of David be his Father 
and Lord. 



But let us notice when these changes occurred. He was not the Son 
of David before he left the higher nature and became a man-a 
branch out of the roots of Jesse. (Isa. 11:1.) Nor is he yet David's 
Lord, in the sense here considered, that is, as David's father, except 
as recognized prophetically, for David has not yet been made alive 
from the dead. The race, as a whole, is still clinging as withered or 
withering branches to the original root Adam: the New Root, 
though full of vitality, has not yet sprouted forth (except as in the 
Christian Church fresh rootlets have been put forth). The sprouting 
awaits the spring time of God's appointment and favor, the 
Millennial Age-the resurrection or restitution times. Though he is 
not yet, he shall be called, and truly, "the everlasting Father," or the 
giver of perfect, everlasting life. 

From this it appears that Jesus becomes the "ROOT," Lord, Life- 
giver of the race, by virtue of his death and resurrection, and hence 
that in this sense he was not David's root or Lord before his death. 
This agrees perfectly with the statement of the Apostles on this 
subject. 

Peter argues the whole subject in Acts 2. After assuring us that 
Jesus was a man (verse 22), and that he died and was raised out of 
death by divine power, and highly exalted (verses 23,24,33), 

R810 : page 3 

he refers us to this exaltation, saying, "Know assuredly that God 
hath made that same Jesus whom ye have crucified both Lord and 
Christ" (verse 36). In other words, it was by virtue of his obedience 
to death that he was made LORD. 

Note further Paul's words on this subject: "To this end Christ both 
died and revived, that he might be LORD, both of the dead and the 
living." Rom. 14:9. How forcible! Paul says, Jesus died that he 
might be Lord; Peter, that he was exalted by the right hand of God 
who hath made him Lord. He became David's offspring in 
Bethlehem; he became David's Lord and the root from which David 
must receive life at his resurrection, and by virtue of his death. As 
the Apostle says again, "Jesus Christ our Lord.. .was made of the 
seed of David according to the flesh; and declared to be the Son of 
God with power [might and authority]... by the resurrection from the 
dead." (Rom. 1:4.) The might, authority, or power, was gained by 
his sacrifice; it was recognized of God, and declared to men, by his 
resurrection. He had delegated power and prospective authority 
before, but not until after his sacrifice declared acceptable to God 
by the fact of his resurrection did he say, "All power is given unto 
me in heaven and in earth." (Matt. 28:18.) Having bought all, he 
now has power and authority over all. Wherefore it is written, "He 
is Lord of all." 

To be Lord of the dead, implies the right, authority and power to 
give them life, to restore them to life and its privileges; and 
secondly, it implies that the dead are so completely dead 



annihilated -as to need another Father to regenerate or re-create 
them to give them anew the impulse of life. 

R810:page4 

That Jesus had not such right, authority or power until he had 
given himself a ransom [a corresponding price] for all, scarcely 
requires argument. Jehovah had condemned mankind to death, and 
had therefore permitted the great enemy to have (Heb. 2:14) 
dominion or power over all; and to suppose that Jesus would or 
could present himself in the world as the Lord of those dead, before 
he had redeemed them, would be to suppose that he came to oppose 
the Father's authority, and in defiance of his pronounced penalty, to 
order the release of those prisoners on his own authority. But Jesus 
disclaimed any such attempt when he said, "I came not to do mine 
own will, but the will of him that sent me." It was the Father's will, 
and the Son's course, to give himself a ransom for all, that thus he 
might rightfully become Lord of all by the purchase of all with his 
own precious blood. Having bought all, he declares not only his 
power, but his will (still the Father's will) to be, that all may be 
brought to a knowledge of the truth, that thereby, under his 
righteous administration, they may all by obedience come to 
perfection and life everlasting. 

Some may think that Jesus gave evidence that he was Lord of the 
dead, and as such had power to restore them to life before he died? 
We answer, No; Elijah and Elisha similarly awakened the dead for 
a little time; but neither they nor Jesus claimed to do it by their own 
power. It was the power of Jehovah delegated to, or active through 
them. (John 14:10 and 10:25.) But neither they nor Jesus ever 
released any from death fully to perfect life; nor was it possible to 
do so, seeing that all were yet under condemnation of death until 
the ransom for all had been given. In harmony with this is the 
statement that Jesus in his resurrection was the firstborn from the 
dead (Col. 1 : 1 8)-the first one fully and perfectly released from 
death. 

In perfect harmony also is Paul's statement (Phil. 2:6-11), that God 
hath highly exalted him, and given him a name above every 
name... that every tongue should confess that Jesus is LORD to the 
glory of God the Father because he humbled himself to manhood, 
and then to death, even the disgraceful death on the cross, in 
obedience to the Father's plan for our redemption. 

Now, looking at the words of Jesus, we can see how he was David's 
Son, and yet is to be David's Lord or Father. And noting the 
prophecy referred to by Jesus in this connection, and also referred 
to by the Apostles (Matt. 22:4; Heb. 1:13), viz., "The Lord said 
unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand until I make thine enemies 
thy footstool," we see that this refers the Lordship of Jesus to a time 
after his sufferings and trials were ended. After he had been 
accounted worthy of exaltation, then he was exalted, and before that 
time he could only be called David's Lord prophetically. Jehovah 



would not, could not, justly give him the dominion and subdue it 
under him until it had been released from the curse, bought with a 
price: And that just price he paid, and is therefore now rightfully 
LORD, by Jehovah's appointment. 

All hail the power of Jesus' name! 
Let angels prostrate fall: 
Bring forth a royal diadem, 
And crown him LORD OF ALL. 

Let every kindred, every tribe, 
On this terrestrial ball, 
To Him all majesty ascribe, 
And crown him LORD OF ALL. 

Sinners, whose love can ne'er forget 
The wormwood and the gall, 
Go, spread your trophies at his feet, 
And crown him LORD OF ALL. 

Ye favored seed of Adam's race, 
Redeemed from Adam's fall, 
Hail him who saves you by his grace, 
And crown Him LORD OF ALL." 



R810:page4 

THE BRETHREN OF CHRIST. 

"For both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of 
one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren." Heb. 
2:11. 

This portion of the word is of a highly important character, and of 
great concern to us, for it clearly reveals our relationship to the law 
of the highest. It is vastly important that we understand from the 
word of God what is written concerning the calling, character and 
relation to the world, of the individuals that sustain so close a 
relationship as is implied by the brethren of Christ, so that we can 
compare our character and relation to the world, with what is 
written concerning the same in the word of God, and see whether 
we are able to identify ourselves with the inspired portrait of the 
characters of those who shall finally be reckoned the brethren of 
Christ, the Son of the living God. 

In the first place let us consider the calling of the brethren, for the 
Scriptures certainly teach very emphatically that they are a called 
people. 

Who is it that calls them? for if they are called, some one must call 
them. We will refer to the word and see if we can find who it is that 
calls, and how they are called. "Moreover whom he did 
predestinate, them he also called." Rom. 8:30. "Who hath saved us, 
and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but 



according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in 
Christ before the world began. 2 Tim. 1:9. 

How does God call? Let Paul answer: "Whereunto he called you by 
our gospel, to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ." 2 
Thes. 2:14. Then God calls by the gospel. What is the gospel? It is 
the voice of God by Jesus Christ proclaiming glad tidings of a 
coming kingdom. God who at sundry times and in divers manners 
spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last 
days spoken unto us by his Son, wherefore he saith, "Today if ye 
will hear his voice, harden not your heart." Heb. 3:7. Jesus called 
by the gospel when he was on earth, and then he gave the 
commission to his disciples, and so the calling goes on through the 
long dark night until the fulness of the gentiles are come in. "My 
sheep hear my voice and I know them, and they follow me and I 
give unto them eternal life." John 10:27. The sheep are the same as 
brethren. 

We will now notice what is meant by following Jesus as the Good 
Shepherd who giveth his life for the sheep, for it is said that his 
sheep follow him, and if they follow him they must pass through 
the same road that he passed; and a description of the follower of 
Jesus will also describe the character of the brethren. Well, we 
cannot follow Jesus in repentance, for he knew no sin, but we can 
follow him in immersion, and in reality this is the first step that can 
be taken in following Jesus." 

After he was baptized Jesus was tempted of the devil, and must the 
brethren who follow Jesus, follow him in temptation? Yes, it is 
necessary that we be tempted. He tempted Jesus, and shall he not 
tempt us? My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers 
temptations, knowing this, that the trying of your faith worketh 
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope. So, then, 
temptations are necessary, that our faith may be tried and patience 
wrought 

R811 : page 4 

out in us. Blessed is the man that endureth temptation, for when he 
is tried he shall receive the crown of life. God who calleth us is 
faithful and will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able 
to bear; but will with the temptation make a way to escape that we 
may be able to bear it. 

Thus, if we would follow Jesus the Good Shepherd, we must be 
tempted as he was tempted, and we must also resist temptation, as 
he resisted it. "Resist the devil and he will flee from you." 

If we endure the temptations that befall us, we shall be able to 
identify ourselves with the character of the holy brethren as 
recorded in the word of God. Read Luke 22:28-30. 

The many brethren that compose the body of Christ are like Christ 
in worldly circumstances. "For ye see your calling, brethren, how 



that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many 
noble, are called." 

"Hearken, my beloved brethren, hath not God chosen the poor of 
this world rich in faith, heirs of the kingdom which he hath 
promised to them that love him." 1 Cor. 1:26; Isa. 2:5. Jesus was 
very poor and humble when on the earth. "The foxes have holes and 
the birds of the air have nests, but the son of man hath not where to 
lay his head." "Though he was rich, yet for our sakes he became 
poor, that we through his poverty might become rich." As he is, so 
should we be in this world. 

Brethren, let us now consider our love to each other. "By this shall 
all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one for 
another." "He that loveth his brother abideth in the light." "We 
know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the 
brethren." "And this is the message that ye love one another, even 
the message that we heard from the beginning." 

Thus, if we are in the marvelous light of the glorious gospel of 
Christ, we are loving one another; if not we are in darkness even 
until now. 

Who is my brother in Christ? "He that doeth the will of my Father 
in heaven the same is my sister and brother." 

If what we have said concerning the poor circumstances of the 
called of God, be true, it is very easy to understand these striking 
characters of poverty and affliction which describe the 
circumstances of the majority of the called of God; and these 
characteristics of poverty are synonymous with the tribulations and 
sufferings through which we must enter into the kingdom of God. 
"And if we suffer with him we shall also reign with him." "And if 
children, then heirs; heirs of God and joint-heirs with Christ, if so 
be that we suffer with him." We notice also, that some were able to 
feed the hungry, and clothe the naked, and entertain the stranger, 
and minister to the sick and prisoner, which illustrates the love that 
exists among the real brethren of Christ. "Hereby perceive we the 
love of God because he laid down his life for us; and we ought to 
lay down our lives for the brethren. But whoso hath this world's 
goods, and seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up his bowels 
of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him? 
What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, 
and have not works? Can faith save him? If a brother or sister be 
naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them, 
depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled, notwithstanding ye gave 
them not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it 
profit?" 1 John 3:16-18; James 2:14-17. 

Thus, we have in these two statements of the apostles, a sample of 
faith which worketh by love, a pure, holy love, the first fruit of the 
holy spirit; a love far different from the sectarian love of the present 
day, that loves only its creed adherents. This love which is shed 
abroad in the hearts of believers by the Holy Spirit which is given 



unto them, is found only in one sect, and that sect was everywhere 
spoken against in apostolic times. Acts 28:22. And this sect is 
everywhere spoken against to-day. I candidly ask the question, 
brethren, with all sincerity, can a man be a brother of the Lord Jesus 
today, and not be hated by the world? Has human nature changed, 
or has the word of God ceased to be true since Christ and his 
apostles ended their ministry? "Marvel not my brethren, if the 
world hate you, we know that it hated him (Christ) before it hated 
you." "If ye were of the world, the world would love his own; but 
because ye are not of this world, but I have chosen you out of the 
world, therefore the world hateth you." John 15:19. Are not the 
disciples of Jesus hated by the world today, as they were 1 800 years 
ago? 

But where shall we go to find the world today? The civilized world 
is called the Christian world today. So, then, if this be true, there is 
no world to hate the brethren of Christ. But, may it not be a mistake 
to call the civilized world "Christian?" Then, we have Christian 
nations, and all these nations fully equipped for war, and ready to 
slay each other. Whereas, we read in the Book of God of only one 
Christian nation composed of individuals that must not fight, nor 
"resist evil," and when "smitten on one cheek to turn the other 
also. " Thus, if the word of God be true, it is a great mistake to call 
the nations "Christian." 

Then, again, the so called Christian world is divided into three great 
churches, the Greek, the Catholic and Protestant; and the Protestant 
is divided into a great many more churches. Yet on the authority of 
the Book of truth, none of these churches is "the church of the 
living God, the pillar and the ground of the truth." Let there be no 
schism in the body, the "church." Where, then, shall we find "the 
church," the body of Christ? They are in the world, not among all 
churches, but among all nations; and, furthermore, they are in 
Christ, and also in the doctrine of Christ. 

This may sound strange to some, that one cannot be in Christ 
without being in his doctrine. Well, let us hear how the Word reads: 
"Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, 
hath not God. He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both 
the Father and the Son. If there come any unto you, and bring not 
this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him 
Godspeed." 2 John 10:11. In the face of this statement, who will say 
doctrine is not essential to salvation? The word of God, and the 
doctrine of Christ are identical. "If ye continue in my word, then are 
ye my disciples indeed." "He that abideth in the doctrine 

R811 : page 5 

of Christ, hath both the Father and the Son." 

Now, all can see where the brethren of Jesus stand, and where the 
world. The relation of the brethren of Jesus to the world during the 
period of Satanic government is, that of enmity and isolation; "The 
friendship of the world is enmity with God." "In the world ye shall 



have tribulation." The church and the world are antagonistic to each 
other. There is enmity between the woman's seed and the serpent's 
seed. "He that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born 
after the Spirit, even so it is now." You cannot wed the true church 
with the world; you might as well expect oil to mix and remain with 
water, as for the brethren of Jesus to love and fellowship this 
present evil world. "What communion hath light with darkness, or 
Christ with Belial?" "If any man love the world the love of the 
Father is not in him. " "Wherefore come out from among them and 
be ye separate, and touch not the unclean thing." "Evil 
communications corrupt good manners." The world knoweth us 
not, because it knew him not. And what a striking similitude there 
is here between Jesus and his brethren. He was in the world, and the 
world knew him not. Though we are not known by the world, yet 
"God knoweth them that are his," and Jesus knows his sheep, and 
they follow him. The followers of Jesus are looked upon by the 
world as a worthless set of men, despised and rejected, and made 
the object of ridicule and contempt, just as Jesus was. As Jesus 
came forth from the dead vitalized by the Spirit of God and the 
power of an endless life, and became the first born among many 
brethren, so will the brethren spring into immortal being, bearing 
his glorified image, when he appears to avenge his own elect. Then 
let the world scoff and ridicule, and persecute, and if the will of the 
Lord be so, put to death; they cannot obliterate the future 
immortality. If we would follow Christ, we must suffer. If, when 
we do well, and suffer for it, we take it patiently, this is acceptable 
with God. For even hereunto were ye called; because Christ also 
suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow in his 
steps. 1 Peter 2:21. 

Such is the position of the brethren of Jesus in this world, out of 
which they have been chosen. I tell you the brethren of Jesus are 
not interested and engaged in building fine houses and desiring to 
dwell in elegant and decorated mansions, and arraying themselves 
in costly apparel, and embellishing their persons with jewelry of 
corruptible gold and silver. They are content with such things as 
they have, and by faith are persuaded that they have a better and 
enduring substance that will outrival all the glittering splendors of 
earth, and shall remain eternally unblemished by the rust and decay 
of time. The substance of things hoped for is about to be revealed; 
the dark night of sin and suffering is far, very far spent; the glorious 
morn of heavenly glory is about to break upon the world, and the 
little flock that have kept the testimony of Jesus, and shared with 
him in sufferings and temptations, are going to take the kingdom, 
and will be associated with Christ in the work of restitution that 
shall perfect forever the nations of the 

R812 : page 5 

renovated earth. Then will the holy prophets, apostles and saints, be 
eyewitnesses of the glorious events that they long ago foretold, 
believed, and for the faith in which they once suffered and were put 



to death. Abraham, the recipient of the promise, will behold the 
fulfillment of the promise, that in his seed shall all the nations of 
the earth be blessed. The resurrected church, (the royal seed) will 
attest its fulfillment; the renovated nation of Israel, and through 
them the universal conversion of all nations, will attest the farther 
and universal fulfillment of the God-given promise, "In thy seed 
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed." The glorious 
verification of eternal truth approaches; the sheep have nearly all 
heard the voice of Jesus; the times of the Gentiles are knelling to a 
close. Be ye also ready and watch unto prayer. Ira Forbes. 



R812:page5 

SUNDAY AND THE LAW. 

We observe this day as a law of the land, and with rejoicing and 
thankfulness for so favorable a time for worship and study. But we 
do not keep it for the Jewish Sabbath, nor as the Jew was required 
to keep it under the Law Covenant. Why? Simply because we are 
not under the Law Covenant, and we are not subject to any man's 
judgment, in meat, or in drink, or in respect to a holy day, or of the 
new moon, or of the Sabbath day, "which are a shadow of things to 
come." Col. 2:17. 

The law was but one law (not ten), and to break one of its parts is to 
be guilty of all. It promised life everlasting to all who kept it, but 
none of Adam's sons or daughters ever kept it, and all die. It is a 
perfect law. All its requirements are holy, just and good, and it 
requires the full measure of a perfect man's ability to keep it. God 
knew, but the Jew did not know, that when he-the Jew, agreed to 
that covenant he signed his own death warrant; and it was said unto 
them, "Ye cannot serve the Lord." He will not forgive sin. But they 
accepted the terms, and witnessed against themselves. Josh. 26:19- 
22. 

"The law made nothing perfect," and was disannulled on account of 
its weakness or unprofitableness in this respect (Heb. 7:18,19) 
because of man's weakness and inability. God could not fit a law 
down to their condition. He could give no other than a perfect law. 
He could not look upon sin with any degree of allowance, and his 
law could not therefore give life to the being who failed of 
obedience in one point; he was guilty of all (James 2:10). "For if 
there could have been a law given that could have given life, verily 
righteousness (and hence life) should have been by the law" (Gal. 
3:21). But as we have shown, there could no such law be given, and 
there was "none righteous, no not one" (Psalm 14:1-3; Rom. 3:10)- 
none up to the standard of perfection required by the law; hence not 
approved by it as worthy of life everlasting. 

"Wherefore then serveth the law? It was added because of 
transgressions (for how long?), till the Seed should come to whom 



the promise was made" (Gal. 3:19). By that time it had served its 
purpose. It was a ministration of death written in stones (2 Cor. 3:6- 
17). The Jews were placed under the "letter" of it, and the world has 
witnessed its enforcement upon them. 

The common impression is that the "letter" of the law is much more 
lenient than the spirit of it, but from our last reference (in 
Corinthians) Bro. Paul affirms the contrary. "The letter killeth." 
How glad we are that we are not under the letter of it (as the Jew 
was), for we could no more keep it than could the Jew. "For by the 
deeds of the law shall no flesh be justified in his sight." None but 
our Lord ever could claim life under the law. He was of another life 
germ than the Adamic, though born of a woman. Made under the 
law, he magnified the law and made it honorable by showing that it 
was good and right, and that a perfect being can keep it and delight 
therein. 

The world of mankind will not be placed under the "letter" of the 
law actually as the Jew was typically until in the Millennial Age 
under the new covenant, when God "shall take away their sins." 
Then ability will be given to keep it, as implied by the process of 
writing it "upon their heart," "in their mind," on their nature, as in 
the first perfect man, and not on tables of stone, as in the type. Then 
none need say to his neighbor, "Know ye the Lord?" for his image 
will be in small and great. The vail which hides the liberation from 
this ministration of death under the old, and obscures the glories of 
the new covenant, is yet upon the heart of the Jew and the world. 
"Nevertheless, when it shall turn to the Lord the vail shall be taken 
away." 2 Cor. 3:16. See Jer. 31:29-34. 

H. L. GILLIS. 



R813:page5 



CHRISTIAN UNION. 



Christian union is a hobby with many at the present time. It is the 
pass-word to the very inner temple of self-styled "orthodoxy." Men 
will talk of "a sweet union of loving hearts" when there is not a 
principle of true union with them. We think this is well calculated 
to fulfill prophecy, by securing union of action on certain popular 
points where there is no union in principle. Mr. Hammond, in his 
"union revival meetings," takes pains to let it be understood that he 
can work with "all who believe in Jesus;" with Catholics as well as 
Protestants. Most other revivalists do the same. If they can, why are 
they Protestants? And was not the work of Luther worse than 
useless? Wherever this cry of "union" is raised; the spirit of true 
reform is lacking; there is a sacrifice of truth for an empty name. 

Catholicism never changes its policy. It may change its action for 
the sake of policy, but it is the same now that it was in the days of 
Luther. When Protestants bow down to the name of "union" so as to 



unite with Catholics, or try to, it is because they have lost every true 
element of the Reformation. 

But they cannot unite with Catholics for the reason that Catholics 
will not unite with them. And this shows that the Catholics are 
more consistent than they. Catholics know very well that there is an 
"irrepressible conflict" between the two: and an impassable gulf, 
which must remain as long as Catholics are Catholics and 
Protestants are Protestants. When names are preferred to things; 
when shadows are counted more real than substances, and when 
principles are sunk out of sight for mere feeling and momentary 
triumphs, then there is union, but it is on the same basis of that 
which was effected between Pilate and Herod. 

Jesus came "to bear witness of the truth," and to unite hearts in the 
truth, but to separate between mere professors, and them who love 
and obey the truth. If we have the truth, it is our duty to maintain it. 
This cry of "charity" and of "loss of influence," is a mere delusion, 
raised to frighten timid ones whose hearts are not established in the 
faith. Charity "rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth." We 
have no right to any influence which we cannot use to the glory of 
God and to the advancement of his cause. Let us "hold fast the form 
of sound words," for the truth is not ours to compromise or to trifle 
with. In all ages they who have adhered to the truth without 
swerving have lost their influence with the worldly and time- 
serving, but they have glorified God and received his approval- 
Selected. 

The Catholic says:-"The desire for the union of Catholics and 
Protestants is most laudable and one which every sincere Christian 
longs to see realized. Our separate brethren will always find the 
doors of the Catholic church open to them, whenever, either as 
individuals or as a body, through the grace of God, they are urged 
to enter. They will find, too, all the loving tenderness of a mother 
for her long lost children lavished upon them. This is what they 
may reasonably expect. There can be union in no other way. 
Certainly not, in the sense the Protestant mind attaches to the word. 
The Catholic church, in the questions at issue between Catholics 
and Protestants, as such, never compromises, because she cannot." 

In accord with this spirit of so-called liberality and union we note 
the fact that when the celebrated Roman Catholic prelate Cardinal 
McClosky, of New York, was dying, the "Baptist Conference of 
Ministers" offered up to God earnest prayer for his recovery. It is 
needless to remark that their prayers were rejected, but nevertheless 
this furnishes a powerful illustration of the growing sympathy 
between "the mother church" and the daughters and the 
baselessness of the name Protest-ants as applied to the daughters 
today. This is not because of any doctrinal change on the part of the 
"mother" but rather of the daughters; who in fact are ignoring the 
doctrines of Christ in their great effort for outward union and 
increase of members and wealth. This also furnishes an illustration 



of the theme made prominent in our last issue-'The Province of 
Prayer." 



R813:page5 

UNCHANGED SENTIMENTS OF ROME. 

"We declare, affirm, define, and pronounce it necessary to 
salvation, for every human creature to be subject to the Roman 
Pontiff. "-Cardinal Manning. 

"Accursed be those very crafty and deceitful societies, called Bible 
Societies, which thrust the Bible into the hands of the inexperienced 
youth."-PopePiusIX. 

"What Father Walker says (i.e., that he would as soon administer 
the sacraments to a dog as to Catholics who send their children to 
the public schools) is only what has been said over and over again 
by the bishops in their pastorals all over the world, and we heartily 
indorse it. "-N.Y. Tablet. 

"No Bible shall be held or read except by priests. No Bible shall be 
sold without a license, except upon the pains and penalties of that 
mortal sin that is neither to be forgiven in this world or in the 
next. "-Council of Trent. 

"Moreover we confirm and renew the decrees delivered in former 
times by apostolic authority, against the publication, distribution, 
reading and possession of books of the Holy Scriptures translated 
into the vulgar tongue. "-Pope Gregory XVI. 

"The following is from the bishop's oath:-Heretics (Protestants), 
schismatics and rebels to the Pope or his successors, I will, to the 
uttermost of my power, persecute and wage war with." E. 
Trumpet. 



R812:page6 

UPON THIS ROCK I WILL BUILD MY CHURCH. 

"Jesus asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the 
son of man am? And they said, Some say that thou art John the 
Baptist; some, Elias; and others Jeremias or one of the prophets. He 
saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am? And Simon Peter 
answered and said THOU ART THE CHRIST, THE SON OF THE 
LIVING GOD. 

And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon 
Bar-jona, for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my 
Father which is in heaven. And I say also unto thee, that thou art 
Peter. And upon this rock I will build my church, and the gates of 
hell shall not prevail against it." Matt. 16:13-18. 



The Church of Rome has taken advantage of this language of our 
Lord to Peter, and attempted to base upon it authority for her Popes, 
the claimed successors of Peter through the laying on of hands. As 
her history dates back to the days of the Apostles-for even then the 
Mystery of Iniquity began to work, as the Apostle testifies 2 Thes. 
2:7:-she had but little difficulty in establishing her claim of 
succession, the influence of which is powerful among an ignorant 
and credulous people. The practice of laying on of hands was quite 
common in the early Church, both the Apostles and other disciples 
did it (Acts 6:6; 13:3). At such times special gifts were sometimes 
imparted and sometimes not (Acts 19:6; 13:3); and the Apostles 
never intimated that by this means or any other they conferred upon 
any one authority to preach the gospel, or serve the Church. That 
authority comes to all the Church through the anointing of the Spirit 
of truth. 

Nay more, none can be of that anointed body except they be 
preachers to the extent of their ability or talent. Those who use not 
the anointing, given for that very purpose (Isa. 61:1), are reckoned 
unfit for the kingdom honors. Matt. 25:25-30. 

This far-sighted stroke of policy on the part of the Church of Rome, 
needed only another to make it permanent, and that was, the denial 
of the right of private judgment to individuals in interpreting the 
Scriptures. The Church of Rome claims the sole right and ability to 
do this, and her faithful must abide by her decisions. Nor has 
Protestantism (so-called) been slow to reap what advantage she 
could from these deceptive and ensnaring claims. Though it could 
not openly claim with any show of possibility, an apostolic 
succession, it endeavors to create an impression that its clergy is a 
special class, endowed with power, authority and ability to interpret 
the Scriptures, which other Christians do not possess. As the people 
had so long been under this deception with regard to the Roman 
clergy, it was only necessary that the superstition be fostered a 
little as it was when Protestant preachers began to assume an air 
of authority and superior wisdom and that the truth on the subject 
be left in the back-ground. And now that the growing intelligence 
of Christian people is beginning to demand a scriptural foundation 
for the authority claimed, strenuous efforts are being put forth by 
Protestantism to discourage on the part of the people, all 
independent thought in Bible study, and to restrict investigation to 
the conclusions of approved sectarians. To this end the S.S. Lessons 
are guardedly arranged so as under a guise of liberty to fetter 
thought so far as possible without seeming to do so. 

That no such idea as that Peter was the rock on which the Church 
should be built, was intended by our Lord, or gathered from his 
words by Peter, to us is evident. Jesus had asked, "Whom do men 
say that I am"? Then bringing the question home more closely, "But 
whom say ye that I am"? Peter's loving devotion found quick and 
strong expression -"Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." 
And Jesus as quickly and warmly responded, "Blessed art thou, for 



flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which 
is in heaven. And I say also unto thee that thou art Peter-a rock or 
stone. And on this rock I will build my Church," etc. His name 
previously was Simon, henceforth it is to have the name rock or 
stone added, for Peter signifies rock. Because Simon was first to 
express the grand foundation doctrine upon which 

R813 : page 6 

the Church of Christ was to be built, viz., that Jesus is the Messiah, 
Jehovah's anointed one; therefore he was honored by the name 
Rock, or Peter, as a memorial of his being the first to recognize the 
great Rock, Christ Jesus. 

The Scriptures from Genesis to Revelation harmoniously teach that 
Jesus Christ the Son of the living God, is the Solid Rock 
Foundation on which his Church was to be, and now is being built. 
Christ Jesus, not Peter, was the stone of stumbling and rock of 
offence which Jehovah laid in Zion, and over which both the houses 
of Israel stumbled as predicted -Isa. 8:14. When Peter, instructed 
by Isaiah, declared that the nominal Gospel Church, like the Jewish 
Church, should stumble over Christ the "foundation corner stone" 
of the true Church, he had little idea that the apostacy would claim 
him as the stone on which the Church is built. 

Peter's own words to the Church are, "Draw near to him [Christ], 
the living stone, rejected by men, but by God chosen, honorable; be 
yourselves also built up as living stones, a spiritual house, for a 
holy priesthood, to offer sacrifices, well pleasing to God through 
Jesus Christ, because it is contained in the Scripture, "Behold I 
place in Zion a Foundation-corner Stone [Christ], chosen, 
honorable, and he who confides IN IT shall not be ashamed.. ..This 
Stone which the builders [of the Nominal Church] rejected 
[substituting the name of Peter, Peter himself declares], is made the 
Head of the corner." 1 Pet. 2:4-7. -Comp. Diaglott. 

In an ordinary building there is no chief or head corner stone; but 
the idea in the mind of the Apostle seems to be that of a pyramid 
whose chief corner stone is the top stone which is a perfect pyramid 
in itself. The top stone is also the foundation stone of this 
wonderful building of God. The foundation is laid in the heavens, 
and all that is built thereon must be built in conformity to the lines 
of the heavenly architecture. As the invisible power of earthly 
attraction holds an earthly building to its earthly foundation, so the 
invisible power of the heavenly attraction will secure the building 
of God on its firm foundation laid in the heavens. Jesus, Jehovah's 
Anointed-the Rock of Ages. 1 Cor. 3:11. 

"On this Rock I will build my Church." All the members, Peter 
included, will be built on that same rock-not on Peter, nor on any 
system which either directly or indirectly claims Peter as its rock, 
but on Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, our Redeemer and 
our Lord. Those who plant themselves on any other foundation will 



never be built in to the glorious spiritual temple-the true Church of 
Christ. 

While the Lord declares his purpose to establish his Church on the 
enduring Rock of Ages, and to clothe it with power and glory, he 
shows us that before the realization of our hopes, we must all die 
the head and every member of the Church must die, but he also 
gives us the comforting assurance that "the gates of hell [hades, the 
grave] shall not prevail against it." Through sacrifice, even unto 
death, the victory over death is gained. Death cannot prevail against 
Divine power and hold the Church captive. Though death swallows 
up every member of the Church, all shall come forth to victory: a 
victory foreshadowed by the resurrection of the great Head of the 
Church. 2 Cor. 4: 14; 1 Thes. 4: 14. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R813:page6 

LIFE THROUGH DEATH. 

He that loseth his life for my sake shall find it. -Matt. 10:39. 

Viewed only from a human standpoint, many of our Lord's 
utterances seem like "hard sayings," which none can accept. 

The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God: neither 
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned (1 Cor. 
2: 14). Many such, however, have undertaken to interpret "the 
things of the Spirit of God" -and have thus become blind guides, 
leading multitudes into error, and filling their minds with gross 
darkness. 

In this way those powerful organizations known as churches have 
been established, and by their opposition to the truth, and those who 
hold the truth, have become anti-Christ. (Adversaries of the true 
Church-the anointed body 

R814:page6 

of Christ.) The same spirit which in our day has become so 
formidable, manifested itself in Apostolic times (1 John 2:18), and 
has been alive during the entire history of the Gospel Church. 

This accounts, in part at least, for the fact that the nominal church is 
so largely composed of the unrenewed, and that the many forms of 
worldliness which are so pleasing to the "natural man" are not only 
permitted, but declared to be in harmony with the Divine will. The 
renewed mind, however, readily distinguishes between the ways of 
"this present evil world" and the "path of life." 

The one is a narrow way with a strait entrance, and requires the 
most assiduous effort to tread therein; the other is a broad way with 
a wide approach, and many who presumably desire the way of life, 
find themselves drifting with the multitude in its seductive paths. 



None need, however, to remain long in doubt, for it is plainly 
enough marked out in God's Word; and though the ministers of 
darkness be vigilant in their endeavors to captivate, only the 
unwary will be led astray. 

Prophecy declares, referring to the Anointed, Thou wilt show me 
the path of life (Psa. 16:11); and Paul teaches that Jesus, to whom 
the Father first revealed this way, has brought it to light through the 
Gospel. (2 Thess. 1:10.) 

Now all believers have it plainly made known to them, both by the 
teaching and example of him who declared himself the way, the 
truth, and the life. (John 14:6.) 

As this is a prize never until the Gospel Age placed within the reach 
of any, and as Scripture teaches that it is attainable only during this 
age; it is of the utmost importance that all who desire it should 
strive lawfully. 

What then are the teachings of the Prince of Life regarding its 
attainment? What course did he pursue to reach his exalted 
condition, viz., partaker of the Divine nature? 

Let him speak. 

He that would be my disciple, let him deny himself and take up his 
cross and follow me. (Matt. 16:24.) 

However contrary the desires of the flesh may be to "the law of the 
Spirit of life," this law must have supreme jurisdiction, and they 
that are Christ's must crucify the flesh with the passions and 
desires: (Gal. 5:24-Diaglott), must present their bodies a living 
sacrifice, (Rom. 12:1.) Not the sinful propensities of the depraved 
nature alone must be subdued; the life to which we are justified by 
our faith in Jesus' ransom must be laid down, even as he laid down 
his life. (John 10:18.) We thus account that we are "crucified with 
Christ." While the Head only was actually put to death on Calvary, 
all the members of his body reckon themselves crucified with him; 
and all drink of the cup of which he drank, and all are baptized with 
the baptism with which he was baptized. 

Though eighteen centuries have elapsed since Jesus trod the path, 
his footsteps have not grown dim, but are as plainly visible to-day 
as when Paul and his fellow-disciples sought and found the way. 

Jesus' self-denial meant the free surrender of all his natural rights 
and all his ambition as a man among men. It meant the 
relinquishment of all desires to accomplish his beneficent work by 
any methods that might glorify himself; and a complete surrender 
of his own will to that of the Father. His prayer was, Father, glorify 
thy name. (John 12:28.) 

Need we wonder that he spent long nights in prayer and 
communion with the Father that he might receive strength to hold 
steady to a purpose on which hinged such momentous issues to 
thus open and "consecrate a new and living way"? Can we wonder 



that Jesus declared, Few there be that find the way of life? That 
many that have followed blind guides will be doomed to bitter 
disappointment, we have conclusive evidence. (Matt. 7:23.) 

Let none shrink or turn aside for a less rugged way, but exclaiming 
with the poet, 

"His track I see, and I'll pursue 
The narrow way till him I view," 
let each make new resolves and take fresh courage, knowing that 
the crown is almost in view. 

Tho' the night be dark and dreary, 
Tho' the way be long and weary, 
Morn shall bring the light and cheer; 
Child, look up, the morn is near. 

Tho' thine eyes are sad with weeping, 
Thro' the night thy vigils keeping, 
God shall wipe thy tears away, 
Turn thy darkness into day. 

Tho' thy Spirit faints with fasting 
Tho' the hours so slowly wasting, 
Morn shall bring a glorious feast, 
Thou shalt sit an honored guest." 

S. T. TACKABURY. 



R747 : page 6 

JESUS was made perfect as a man; for as such he was perfect, else 
he could not have been our ransom. One imperfect being could not 
redeem other imperfect beings. As shown in the typical sacrifices 
for sin under the law, the sacrifice must be without blemish. So, 
too, with the antitype-the real sin-offering -the Lamb of God, that 
took away the sin of the world, was perfect without a single 
blemish-"a lamb without spot." (Heb. 2:10.) 



R814:page7 



ZION HEARD AND WAS GLAD. 

"Zion heard and was glad; and the daughters of Judah rejoiced 
because of thy judgments, O Lord."-Psa. 97:1-8. 

So says the Psalmist speaking prophetically. Taking a standpoint 
future, and looking back, he tells how Zion and Judah were made to 
rejoice by some special tidings of great joy. Was it the tidings of a 
long promised Messiah for whom the world had been looking for 
four thousand years, now found in Bethlehem? This was good 
news, but not the tidings referred to. Was it the message that the 
sacrifice is accomplished which has procured man's redemption? 
That is the foundation of all their hope, but that is not the special 



cause of rejoicing mentioned here. Was it that the crucified one has 
been raised from death by the power of the Father? That was 
glorious news; for in that God hath raised him from the dead, he 
hath given assurance unto all men of the acceptance of his sacrifice 
as a satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, and therein, all 
who believe, may read their title clear to everlasting life. 

But there is still another cause of rejoicing mentioned by the 
Prophet, and it is the greatest cause of rejoicing we have ever yet 
had. It was blessed to know that the plan of God had so far 
progressed as to secure the birth, death, and resurrection of the 
promised deliverer; but it would be still more blessed to know that 
the plan has so nearly reached its glorious consummation as to 
show that the time is fulfilled for the actual establishment of his 
kingdom and the commencement of his reign which is to bring 
mankind into the actual possession of the life and blessings secured 
by the ransom, and this is just the message that now comes to us; 
and those who believing, realize it, rejoice with joy unspeakable 
and full of glory: "The Lord reigneth! and the fulfillment of every 
foretold sign of his presence bears witness to the fact. 

But where is the Zion that rejoices? We see that it is not all who 
claim to be of Zion; it is not the great nominal church for they turn 
away from the message, and say, Where is the promise of his 
presence? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as 
they were from the beginning. They have forgotten the foretold sign 
of his presence, and the object of his coming, and 

R815 : page 7 

do not desire his appearing. But the true Zion are now made 
manifest. They hear of his presence, remember the foretold signs 
and realize their fulfillment; they mark the accumulated testimony 
of all the prophets, and they have learned from the Scriptures that 
the object of that reign is the restoring and blessing of all the 
families of the earth, which he purchased from the dominion of 
death nearly nineteen centuries ago. 

In view of this good news the Prophet not only foretells Zion's 
rejoicing, but he calls upon the earth to rejoice with her -"The Lord 
reigneth! let the earth rejoice." (ver. 1.) But the earth is not yet 
prepared to rejoice; for "Clouds and darkness are round about him," 
(ver. 2), and they cannot see the blessings beyond because they 
walk only by sight, and not by faith. They do not know the Lord 
and have neither faith nor interest in his coming. They will only 
come to realize his presence in the exhibition of his power, under 
which they will first suffer before they can be blessed; for the 
powers of this world must either melt or be overthrown in the great 
time of trouble which accompanies the setting up of the kingdom of 
God. 

Notwithstanding the fact that mankind has been oppressed, and 
trodden under foot, and kept in ignorance, poverty and distress, by 
the powers of this world; notwithstanding the fact that by injustice, 



and war, and blood-shed, and tumult, and strife, the powers that be 
have gained and retained their mighty influence, men fear their 
overthrow lest the greater evils of anarchy and confusion prevail. 
They have come to regard those systems of oppression with a 
measure of pride, and have partaken of and manifested their spirit, 
and millions of men have given their lives for their defense. But the 
children of God regard them in a very different light. 

The different estimates of the kingdoms of this age by the world 
and by the saints is strikingly illustrated by the two visions of them 
to Nebuchadnezzar and to Daniel. To Nebuchadnezzar they 
appeared as a great image of glory and power, the head of gold, the 
breast and arms of silver, the thighs of brass, the legs and feet of 
iron, the feet being partly of iron and partly of clay. These four 
divisions represented respectively the universal dominions of 
Babylon, Medo Persia, Grecia and Rome. These have succeeded 
each other and held the dominion of the earth since the days of 
Nebuchadnezzar, and we are now living under the decaying power 
of the Roman dominion as illustrated in the mixture of iron and clay 
which formed the feet of the image. The stone which is to fill the 
whole earth is about to smite the image and utterly destroy it. (Dan. 
2:34-45.) The kingdoms now in existence, represented in the feet of 
the image, received their power and authority originally from the 
Papacy, or some of her protesting daughters and imitators, who 
crowned them or their ancestors, and still they claim, according to 
their word, that they reign "by the grace of God." Men dread the 
destruction of this great image of human power which has 
overawed, overpowered and deceived them for so many centuries, 
and would avert its destruction if they could. 

But to the children of God, as to the prophet Daniel, these same 
four universal powers appear as four dreadful, ferocious wild 
beasts a lion, a bear, a leopard, and another beast so great and 
terrible as to almost baffle description. These represented 
respectively the same governmental powers as those illustrated in 
Nebuchadnezzar's vision. The last and most terrible beast was 
Rome, and how terrible has been its history of crime and oppression 
and wickedness ! The days of its triumphal march were filled with 
the groans of martyred saints, with the wails of the widowed and 
orphaned, with the boast of malice and licensed crime and 
oppression, with high-handed tyranny, and with a brazen-faced 
impudence which flung defiance in the face of the Almighty. Well 
may we rejoice that our day witnesses its waning power. 

Although as its power has waned, we have seen that greater liberty 
and happiness has been enjoyed by mankind, yet we see that full 
liberty and perfect happiness cannot be enjoyed until the last 
vestige of its oppressive power is destroyed, until it is hunted out in 
every hiding place where it secretly lurks, until its pernicious 
doctrine of the divine right of kings to oppress and impoverish the 
people is fully eradicated, until its blasphemous utterances against 
the God of heaven are made fully manifest, though hiding even 



under the name of Protestantism, until its great power is utterly 
destroyed, and its very memory has become a hissing and a by- 
word. 

Is it any wonder that Zion rejoices as she realizes the presence of 
him who has been consuming this power with the spirit of his 
mouth (by the manifestation of his truth), and who is to completely 
destroy it with the brightness of his presence (Gr., parousia)? 2 
Thes. 2:8. 

Notice the indications of his presence mentioned by the Psalmist, 
and now coming to pass: "Clouds and darkness are round about 
him. " The storm clouds that are now gathering are visible to all the 
world, and darkness ignorance of God's ways everywhere 
prevails. The Church nominal, as well as the world, is in total 
ignorance of what the outcome shall be. 

"His lightnings enlightened the world; the earth saw and trembled." 
In the midst of the dark forebodings of the gathering storm come 
the lightning flashes of truth, due in this time of his presence, and 
because of his presence. Truth on various subjects is thus being 
revealed. Men are getting ideas which they never dreamed of 
before. The spirit of inquiry is abroad. Men are beginning to 
inquire, What are our natural rights? How did kings and emperors 
get the right, if right it is, to rule over their fellow-men and to 
oppress them for their own advantage? By what fair (?) means do 
some men, with little or no labor, acquire millions of money, while 
others, by severest toil, can scarcely gain life's necessities? By what 
means do the comparatively few gain and retain a monopoly of the 
blessings of life, while the great mass of mankind live in poverty 
and discomfort? 

Gradually, but rapidly, the masses are coming to see that the 
overplus of power is in their grasp, that their overwhelming 
numbers and force only want systematizing and organization, and 
to this work great efforts are now being directed, and beneath the 
tread of the mustering hosts and their accumulating power, thrones 
tremble. The lightning flashes of truth are bringing about these 
changes. The increase of knowledge, the general diffusion of 
education, the multiplying of inventions, the general interchange of 
thought, the wider range of commercial interests, the rapid modes 
and cheap rates of travel and the advantage that is taken of it, the 
multiplicity of books and periodicals, and the wonderful power of 
the daily press all these influences have been waking men up to an 
appreciation of their manhood, and they will not long permit it to be 
ignored and trampled in the dust for the selfish aggrandizement of 
the few. Gross ignorance and superstition are rapidly becoming 
things of the past. 

But it is not to be presumed that these efforts of the masses will 
proceed on the golden mean of propriety. No; like a pendulum, they 
will swing to the very opposite extreme of impropriety; and hence 
the great trouble, the anarchy and confusion which will result. This 



destructive trouble is represented by fire- "A fire goeth before him 
and burneth up his enemies round about. " It will destroy the 
enemies of God and men, the oppressive organizations of both 
church and state, and thereby liberate the people. 

But it will soon be discovered that the liberty gained is even worse 
than the oppression from which they have escaped. The 
unrestrained liberty of all men in their present fallen condition, 
would be the worst evil that could befall the world. And such 
anarchy will be the result of their efforts. This is all they will be 
able to accomplish, and in so doing they will exhaust their power. 
None will be able to assume the control, and direct affairs to a 
satisfactory settlement. Thus men will become convinced of their 
own utter inability to rightly adjust the tangled problem. This is just 
where God wants to bring them that they may hear him say, "Be 
still, and know that I am God. I will be exalted among the heathen; 
I will be exalted in the earth." (Psa. 46:10.) He will say it not by 
voice, but by the manifestation of his power, and then men will be 
prepared to realize that "The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of 
Jacob is our refuge." The new heavens (the new kingdom) will 
declare his righteousness, and all the people shall see his glory. 
Those who have worshiped those false systems of church and state 
as idols, will be confounded when thus they witness their complete 
destruction, (verses 6,7.) 

Again says the Psalmist prophetically, "The hills melted like wax at 
the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the Lord of the whole 
earth." (verse 5.) Mountains and hills are symbols of governments. 
Some will melt under the fervent heat, while others will be carried 
forcibly into the midst of the sea. (Psa. 46:2.) We have today in 
Great Britain an illustration of a mountain melting. It has enough 
political wisdom to see the rights, and to concede some of the 
demands of the people. It is melting and flowing down to some 
extent to the level of the people's interests. If all the governments 
would do this, if they would all melt down and fully concede to the 
people their rights, then much of the great calamity of revolution 
would be averted; but this, all will not do. The 

R816 : page 7 

policy of Russia, for instance, is to concede nothing to the people, 
but to retain all its oppressive power intact. It will not melt; 
therefore it shall be forcibly carried in the tumult of revolution "into 
the midst of the sea." The sea in symbolic language represents the 
masses of the people unrestrained by law and order; hence the 
carrying of a mountain into the midst of the sea, would signify the 
overwhelming of a government in a revolutionary uprising of the 
masses. (Psa. 4:2.) 

As Zion sees all these things coming to pass, she recognizes in 
them the evidences of her Lord's presence and the preparation for 
the kingdom of heaven, and knowing what the glorious outcome 
will be, and that shortly, she rejoices notwithstanding that clouds 



and darkness are round about him for a time. She knows that 

"Behind a frowning providence 

He hides a smiling face." 
"The Lord reigneth, let the earth rejoice" also; for it is great cause 
for rejoicing if they could only have faith to realize it. But we 
rejoice further to know that though their eyes are now so blinded by 
prejudice and false doctrine that they cannot see the evidence on 
which to rest faith, by and by their blindness shall be removed and 
they shall have the evidence in demonstration. 

The first to realize it after Zion, will be the daughters of Judah, 
fleshly Israel, whose blindness shall be taken away. Already we 
learn that the blindness is beginning to be turned away. Soon all the 
daughters of Judah will see and rejoice together because of the 
Lord's judgments against oppression and tyranny, and because of 
the returning favor of his "Covenant people." Soon the glory of the 
Lord will be revealed to all; the 

R816:page8 

clouds being rolled away the Sun of righteousness shall shine forth 
with healing [restitution] in his beams and all flesh shall recognize 
it together. 



R814:page8 

KNOWLEDGE LEADS TO FREEDOM. 

"The force of education is making itself felt in all European 
countries, and in the old way, too, of producing commotions and 
turbulence. Wherever it appears it turns the world upside down. In 
France it has changed the whole complexion of the national 
politics. In Belgium it has excited active and tumultuous interest. In 
Russia it has led to violence characteristic of that country, and we 
read that in Spain it is giving warning to the clericals that their 
reign must soon come to an end. The tremendous movement that is 
in progress in England also, a movement that under any other man 
almost than Gladstone would be a revolution, is due to the fact that 
the peasantry are getting the benefit of schools and other means of 
intelligence and training. In a way that is similar, and yet different, 
the same result is being reached in heathen countries under the 
operation of Christian missions. "-United Presbyterian. 

We are glad that our neighbor is getting its eyes open on this 
subject. It should notice also, that education and thought are 
breaking the fetters of fear, which have so long kept many in the 
nominal Churches. Some are coming to recognize the real Church 
whose names are in heaven, and to approach the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made them free, while others, deceived by the creeds 
are discarding the teaching of the Bible totally and becoming so- 
called Rational Christians, really Unbelievers. 



page 8 

HUMAN OR SPIRITUAL. 

A LETTER AND ITS ANSWER. 

Red Oak, Sept. 28, 1885. 

MY DEAR MRS. RUSSELL: It hardly seems right to trouble you 
again with my questions, but you and Mr. Russell have helped me 
so often perhaps you will once more. I feel sure the teaching of the 
WATCH TOWER is true. I would not go back to the old way of 
trying to believe for anything. I know that God, for Christ's sake, 
has forgiven my sins. I believe I have no will of my own; at least I 
try not to have. It seems right and just that some should inherit 
divine life. I realize that for others. But do you think it wicked 
when I tell you that to be a perfect human being is all I can desire 
for myself? To have my father and friends who are gone, back 
again; to have sin blotted out of the world; never to be sick or know 
sorrow of any kind; to live as God intended his children to live. It is 
almost more than I can bear to think of. Anything beyond or better 
is as unreal to me as the thoughts of heaven used to be when I was 
taught that some time we would go there. Is it wrong for me to feel 
so, and are there not others who feel the same way? Surely I am not 
the only one. I am afraid to settle down and take all the comfort I 
can, for fear I have neglected something. Can you help me? Yours 
truly, 



MY DEAR FRIEND: With reference to your question I would say 
that if you never started for the great prize of our high calling-the 
divine nature-then you are perfectly right in looking for the glory 
and perfection of human nature, and that will indeed be a glorious 
and satisfying portion. Those who made an entire consecration 
within the acceptable time, or the time when they were acceptable 
as LIVING SACRIFICES, which time we believe ended with the 
fall of 1881, should not turn back. If they offered themselves 
unreservedly to God within that time, they were accepted of him 
and sealed with the spirit of adoption, which enables them to 
appreciate every item of truth relative to their new inheritance-the 
spiritual-the Divine nature which they desire and long for above 
every thing else. God will never fail to fulfill his part of the 
covenant if we keep our part of the contract to sacrifice our human 
nature and all that belongs to it. 

But if such a one who has covenanted to sacrifice all even unto 
death-and who has received the spirit of adoption- the earnest of 
his divine inheritance- turns away from it and despising his 
covenant, seeks to regain and attain the perfection of the human 
nature, he will surely fail and lose both all. If such a one seeks to 
save his life he will lose it; but, if according to his covenant he 



loses it, gives it up, sacrifices it, he will save his life as a "new 
creature" spiritual. 

If, however, your consecration has been since that time, then the 
earthly glory is for you, and you may begin at once to conform to 
the principles of the new heavenly kingdom now being set up, 
though the world is not yet aware of it. You may begin at once to 
grow up toward perfection as a human being. 

Now, I judge you can tell just where you stand. If you ever started 
for the heavenly glory and kingdom, and received the seal of 
adoption, I beseech you turn not back-neither to the right hand nor 
to the left; but press on and make your election sure by fulfilling 
your covenant. But if yours is the earthly inheritance, strive to 
conform as fully as possible to the will and plans of God. Those 
first and foremost to recognize the new kingdom and to conform to 
its laws of love and justice, will be first blessed by it. 

Yours rejoicing in the glorious prospect for both the spiritual and 
fleshly sons of God. 

Many have sung "I want to be an Angel," etc., who want nothing 
more than, that they preferred to be angels in heaven, to going to a 
place of torture, because they have been taught that their lot must 
be one or the other. 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R816:page8 



THE KEY LOG. 



Sometimes when logs are being driven or guided down stream to 
their destination or market-place, there comes what might be called 
a jam. The great mass of timber refuses to move. Then the skill of 
the drivers is soon manifest in the rapidity with which they discover 
the cause of the obstruction. One certain log is found which holds 
the key to the situation. Dislodge this, and the vast body begins to 
move again, though the work necessary to bring about the much- 
desired result is attended with more or less danger to the one 
undertaking it. Ropes are often attached to the body, which, being 
held by the hands of others, serve to lessen the danger of being 
caught by a sudden start of the huge pile. 

So in the progress of humanity towards its grand destiny, there 
comes a sudden check, confusion takes the place of harmony and 
advancement. Some one is raised up to cut the key log of a 
tremendous error, and then the race moves on its homestretch with 
an accelerated ratio. Luther, Wesley, Channing, each in their day 
dislodged mighty errors from the minds of many of their 
generation. 

Again, there comes up into the ear of God the deep longing of tens 
of thousands for some one who will deliver them from their present 



dilemma of painful doubt and indecision. Go back to old ideas they 
cannot; accepting new ones is seemingly impossible, and so there is 
a jam. Old cherished ideas cannot be given up until something 
better is given to take their place, until the reasonableness of the 
new departure and its connection with the real truths of the old is 
seen. Divine wisdom is needed to say the right words at the proper 
time. Then the tares of error can be separated from the wheat of 
truth without rooting up "the wheat with them." 

A bending staff I would not break, 
A feeble faith I would not shake, 
Nor even rudely pluck away 
The error which some truth may stay, 
Whose sudden loss might leave without 
A shield against the shafts of doubt." 



-Exchange. 



R816:page8 



QUESTION COLUMN. 



Ques.-What will be the nature of the liberty into which the whole 
creation is to come, when the sons of God are manifested? See 
Romans 8:19,21. 

Ans.-The nature of the liberty is indicated by the Apostle by his 
contrasting it with bondage in the same verse. The bondage was of 
"corruption" i.e. death, with all concomitants of pain, sickness and 
sorrow. For six thousand years it has proved itself a terrible 
bondage, one from which mankind could not escape. But a Savior 
came and ransomed the whole creation, the entire world of 
mankind, giving himself a "corresponding price" for all; and as a 
result has obtained control of mankind, and the right by purchase 
(with his own precious blood) to open the tomb and release all men 
from every cord of bondage which now binds them. 

By virtue of the ransom which he gave for all, he declares "there 
shall be a resurrection, (a lifting up to perfection) both of the just 
and the unjust." I have the keys (symbol of right, authority and 
power) of death and hades. " Rev. 1:18 

To release men from the bondage of death is to restore to original 
perfection. Adam was a perfect man "crowned with glory and 
honor" (Psa. 8:5), and in God's sight "very good" until he sinned; 
because of sin he was delivered into "the bondage of corruption" 
according to the will and law of God. But since by his atonement 
sacrifice the Lamb of God takes away the sins of the world, it 
becomes his right and privilege to save men, by liberating them 
from the WAGES of those sins, viz.: from the bondage of 
corruption death. 



This deliverance from corruption's bondage was the theme and 
substance of Jesus' preaching, not only as indicated by his recorded 
words, but as prophesied beforehand: The spirit of the Lord God is 
upon me because he hath anointed me to preach the good tidings to 
the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to 
proclaim to the captives, LIBERTY, and to the prisoners 
RELEASE, (Isa. 61:1.) Yes, this was Jesus' mission and message, 
and it was illustrated by his miracles, by which he manifested forth 
his future glory-the work of healing, restoring, liberating from 
pain, sorrow and death, into the liberty of manhood-the liberty 
enjoyed by man while yet a "Son of God," (Luke 3:38), before he 
became a sinner. To this liberty or freedom from death and trouble, 
the whole creation shall again be restored the glorious liberty 
common to sons of God on whatever plane of being they may be, 
whether sons of human nature (Luke 3:38.) sons of angelic nature 
(Job 38:7.) or sons of the divine nature (1 John 3:2; 2 Pet. 1:4). The 
same glorious freedom from death belongs to all the sons of God. 

While the human creation shall be delivered from bondage to 
present death which came on account of Adam's sin, and is to be 
removed because of Christ's redemptive work, it does not follow 
that they shall retain their liberty. They may retain it, and from 
present experience will know the value of retaining it, yet they will 
ever be able to place themselves in bondage at their own option, but 
only by deliberate, wilful, sin against full light and knowledge. The 
second or wilful bondage is called the Second death, from which, 
deliverance is never promised. 

The time for the deliverance of the world from present bondage to 
corruption (that which came as a result of Adam's sin Adamic 
death) is referred to by Paul. Jesus did not deliver the prisoners at 
the time of his first presence in the world; he merely preached 
deliverance to the captives and opening of prison doors. True, when 
reproved by the self-righteous Pharisees (zealous for the Sabbath, 
but ignorant of its real significance) for healing a woman on the 
Sabbath day, he said: "Ought not this woman whom Satan hath 
bound lo these eighteen years be loosed from this bond on the 
Sabbath day?" Luke 13:16. He did release her from the special 
infirmity but not from all the bondage of corruption; she was still 
subject to pain and death- the bondage of corruption-and the little 
release which Jesus granted her was only an illustration of the full 
and complete release which he would grant in the "times of 
restitution of all things"-the great antitypical seventh day or 
Sabbath. 

The time for this removal of the bondage of corruption from 
humanity, permitting them to return to the glorious perfection of 
Eden, is when the special class of sons selected during this 
Christian Age, as the BODY of Christ has been made perfect with 
their head, Jesus. Then will come the manifesting of the power of 
those divine sons in the liberating, restoring, perfecting of the 
human family to the proper liberty of sons of God, secured for them 



by the ransom. This liberty will be fully attained by all willing to 
accept of it, by the end of the reign of Christ. It is the very object of 
his reign as promised, to thus bless all the families of the earth. 



page 8 

BIBLE STUDENT'S HELPS. 

YOUNG'S GREEK, HEBREW AND ENGLISH 
CONCORDANCE. 

This work is at once a Greek and Hebrew Lexicon giving the 
meaning of the original terms in English, and also a Concordance 
giving each word of Scripture and the words which they translate. 
The value of the work is becoming more apparent daily, as theorists 
attempt to palm off a private interpretation under a guise of "a 
better definition of the original." 

In this superb volume every word is arranged under its own Hebrew 
and Greek original, exhibiting 311,000 references and 30,000 
various readings. Its size is large quarto, 1094 pages. 

Price to our subscribers, $2.25; usual price, $5.00. If sent my mail, 
the postage should be added, viz.: 54c, and 10c. additional if you 
wish it "registered." This is the latest revision.- "THE AUTHOR'S 
EDITION." 



THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 

For the benefit of new readers we would state that this is a Greek 
Testament. Under each Greek word the corresponding English 
word. It is thus the most literal translation of the New Testament. 
Besides this, it has in another column alongside a very clear and 
emphatic translation, showing the emphasis of the Greek, which is 
generally lost to the English reader. 

The regular price for the work in cloth is four dollars-which, 
everything considered, is not too high; but by special arrangement 
we are enabled to offer it at $1.50 per copy to our subscribers, 
postage prepaid. 

We cannot take postage stamps in payment, as we must pay cash. 



LEESER'S O.T. TRANSLATION. 

The Hebrews have prepared recently an English translation of the 
Old Testament Scriptures which we commend to those desirous of a 
critical translation for COMPARISON in studying. We have 
procured a small lot and can furnish them at $1.65 postpaid, which 
is less than the usual price. 



PITTSBURGH CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Our meetings are held in G.A.R. Hall, over the Third National 
Bank, No. 101 Federal Street, Allegheny City. Readers and friends 
will be warmly welcomed. Preaching every Lord's day afternoon at 
3:30 o'clock; Bible Class at 2:30 o'clock of the same day. 



