Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
How amazed we were to learn that 89,239 persons attended the principal meeting at the ten assemblies held in Mexico during the latter part of December. This is more than double the number of publishers there. Additionally, we rejoiced to hear that 2,757 persons were baptized. We have been enjoying the very interesting experiences of the members of the Bethel family who went to Mexico.
Brother Knorr has also announced that the shift of night work at the factory here has now ended. During October, November and December the day and night shifts produced 9,299,186 bound books. Added to September’s report, this means that for the first four months of our new service year, the Brooklyn plant produced 11,531,787 books.
This extra work has enabled us to fill all the invoices that were made and sent to our shipping department. So the mail that is coming in during January is being cared for within three or four days. Yes, shipments are on their way to the congregations. We are happy to have enough English publications in stock so that we are able to keep our brothers supplied. Supplies of the Bible, the Truth book, the Word of God and the “Mystery” books, as well as other publications, are available.
Of course, this does not mean that we are caught up with all the foreign shipments or foreign-language printing. We have things scheduled for printing right straight through to the end of April on needed literature and stock that will have to be reprinted to fill our shelves again. But this would be a fine time for any congregation that wants more literature to order it, during these winter months. You might want to get a two- or three-month supply of publications. This will prepare you for May, when everyone in English-speaking congregations will be using the “Mystery” book, and in June we will be using the New World Translation along with Is the Bible Really the of God? So you may want to order some literature within the next few months so as to be ready for that work.
Another cause for rejoicing was the November reports from many branches. Almost fifty percent of them had new peaks in publishers. It is truly encouraging to see how steadily Jehovah is work is moving forward! Now we are coming into the second month of the Watchtower campaign. We want to care for all those who are turning to Jehovah to gain his favor. May Jehovah bless your efforts to help these persons as we all show ourselves to be good listeners, joyfully enduring. Be assured of our warm love.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE
[Blurb on page 4]
How many will you bring to the special public talk?

