Presenting the Good News​—With an Awareness of Current Developments
1 Isn’t it enjoyable to discuss a subject of mutual interest with others? Yes, and our being conversational in such matters generally requires that we take an interest in their viewpoint. In our ministry, it requires discernment to determine quickly the interests of a stranger. Then with tact and skill, we can channel the resulting discussion to our Scriptural presentation.
2 Religious news items can be analyzed in the light of the territory we work. Local items are always the best ones to use. Be prepared to develop such news items in various ways to meet effectively the varying attitudes and viewpoints in the territory. Changes in the Catholic church, for example, can be of interest to Catholics as well as non-Catholics, but possibly from different standpoints. A Catholic may be concerned because he is a member of that organization, but a non-Catholic’s interest may be only passive.
3 In talking to Catholics, you could say, “Do you agree with the position being taken by so many of the priests nowadays that the Bible is not the Word of God but that parts of it are only myth? [g 4/22/68, pp. 13, 14] Do you think that such a trend away from God’s Word will continue? If so, does this make the Bible untrue?” In the developing discussion, direct attention to scriptures such as Romans 3:3, 4 and Hebrews 6:17, 18. Explain that Jehovah’s witnesses are encouraging people to do more Bible reading and study. Proceed to explain the free study arrangement.
4 In talking to non-Catholics, you could say: “No doubt you are aware of the trend among religious leaders toward publicly discrediting the Bible. We often hear of priests and ministers who say from the pulpit that they don’t even believe in God. [g 4/22/69, pp. 15, 16] In the place of the Bible they offer godless evolution and worldly philosophy. Do you feel that such a course helps or hinders the cause of godless communism?” Get the householder to express himself, and adapt your presentation accordingly. In the course of your discussion, have in mind the objective toward which you are working. Consider transitions from their response to the points you feel should be made. Or, consider how the point of discussion you have brought up will tie in with the literature offer or the free Bible-study offer.
5 In discussing news items dealing with the breakdown in law and order, after brief introductory remarks, you can say: “No doubt you are aware of the trend toward lawlessness and anarchy. Do you think a time will ever come when you can leave your home unlocked and go out on the street at night and not be in fear? [Let householder express self.] Do you think that this is the way God purposed for man to live? Did you know that the Bible foretells that just such conditions as we see today would come before God established his righteous new system for the benefit of all obedient mankind?” Attention can then be directed to appropriate material in The Watchtower or to chapter 10 of the Truth book.
6 By being aware of current developments and incorporating appropriate items into our presentation, we will have a fine opportunity to get the householder to make some expression and to establish points that will be helpful to him. We will be able to give tailor-made presentations that really fit the individual needs of the person we are witnessing to and, in this way, we can more fully accomplish our ministry.​—2 Tim. 4:5.

