Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 8
Theme: Increasing Our Joy by Making Disciples. Song 34.
12 min: Introduction, text and comments. Servant considers material in branch letter with family he is visiting, using material to enhance their heart appreciation.
20 min: “A Bible Study for You.” Question-and-answer coverage. Demonstrate points in paragraph four.
15 min: Appreciating “Watchtower” articles. Analyze and discuss with audience articles from February 1 issue and first article of February 15 issue. Read appropriate excerpts that are especially good for the public. Help publishers to see this is what the people really need, in view of the shortness of time. The articles are kind and reasonable, while firm and pointed in the conclusions drawn. They come to the point quickly. Discuss and demonstrate how material can be tied in with current Scriptural presentation. Encourage enthusiastic offering of subscriptions and individual magazines.
Comment on article entitled “For Special Distribution.”
 3 min: Accounts servant’s report.
10 min: Concluding comments. As time permits, consider items from “Theocratic News,” highlights of December report for the United States, and local January report. Song 105.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 15
Theme: Joy Resulting from Increased Effectiveness in Jehovah’s Service. Song 52.
 7 min: Introduction, text and comments.
 7 min: Overseer invites all to open Bibles and then draws comments from audience on high points of material from Revelation chapters four and five covered recently in “Mystery” book at the congregation book study. Who are the “twenty-four older persons”? (4:4) What are the “lightnings and voices and thunders”? (4:5) What is represented by the “glassy sea,” and who are the “four living creatures”? (4:6) What is shown by the twenty-four older persons’ casting their crowns before the throne? (4:10) What does the Lamb’s having “seven horns and seven eyes” picture? (5:6) Discuss need to get points clearly in mind and encourage all to prepare for and attend book study regularly.
10 min: Question Box. Discuss and demonstrate appropriate points. Encourage publishers to discontinue unproductive back-calls and Bible studies; have a good schedule for house-to-house activity to find fruitful studies.
12 min: Interview school-age publishers as to what they have been doing to get studies. Entertain experiences regarding studies they have conducted or are currently conducting. How do they get studies started? Is it difficult? When do they conduct them? Let young publishers discuss together the potential for starting studies with school friends, also with relatives or neighbors of similar age. Consider following “Yearbook” experiences if time permits. (yb70, pp. 93, 94; yb68, p. 207)
14 min: Presenting the Good News. Discuss and demonstrate appropriate points. Encourage publishers to be alert to tie current news items in with their presentations; the public usually are aware of these and will comment on them. This helps us to draw them into a conversation.
10 min: Concluding comments. Have report on number of subscriptions obtained thus far by congregation. Ask if any are having good results in offering double subscriptions. Emphasize the obtaining of subscriptions from house to house; offer to Bible students as part of their reading program. Song 102.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 22
Theme: Enlarged Service Results in Rich Rewards. Song 77.
12 min: Introduction, text and comments. Talk on December 15, 1969, “Watchtower” article “Why Serve Jehovah?”.
 8 min: Interview newer publishers, those sharing in service for less than a year and who are already conducting home Bible studies. Ask them how they got them started. Was it difficult? What do they do about questions to which they do not know the answers? Get expressions on their joy in their work, etc. Consider following experience if time permits. (“Awake!”, Nov. 8, 1969, p. 26, right-hand column.)
20 min: Discuss and then demonstrate points from article “When Objections Are Raised.”
10 min: Call Back on Subscribers. Discuss how to get a study started with subscriber who already has book. In making such calls, the publisher need not do all the talking; get the householder to think and express himself. Incorporate teaching methods in demonstrating how call is made on subscriber who does not have the “Truth” book. Free study offer is made, selecting material pertinent to the householder’s needs and interests.
10 min: Concluding comments. Mention subject for special public talk scheduled for weekend; emphasize practical value, discuss whom to invite, etc. Remind publishers of opportunities to vacation pioneer and the benefits to be received. Song 65.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 1
Theme: Building Other Ministers on Right Foundation. (Eph. 2:20) Song 75.
 8 min: Introduction, text and comments. Include comments on  theme for month. ( March 1. 1970, issue of “Watchtower”; yb70, p. 92, par. 5.)
12 min: “Subscription Expiration Slips.” Discuss points from article and encourage publishers to apply suggestions. Demonstrate how to make call. Include local experiences about following up on expiration slips.
25 min: Our Privilege of Prayer. To be handled by a capable brother. Get comments from audience on following points: What gives you confidence that God listens to prayer? (Luke 11:5-13) Why do many prayers go unanswered? (Prov. 28:9) What is required on the part of the one praying if his prayers are to be heard by God? (Heb. 11:6; 1 John 5:14; James 4:3) What will help us to avoid having our prayers become simply a repetition of words? (w64, pp. 557, 558; Ps. 119:145) When prayer is offered in the congregation, how can we show that we fully concur in it? (w64, p. 558; 1 Chron. 16:36; 1 Cor. 14:16) Of what significance is the portion of the prayer in which one says that one is asking ‘in Jesus’ name’? (g5/8/65, pp. 28, 29) Why is it that brothers are the ones called on for prayer? (w64, pp. 181, 182) At a home Bible study, under what circumstances would a sister offer prayer with her head covered? (w64, p. 201) In what way can our prayers reflect our concern for others? (Acts 12:5) What should be made the matter of first concern in our prayers? (Luke 11:2; Matt. 26:42) Why? (w63, p. 166) About what is it proper to pray? (sickness? family problems? an assignment that one has on the meeting? financial difficulties? etc.) (Phil. 4:6; w64, pp. 559-564) Encourage publishers personally to apply points and to teach students to do the same.
 5 min: Discussion between two publishers making plans for weekend service activity. Plans include adequate time to follow up placements already made. One publisher has difficulty in getting studies started. Other publisher discusses approach she uses. Asks publisher to act as householder so she can demonstrate just how she does it. After discussing and practicing presentation, they then arrange to work together. At conclusion, congregation servant invites any who presently do not have a Bible study and would like to have one to see the Bible study servant. He may personally arrange to work with them, or he may arrange for someone else who does well in the Bible study ministry to assist.
10 min: Concluding comments. Emphasize practical value of special public talks. Discuss how many to invite and how. Encourage all to share fully in sentiments of concluding song by singing heartily; singing at meetings is a part of our worship. Song 110.

