Announcements
USE THE REMAINING TIME WISELY
Not forever will the Creator allow present distress and wickedness to continue on the earth. He has foreordained a definite time to bring the last vestiges of Satan’s world to a violent end; and the remaining time is very short. Don’t you desire to use that remaining time wisely? (Eph. 5:15, 16, RS) If so, we invite you to join with Jehovah’s witnesses in the activity they have arranged for November. During this month they will be offering the new book “This Means Everlasting Life”, on a contribution of 35c. Throughout its 320 pages this attractive and enlightening book alerts its readers to how everlasting life may be gained and the nearness of the time when it will be the cherished possession of righteous humankind. Life-seekers need to quickly and intelligently seek God and his kingdom. Can you think of a wiser use of your time than to aid another to learn of the way to life? Jehovah’s witnesses in your community will be glad to assist you to share in this activity. Or, if you prefer, write to us and we will furnish you with helpful instructions and report forms.
“THIS MEANS EVERLASTING LIFE”
What can compare with everlasting life? Wealth? Fame? Or personal accomplishment? No, as desirable as may be the attainment of even our fondest imaginations, their brilliance fades as life-forces ebb. Without life, no other pleasure can be enjoyed; when life ceases, ownership, happiness and pleasures end. So, if you would prolong the cherished good things you now know, you must not seek them first; but rather, you must first seek everlasting life. A new 320-page book “This Means Everlasting Life” presents information of vital import to life-seekers. Clearly and logically it unfolds to its readers the sureness of the promise of life and Scriptural instruction on how to attain to it. A scripture index enhances its value. Your personal copy will be sent to you, postpaid, for a contribution of 35c.
CAN YOU LIVE FOREVER IN HAPPINESS ON EARTH?
Humanitarians have long hoped for and worked toward lengthening the span of life. But with all their work and even in their fondest dreams they do not envisage more than a few short years to be added, and those replete with present troubles. But what if those cares could be taken away and the span of life lengthened into eternity? Think of the possibilities! Hopes spiral upward as the mind dwells upon the prospects. And it will cheer you to know that this hope is not a mere figment of the imagination. Scriptural evidence which indisputably proves that soon lasting life on earth will be a reality is now available to you in a 32-page booklet Can You Live Forever in Happiness on Earth? It contains the text of a speech delivered by N. H. Knorr, president of the Watchtower Society, to a visible audience of 123,707 as the climax event of an 8-day International Assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses in New York city, July 30 through August 6, 1950. You will be sent a copy of this booklet, postpaid, on a contribution of 5c.
CORRECTION
In the first copies of the first edition of “This Means Everlasting Life” an error appears on page 206, paragraph 2, line 8. The date A.D. 607 should be 607 B.C. This is not true of the Spanish edition.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of Nov. 5: The Way of Success, ¶1-15.
Week of Nov. 12: The Way of Success, ¶16-26; and “Droop Not Your Hands”, ¶1-8.
Week of Nov. 19: “Droop Not Your Hands,” ¶9-25.

