It Is Nearer than They Think
WHAT is this that is so near?a Why, if you have not heard, it is the day of Jehovah’s vindication. The day when mankind’s enemies and oppressors will be destroyed at Armageddon. The day when all of God’s howling foes will bite the dust in bitter anguish in the battle of God Almighty. A triumphant day indeed! The time when lovers of righteousness will see not only the day of doom come upon the wicked workers of iniquity, but also God’s majestic Kingdom rule extended over the entire earth in all its glory.
Today every effort is being made by the Devil’s organization to bolster its forces and hold on to its domination of the earth. Under the banner of the United Nations the powers of this old world are engaged in a strenuous propaganda and military struggle in an effort to strengthen its entrenched position. Political, commercial and religious leaders boast of this array of strength and in haughty self-confidence they put their trust in human schemes and institutions as if such were impregnable fortresses. But just as the ancient city of Babylon came tumbling down from its lofty height in one fateful night in 539 B.C., so modern Babylon will collapse, suddenly.
Look at this modern counterpart of ancient Babylon. She is an immoral mistress committing fornication with earth’s rulers. Her beauty and splendor are so artificial and thin, a veneer on the surface, beneath which is found gross corruption and all uncleanness. (Rev. 17:1-6, 15, 18; 1 John 2:16, 17) No wonder, then, Jehovah determines to pour out upon her his pitiless wrath and blazing anger in this great and terrible day which is so near. Hence, the alarm and warning to all the inhabitants of the earth: “Behold, the day of Jehovah cometh, cruel, with wrath and fierce anger; to make the land a desolation, and to destroy the sinners thereof out of it. And I will punish the world for their evil, and the wicked for their iniquity; and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible.”—Isa. 13:9, 11, AS.
Like Isaiah, the prophet of old who sounded this warning, so today Jehovah’s faithful witnesses hasten throughout the world declaring that the “day of vengeance of our God” is near at hand. (Isa. 61:2) To be sure, this proclamation raises a great howl among the Devil’s crowd. “Wail ye; for the day of Jehovah is at hand; as destruction from the Almighty shall it come.” (Isa. 13:6, AS; Jas. 5:1) Nevertheless, the warning must be sounded for the benefit of good-will people who receive this message of doom as good news. From house to house Jehovah’s messengers hasten in order that none be overlooked. Interested persons, once located, are called back on and further Bible proof is given them that Babylon’s destruction “is near” and “her days shall not be prolonged”.—Isa. 13:22.
Now is no time for one to be captivated by this world’s glitter or be fooled by its “all is well” gush of propaganda. Now is no time to scramble for all that one can seize of this world’s possessions for protection. Neither is it a time to postpone Armageddon in one’s mind. (1 Thess. 5:2-4) Now, as never before, is the time to bestir oneself and take life-saving action while there is yet time. “Now it is high time to awake!” the apostle Paul says. (Rom. 13:11) Destruction of modern Babylon will clear the ground for the extension of God’s blessed Theocratic rule to the limits of the earth. Praise be to God that such momentous events are nearer than most people think!
[Footnotes]
For a more complete consideration of this subject see The Watchtower, October 1, 1949.

