“The Wisdom from Above”
GRASSHOPPERS are not very smart. Their thoughts are not men’s thoughts. If a man could give just a small part of his mental power to a grasshopper, that favored grasshopper would be far wiser than all the other grasshoppers combined. How high above grasshoppers are men!
But before any swell with pride, read what Isaiah says about Jehovah God: “He sits over the round earth, so high that its inhabitants look like grasshoppers.” (Isa. 40:22, Mo) How high above men is God! “My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the LORD. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.” (Isa. 55:8, 9) If a man could get some of God’s wisdom in him, that favored man would be wiser than all other men that lack divine wisdom.
While it is not possible for feeble man to project any of his mental power to a grasshopper, it is possible for Jehovah to impart his wisdom to men. Through his Word the Bible “the LORD giveth wisdom”, “he layeth up sound wisdom for the righteous.” (Prov. 2:6, 7) For those who gain proper understanding along with the wisdom from the Scriptures, the eyes of their understanding are enlightened. They discern more than other men.—Prov. 4:7; Eph. 1:18.
For instance, many men note the wars, famines, pestilences and other numerous woes that have afflicted and still afflict this generation, since 1914. But they blindly say it is only history repeating itself. Whereas the eyes of understanding enlightened by God’s Word see in these things not repeating history, but the foretold signs of Messiah’s presence. By studying the Bible such persons have the mind of the Lord on these momentous happenings, and hence they draw on a wisdom far superior to the pooled wisdom of all the finest human brains in the world, a wisdom higher above man’s than man’s is above a grasshopper’s. Note things written centuries ago that mark the time of the end of this present wicked system of things.
Jesus said: “Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be great earthquakes and in one place after another pestilences and food shortages . . . and on the earth anguish of nations, not knowing the way out because of the roaring of the sea and its agitation, while men become faint out of fear and expectation of the things coming upon the inhabited earth.”—Luke 21:10, 11, 25, 26, NW.
The apostle Paul said: “Know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here. For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, self-assuming, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, without gratitude, with no loving-kindness, having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness, betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with self-esteem, lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God, having a form of godly devotion but proving false to its power; and from these turn away. . . . Wicked men and impostors will advance from bad to worse, misleading and being misled.”—2 Tim. 3:1-5, 13, NW.
The apostle Peter said: “In the last days there will come ridiculers with their ridicule, proceeding according to their own desires and saying: ‘Where is this promised presence of his? Why, from the day our forefathers fell asleep in death, all things are continuing exactly as from creation’s beginning.’”—2 Pet. 3:3, 4, NW.
Men who shut eyes and stop ears and close minds to such wisdom from above that enlightens us concerning these “critical times hard to deal with” will remain as stupid as grasshoppers in God’s sight. If they ridicule the divine wisdom that informs that present events and woes are signs of the last days, if they brush off such happenings as history repeating itself, as cycles “continuing exactly as from creation’s beginning”, then their very presence as ridiculers is but an added sign.
But relative to these woes now afflicting mankind, some men do worse than merely ridicule. Some blaspheme God, and cause others to blaspheme. The clergy, who claim to serve God, often say He brings these woes upon men to punish them for evil, and frequently say punishment comes because men today do not support the organized churches of Christendom. Typical is this from a leaflet circulated by Catholics in Timmins, Ontario: “Did you know that the 2nd World War was a punishment from heaven for sins?” Such falsehoods turn men away from God. It is of such wisdom that Jehovah says: “The wisdom of their wise men shall perish.” It perishes, when we listen to divine wisdom that tells who is really behind present woes: “Woe for the earth and for the sea, because the Devil has come down to you, having great anger, knowing he has a short period of time.”—Rev. 12:12, NW.
“The wisdom of this world is foolishness with God.” (1 Cor. 3:19) Do not be dazzled by foolishness. True, some men are smarter than others, viewed in a worldly way. Isn’t it also true some grasshoppers may have more instinctive wisdom than others? Even so, to a man all grasshoppers are so low down mentally that it makes little difference. Similarly, to God all men are so far below him in wisdom that none are of consequence mentally. In fact, he generally favors those of less worldly wisdom. “For you behold his calling of you, brothers, that not many wise in a fleshly way were called, not many powerful, not many noble; but God chose the foolish things of the world, that he might put the wise men to shame, and God chose the weak things of the world, that he might put the strong things to shame; and God chose the ignoble things of the world and the things looked down upon, the things that are not, that he might bring to nothing the things that are, in order that no flesh might boast in the sight of God.”—1 Cor. 1:26-29, NW; Matt. 11:25; Acts 4:13.
Hence men who would be truly wise will seek “the wisdom that comes down from above”, which is peaceable, reasonable, merciful, fruitful, impartial, and not hypocritical. That wisdom is a defense in these critical times; fools will die for lack of it. Search the Bible for it, as for something more valuable than gold and silver. Studiously dig for it, as you would seek out hidden treasures. “If anyone of you is lacking in wisdom, let him keep on asking God, for he gives generously.”—Prov. 2:1-5; 10:21; Eccl. 7:12; Jas. 1:5; 3:15-18, NW.

