Pioneering the Highway to Paradise
ON A clear, crisp March day in New Jersey, some 4,300 gathered at the Jersey City Assembly Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses. They hailed from all over the United States as well as from many other countries. This special meeting was triggered by events that took place 43 years ago when a special missionary training school was established under the direction of the then president of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, Nathan H. Knorr.
This March meeting was the graduation of the 80th class of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead. But what prompted such a crowd to turn up for the graduation exercises? It was the anticipated quality of the program.
Missionary Attitudes​—The Key to Success
The chairman for the program was Karl Klein, a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses. He introduced the first speaker, former missionary in Japan, Lloyd Barry, and now a member of the Governing Body, who spoke on the theme “To Your Faith Add Works.” He counseled: ‘After five months of intensive Gilead training, your love and faith must be at a peak. Now, as you go out to your assignments, you must add works.’ (James 2:22, 23) He said that like Jehovah they should ‘get up early’ and make good use of a full day in his service.​—Jeremiah 7:25.
Daniel Sydlik, another member of the Governing Body, gave encouraging counsel on the subject “You Can Cultivate a Proper Attitude.” In any situation, he said, you can take either a positive or a negative attitude. Basing his remarks on Malachi 3:15, 16, he illustrated how easy it is to find faults in a new country. “Be slow about finding fault,” he continued. “Have a joyful attitude that God will bless.”
Other speakers, including Ulysses Glass, the school’s registrar, highlighted the need for endurance, satisfaction in accomplishment, and courage. Jack Redford, former missionary and one of the school instructors, gave practical counsel on keeping an open mind. Remember, he said, that “wise men change their minds, fools never do!” So he advised the new missionaries to be adaptable like the apostle Paul, who could even quote local poets. (Acts 17:28) “Bloom where you are planted. . . . Keep an open mind and heart,” he concluded.
The principal graduation talk was given by the president of the Watch Tower Society, Frederick W. Franz, now 92 years of age. Under the theme of “Pioneering Now a Highway Back to Paradise on Earth,” he reminisced on the founding of the Gilead School, “a war baby and a child of faith” that got started in the midst of World War II. Using Isaiah 62:10 as his theme text, he showed how these new missionaries would be participating in this great work of building up a wide, solid highway on which newcomers to true worship can walk on their way to Paradise restored. To close the morning program, diplomas were handed out to the 24 graduates.
The afternoon session included an entertaining review by the graduates of things they had learned at school, as well as a preview of future challenges they would face. The program ended with a full-costume Bible drama that vividly illustrated how Rahab, and later the Gibeonites, showed faith leading to deliverance.​—Joshua, chapters 2 to 6 and 9.
With the 24 graduates of this 80th class of the Gilead School, a total of 6,234 missionaries have gone out all over the world to spearhead the preaching work in fulfillment of Matthew 24:14.

