The Key to True Religion
IN THIS 20th century, more people claim to belong to the Christian religion than to any other. Yet this century has been the most troubled in human history. Why the paradox?
For one thing, many do not take their religion seriously. To them, Christianity is just a casual thing, not a dominant force in their lives. Moreover, those who do take their religion seriously subscribe to many contradictory beliefs and even to differing moral standards. And they are divided by national, racial, and economic differences. In addition, they have victimized one another, even persecuting, waging war with, and killing one another. Thus, the two greatest wars in history were basically fought between “Christian” nations.
What conclusion can we draw from this? That either Christianity is not the true religion or there is a big difference between merely claiming to be a Christian and actually being one. According to Jesus Christ, the founder of Christianity, the second conclusion is the correct one. On one occasion, he spoke about some who would address him as “Lord, Lord.” In other words, they would claim to be Christians, accepting Jesus as their Lord. And they would be very busy doing seemingly important works in his name. Yet Jesus would say to them: “I never knew you! Get away from me, you workers of lawlessness.”​—Matthew 7:22, 23.
Surely, none of us want to be in that situation! So how can we determine whether we are real Christians or not? Is there a key to the true religion?
The Key
Yes, there is. Of course, Christianity involves many things. For example, the real Christian has to have a strong faith in God, for “without faith it is impossible to please [God] well.” (Hebrews 11:6) He also has to be engaged in right works. The disciple James warned that “faith without works is dead.” (James 2:26) Moreover, the apostle Paul stressed the importance of having “accurate knowledge of [God’s] will in all wisdom and spiritual comprehension.” (Colossians 1:9) But none of these things provide the key to Christianity.
The fact is, we may have a good Bible knowledge and strong faith and be quite busy in good works, yet be mere imitation Christians. How is that possible? The apostle Paul explained: “If I speak in the tongues of men and of angels but do not have love, I have become a sounding piece of brass or a clashing cymbal. And if I have the gift of prophesying and am acquainted with all the sacred secrets and all knowledge, and if I have all the faith so as to transplant mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing. And if I give all my belongings to feed others, and if I hand over my body, that I may boast, but do not have love, I am not profited at all.”​—1 Corinthians 13:1-3.
Yes, the key to recognizing the true religion is appreciating that it is based on genuine love. Our faith, good works, and accurate knowledge are vital, indispensable. But if we do not exercise them in love, as far as we are concerned, they are of little profit. Why is that? What makes the quality of love of such overriding importance?

