Are You Willing to Adapt?
 1. Changes in the world require that we make what adjustments?
1 At 1 Corinthians 7:31, the Bible compares the world to a stage with ever-changing scenes and actors. Changes in the world require that we make adjustments from time to time in our preaching methods, our schedule, and our approach. Are you willing to adapt?
 2. Why must we be adaptable in order to keep pace with the organization?
2 Your Preaching Methods: The Christian congregation has always been adaptable. When Jesus initially sent out his disciples, he told them not to procure a food pouch or money for their purses. (Matt. 10:9, 10) However, he later revised those instructions in anticipation of future hostility toward his disciples and the expansion of the preaching work into other territories. (Luke 22:36) Over the past century, Jehovah’s organization has used different preaching methods—testimony cards, radio broadcasts, and sound cars, for example—according to what was needed at the time. Today, since people in many areas are seldom at home, increased emphasis has been placed on supplementing our house-to-house ministry with public and informal witnessing. We have also been encouraged to go from house to house during the early evening if people are at work during the day. As Jehovah’s celestial chariot adjusts its course, are you keeping pace with it?—Ezek. 1:20, 21.
 3. How does being adaptable help us to be more effective in our territory?
3 Your Presentation: What are the people in your area presently concerned about? The economy? Family? War? It is beneficial to be aware of the current problems and circumstances common in our territory so that we can prepare an appropriate presentation. (1 Cor. 9:20-23) When householders express themselves, rather than giving a token response and continuing with our prepared presentation, how much better it is to adapt and address their concerns.
 4. Why should we be quick to adapt?
4 Very soon this world’s final “scene” will conclude, and the great tribulation will begin. “The time left is reduced.” (1 Cor. 7:29) How important it is, then, to adapt and to do so without delay, so that we can accomplish the most in the limited time left!

