Deep Appreciation for Jehovah’s Sacred Things
With whom should deep appreciation for what is sacred begin?
It should begin with Jehovah, who truly is The Sacred One. No moment passes in our lives when we are not personally benefiting from the loving-kindness of Jehovah God, the great Life-giver.​—Ps. 27:4.a
We should have deep appreciation for Jehovah not only for the abundance of material blessings he has bestowed upon humankind but also for the countless spiritual good things, chief of which is his Word, the Holy Bible. By means of it we can appreciate God still more.​—Ps. 107:1.
What are some of the sacred things of Jehovah for which we should have deep appreciation?
Such sacred things certainly include the truths found in God’s Word, the Bible. Among these sacred things is the kingdom of Jehovah God by means of which he will vindicate his name, end wickedness and bless all mankind. The precious privilege of prayer is another, for by means of it we can praise Jehovah for his wonderful qualities. Also by means of it we can thank him for all his goodness toward us.
Jehovah’s holy spirit by means of which Christians gain enlightenment and strength to accomplish their ministry is another sacred thing for which they should have deep appreciation. So also is the Christian congregation, which furnishes guidance and protection to those associated with it. There are also the privileges of dedication and baptism and the treasure of the Christian ministry, concerning which the apostle Paul wrote: “I am grateful to Christ Jesus our Lord, . . . because he considered me faithful by assigning me to a ministry.”​—1 Tim. 1:12.
How can we show that we have deep appreciation for Jehovah’s sacred things?
By letting them serve Jehovah’s purpose in our lives. We can show we have deep appreciation for the truths of God’s Word by regularly feeding on that Word, obeying its commands and applying its principles in our lives. We show we have appreciation for Jehovah’s sacred kingdom by giving our exclusive allegiance to it, by setting our hopes on it and by preaching its good news at every opportunity. We show our appreciation for the precious privilege of prayer by ‘praying incessantly,’ by ‘persevering in prayer,’ and by never being too busy to pray. (1 Thess. 5:17; Rom. 12:12) We show appreciation for Jehovah’s holy spirit by asking God for it and by utilizing the various means by which we can obtain it, such as personal Bible study and assembling with fellow Christians.
And how can we show appreciation for the sacred privileges of dedication and baptism? On the one hand, by dedicating our lives to do Jehovah’s will and being baptized in symbol of that dedication and then living up to that dedication. On the other hand, we can show our appreciation of these by aiding others to reach out for these same sacred privileges. As for showing appreciation for the sacred Kingdom ministry, this we can do by putting it first in our lives, by sharing regularly in it and by engaging full time in the preaching work if at all able to do so.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, February 1, 1969.

