Help New Ones Make Progress
1 On April 17, 1992, nearly 11.5 million people worldwide gathered to celebrate the Memorial of Christ’s death. This was over two and a half times the total number of publishers associated with congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses. How gratifying it is to see such multitudes flocking “to the mountain of Jehovah”! (Mic. 4:2) At present there are some seven million people who are showing a measure of interest in true worship and who are not yet public praisers of Jehovah. Surely Jesus’ words “the harvest is great” have never been so meaningful!​—Matt. 9:37, 38.
2 During the month of April, we will make a special effort to help all those who qualify to have a share in the field ministry. The Congregation Book Study conductor, assisted by other capable publishers and pioneers in his group, will play a key role in this. Our threefold goal is (1) to arrange for a home Bible study with new ones who attend the special public talk and the Memorial this year; (2) to encourage those who are studying to qualify to be unbaptized publishers; and (3) to increase our personal participation in the field ministry.
3 A special effort should be made by all to welcome and get acquainted with new ones who attend any of our meetings. What can we do to encourage more of these interested people to have a regular home Bible study?
4 On an average, 585,441 Bible studies were conducted in the United States each month of the 1992 service year. Publishers may invite their book study conductor to accompany them on Bible studies so as to get acquainted with the students. (km 3/81 p. 4) Some of these Bible students may now be attending meetings and qualify to have a share in the house-​to-​house work. Are new ones witnessing informally with some regularity? Do they meet the qualifications for becoming unbaptized publishers as set out in Our Ministry, pages 97-9? If so, explain to them how they might get started in the house-​to-​house work after becoming approved as unbaptized publishers.
5 We must not overlook encouraging one another in our Christian association. (Heb. 10:24, 25) If any have slowed down in their ministry, book study conductors should make definite arrangements to provide help and encouragement. Sometimes a warm invitation to accompany us in field service is all that is needed.
6 To make April an outstanding month of field service activity will take the cooperation of all. The book study conductor’s enthusiastic lead can make the difference as he helps every member of his group to have a full share in the ministry. Additional meetings for service may be arranged. Elderly ones can be given special attention, and young people can be helped in practical ways. Parents should see to it that the entire family shares in the ministry during April. If all of us give our best to Jehovah in this time of the harvest, his rich blessing will be ours.

