Question Box
▪ How should serving as an auxiliary pioneer be viewed?
Auxiliary pioneering should be viewed as both a privilege and a serious responsibility. Tens of thousands of publishers each month are appointed to serve as auxiliary pioneers, and some do so continuously. We commend these zealous publishers whose circumstances permit them to spend the required 60 hours in field service each month that they serve as auxiliary pioneers. Elders as well as others should encourage publishers who apply for auxiliary pioneer service to take their appointment seriously and avoid any inclination toward a casual attitude.
As with regular pioneers, those who volunteer as auxiliary pioneers for one or more months should first count the cost. (Luke 14:28) This includes determining ahead of time whether they can reasonably expect to spend the required amount of time in the field ministry without neglecting other Christian responsibilities. A person’s decision to enroll as an auxiliary pioneer should be made after prayerful consideration of his personal circumstances. It should not be prompted by emotions stirred because others are applying. It should be a reasoned-​out decision, accompanied by making a written schedule for fulfilling the requirements. It is important to read the application carefully and decide in one’s own heart that he can honestly say yes to what is required.
Of course, extra exertion is involved. Certain months during the year lend themselves well to becoming “intensely occupied” with preaching the good news. (Acts 18:5) These include the Memorial season of March and April and the months when the circuit overseer visits the congregation. Many publishers gladly discipline themselves to follow a somewhat stringent schedule so as to have an extra share in the preaching work during these periods of special activity, appreciating that rich blessings are often the result. (2 Cor. 9:6) Many publishers make special efforts to pioneer during vacation months and any month during the year that happens to have five full weekends. But in signing up, they appreciate the need to adhere to the principle ‘Let your Yes mean Yes’ by doing their very best to report 60 or more hours each month they serve as auxiliary pioneers.​—Matt. 5:37.
Publishers who may not be able to pioneer can help by making themselves available to work with the auxiliary pioneers, arranging definite appointments with them. It is helpful to stay out in service longer with the pioneers when possible. Pioneers may especially appreciate having the support of other publishers during early morning, late afternoon, or early evening hours. Auxiliary pioneers are glad to be invited to work with others in making return visits and starting home Bible studies. Those who can thus be supportive of the auxiliary pioneers are bound to reap the greater happiness that comes from giving.​—Acts 20:35.
Diligence on the part of the many auxiliary pioneers is deeply appreciated. Those able to join them can expect rich blessings. (Prov. 10:4) When can you next share in the joys of increased activity as an auxiliary pioneer?

