Service Meetings for April
Week Starting April 5
Song 129
10 min: Local announcements. Review current issues of the magazines, highlighting articles that may be of particular interest in your territory. Arrange for two publishers, one older and one younger, to demonstrate brief Scriptural presentations.
15 min: “The Watchtower​—Spiritual Food at the Proper Time.” Question-​and-​answer discussion. Include comments on the need to discern genuine interest before offering subscriptions. Evidences of sincere interest include a willingness to converse and express an opinion, an involvement in the conversation, a kindly disposition, a willingness to follow along with the reading of Bible texts, and an invitation to return for further discussion. (km 5/90 p. 8) It is usually best to deliver the magazines a few times to confirm interest before offering a six-​month subscription.
20 min: “Tie In the Tracts With Other Literature.” Question-​and-​answer coverage. Include brief presentations based on suggestions in paragraphs 2-6. Cover points from the box “Remember to Use Brochures.”
Song 14 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 12
Song 15
10 min: Local announcements. Relate any outstanding experiences in connection with the Memorial observance. Encourage all publishers to work with their field service groups this weekend.
20 min: “Simple and Effective Return Visits.” Discuss with audience. Have one demonstration showing how to initiate conversation on return visit. Remind all of the need to inform householders about their privilege to contribute toward the worldwide work. Give suggestions on what can be said. This statement appears on the inside cover of The Watchtower: “This is part of a worldwide Bible educational work that is supported by voluntary donations.” Other similar expressions may be used.
15 min: Question Box. Positive and encouraging discussion by service overseer or other elder who has served as an auxiliary pioneer. Interview one or two publishers who serve as auxiliary pioneers from time to time.
Song 39 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 19
Song 194
10 min: Local announcements and pertinent Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Read accounts report and any donation acknowledgments. Read Luke 6:38, and commend congregation for their generosity in supporting worldwide work as well as needs of local congregation.
20 min: “Help New Ones Make Progress.” A discussion between two or three book study conductors. After reviewing highlights of the article, explain what plans have been made to apply suggestions locally. How can we assist newly interested ones who attended the Memorial? What requirements must new ones meet if they wish to share in field service? What can be done to help individuals whose participation has been irregular in the past? How can all be encouraged to have a full share each month? How can stronger publishers assist in helping others?​—Rom. 15:1, 2.
15 min: “To the House of Jehovah Let Us Go.” Question-​and-​answer coverage of paragraphs 1-8 of insert. Briefly review highlights of publications mentioned in paragraph 7. Have capable publisher demonstrate how to help a new person understand why we are organized into congregations. (w84 11/1 p. 15 pars. 6, 7) Highlight features of our meetings that are in sharp contrast with Christendom’s religious services. Encourage those conducting Bible studies to include each week a brief discussion designed to help the student develop a greater appreciation for the organization and the need to be part of it.
Song 28 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 26
Song 180
10 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News. Invite individuals to relate experiences about their expanded field service activity during the month, such as being an auxiliary pioneer, starting new Bible studies, or assisting interested ones who attended the Memorial.
15 min: “Born Again.” Reasoning book, pages 76-80. Demonstration of two publishers meeting someone during house-​to-​house work who asks, “Have you been born again?” Publishers respond in one of the ways suggested on pages 79-80. Afterward, publishers discuss making return visit using points from scriptures in paragraphs 1-3 on page 78.
20 min: “To the House of Jehovah Let Us Go.” Question-​and-​answer coverage of paragraphs 9-14 of insert. Using suggestions in paragraphs 12 and 13, have publisher demonstrate how to talk to someone who is holding back.
Song 127 and concluding prayer.

