Simple and Effective Return Visits
1 Do you regularly make return visits, or do you generally find it difficult because of not knowing what to say? There is no need to feel intimidated. Three things will help you to be successful: (1) good preparation; (2) ability to discuss one or two points on a few simple Bible subjects; and (3) willingness to listen to the viewpoint of the householder.
2 In preparing to make the return visit, consider what subject would be appropriate to discuss with the householder. Is he a student? Many students will have extra time to discuss Bible topics this month as they enjoy a break from their studies. You will likely find some to be open to the Kingdom message. Did you raise a question at the end of your previous visit, or did the householder show interest in a particular subject? Review your notes, and use the Reasoning book to locate the information you will need to make an effective return visit. When you make the call, be warm and friendly. Greet the householder by name.
3 If you placed The Watchtower and Awake! with the householder, your return visit could be based on one or two simple points you have selected from a magazine. If you placed a tract on the initial call, you may either comment on the tract itself or follow up the placement by referring to an appropriate point in a magazine or a brochure.
4 If you placed “A Peaceful New World​—Will It Come?,” simply say:
▪ “The last time I called, we spoke about God’s promise of a peaceful new world. As we discussed, better conditions will come by means of God’s Kingdom. What do you think is required for us to be a part of that peaceful new world?” Allow the householder to comment, then share the thought at Psalm 37:9, 11, 29.
5 If you placed “What Hope for Dead Loved Ones?,” these brief remarks may get a discussion started:
▪ “At the end of our last conversation, I left you a tract entitled What Hope for Dead Loved Ones? The third paragraph raises some interesting questions: ‘Why do people die? Where are the dead? And how can we be sure they can live again?’ The next subheading, entitled ‘Death, and What Happens When We Die,’ answers each question. I happen to have an extra copy of the tract here. Notice what it says in the fourth paragraph.” Then as the householder follows along, read the paragraph, including the two scriptures, and ask the householder for his viewpoint. Listen carefully to what he has to say, and follow through accordingly.
6 During the course of the discussion, the householder may express a number of viewpoints that are not accurate. It is not necessary to take issue with everything he says. Rather, stick to the topic being discussed. Any unscriptural ideas he may have can be corrected during future return visits.
7 By all means plan to follow up on any interest by making simple and effective return visits during April.

