The Watchtower​—Spiritual Food at the Proper Time
1 For nearly 114 years, The Watchtower has been admonishing its readers to keep alert spiritually. Its companion magazine Awake! builds confidence in the Creator’s promise of a peaceful and secure new world within our generation. Together, these two publications have been faithful instruments lighting our way through a bedarkened world. (Isa. 60:2) The truth of God’s Word never changes, but our understanding of it becomes clearer as Jehovah uses these and other instruments to give us spiritual “food at the proper time.”​—Matt. 24:45; Prov. 4:18.
2 Make the Best Use of Magazines: We can demonstrate our gratitude for the spiritual enlightenment we have received by enthusiastically encouraging people to read both The Watchtower and Awake! Ordinarily, we would not offer a subscription when making an initial visit in the house-​to-​house work or when witnessing informally. Many people obtain single copies of the magazines with some regularity and obviously enjoy reading them. These persons may appreciate the opportunity to receive a subscription for six months. However, it is best to offer single issues of the magazines to householders who are not well acquainted with our literature and whose appreciation for its value may be limited.
3 How can you discern if there is genuine interest? As you feature one or two points in a magazine, a tract, or a brochure, note the householder’s reaction. Does he listen attentively? Does he respect the Bible and follow along with the reading of Bible texts? Does he respond to viewpoint questions? If so, you may arrange for a return visit within a week or even sooner and enjoy a further discussion at that time. If it is clear that the householder is reading the literature you left and appreciates talking about spiritual things, you may ask him if he would appreciate receiving the magazines regularly.
4 Individual issues of the magazines may be offered to fellow workers, schoolmates, and relatives. The magazines may also be offered to business acquaintances and in street witnessing.
5 The new magazines should be made available to publishers as soon as they are delivered to the congregation. When you receive a new issue, become thoroughly familiar with it. What subjects deeply concern people in your area? World peace and security? The economy? Good government? The environment? Outstandingly, The Watchtower directs people to the only permanent solution, God’s Kingdom. (Dan. 2:44; Matt. 6:10) It is truly a priceless gift from our “Grand Instructor.”​—Isa. 30:20.
6 April and May offer excellent opportunities to devote more time to field service. Since May has five full weekends, many will be enrolling as auxiliary pioneers. All of us can set personal goals now to increase our field service during these two months and enthusiastically encourage everyone we meet to read The Watchtower and Awake!

