Tie In the Tracts With Other Literature
1 Of all the magazines being published today, only The Watchtower and Awake! can help sincere readers find the path to everlasting life. As you converse with people during April and May, some will show unmistakable interest in the Kingdom message, and you may draw their attention directly to the latest magazines or one of the Society’s colorful brochures. Others may initially show little interest. In such cases, first you might discuss a point or two in a tract; then if the householder shows further interest, tie in the tract with the magazine or brochure you are featuring.
2 You could say:
▪ “Most people would agree that in today’s world, there are more problems than solutions. Did you know that many of our most serious problems were foretold in the Bible?” Then you may turn to pages 4 and 5 of the tract Will This World Survive? and discuss some of the problems.
3 If you are featuring the April 1 Watchtower and the householder shows interest in what you have read from the tract, you can point to the article entitled “Follow the Light of the World” and explain how Jesus Christ will ultimately solve all man’s problems. Then offer to return at a convenient time to discuss the matter further.
4 If the April 8 “Awake!” is being highlighted, you could use the introduction outlined in paragraph 2 of this article and then add:
▪ “Many are skeptical of the ability of religion and politics to solve our problems, but they wonder whether science has the answer.” Then read an appropriate point in the article “Can Science Meet the Challenges of the 21st Century?” It is quite likely that this article will appeal to many young people, especially students.
5 When featuring the “Look!” brochure, you might use a different approach:
▪ “Many people wonder what happens to us when we die. Some say we go either to heaven or to hell; others are not sure. The Bible’s answer is both surprising and reassuring.” Then you could introduce and discuss portions of the tract What Hope for Dead Loved Ones? Thereafter you could refer to pages 16 and 17 in the brochure if the householder shows interest in the tract.
6 When witnessing to Jewish people, use the tract A Peaceful New World​—Will It Come?, which features quotations from the Hebrew Scriptures. You could ask the householder the two questions presented in the first paragraph of the tract. After he responds, direct his attention to the first paragraph on page 3. This points to the Messiah as the means by which the peaceful new world will come. If the householder shows further interest, use the April 1 Watchtower in the way suggested in paragraph 3 of this article.
7 If you are a new publisher, you will no doubt appreciate a simple approach. Why not obtain a supply of the tract Will This World Survive? and follow the suggestions outlined above in paragraph 2?
8 We are honored to bring the message of salvation to the homes of people. In our search for ‘deserving ones,’ let us make good use of our tracts and tie them in with other literature when interest is found.​—Matt. 10:13.

