“To the House of Jehovah Let Us Go”
1 David responded with eagerness to the invitation: “To the house of Jehovah let us go.” (Ps. 122:1) Jehovah’s “house,” represented by the temple, was the gathering place for those who had a desire to worship the true God. It was a sanctuary of security and peace. Today, the worldwide Christian congregation is God’s “house,” “a pillar and support of the truth.” (1 Tim. 3:15) All the provisions for salvation are made available through this channel. For that reason, “to it all the nations must stream” if they desire to enjoy the blessings promised under God’s Kingdom rule.​—Isa. 2:2.
2 This “house” comprises more than 69,000 congregations in 229 lands. The doors of Kingdom Halls around the world are open, with more than four million zealous workers extending the invitation: “Come! . . . Let anyone that wishes take life’s water free.” (Rev. 22:17) Many have heard this message and responded with appreciation. Others have been touched but have not yet come to Jehovah’s house by associating with the Christian congregation. Such have a “spiritual need” that can be satisfied with provisions found only in the congregation. (Matt. 5:3) We live in critical times, with the end of this system rapidly approaching. An indifferent or reluctant attitude can result in perilous delay. It is urgent that people reach out to “draw close to God” by drawing closer to his organization. (Jas. 4:8) How can we help them?
3 Direct Interest to the Organization: From our initial contact with interested persons, we should be directing their attention to the organization. While we may be able personally to locate scriptures and explain fundamental doctrines, we are not the source of such knowledge. Everything we have learned has come from the organization, channeled through the slave class that supplies “food at the proper time.” (Matt. 24:45-47) From the start, new ones need to realize that pure worship involves more than just us or even the local congregation; there is an organized, theocratic, worldwide society operating under Jehovah’s direction.
4 The direction we receive originates with Jehovah, who has promised to guide and teach us. (Ps. 32:8; Isa. 54:13) This instruction is disseminated primarily through our literature. If we can help interested ones develop a high regard for the literature, recognizing it as a source of lifesaving instruction, they will be far more likely to read and apply its message than to discard it quickly. We should always present and use this literature in a way that cultivates respect for it. This teaches new ones to appreciate the organization and to rely upon its provisions.
5 Let interested ones know that there is a central meeting place in the community where instruction is regularly provided. Give them the Kingdom Hall address and the meeting times. Explain the differences between our meetings and the religious gatherings they may have attended in the past. Everyone is welcome; there are no collections or personal solicitations for funds. While appointed ministers conduct the programs, everyone has opportunity to participate by offering comments and sharing in program parts. Families are welcome; children are included in our Bible discussions. Our ministers do not wear special robes or garments. The Kingdom Hall is tastefully decorated and has no candles, statues, or images. Those who attend are primarily residents of the local neighborhood.
6 Direct Interest Progressively on Bible Studies: The primary purpose of a Bible study is to teach the truth of God’s Word. It should also build in the student an appreciation for Jehovah’s organization and make him aware of the vital need to become part of it. The great work done by Jesus and his disciples in the first century attracted sincere ones and united them for work under a central governing body. In communities where the response was good, congregations were formed to give regular training and instruction. Those associated were strengthened spiritually, helping them to endure times of tribulation. (Heb. 10:24, 25; 1 Pet. 5:8-10) In our day it is Jehovah’s purpose “to gather all things together again in the Christ.” (Eph. 1:9, 10) As a result, we have a worldwide “association of brothers.”​—1 Pet. 2:17.
7 The weekly Bible study should include instruction that will help students appreciate the organization and take advantage of provisions for their salvation. Take a few minutes each week to relate or describe something about the organization and how it functions. You can find helpful talking points in the November 1, 1984, Watchtower. The brochures Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century and Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide discuss major facets of the organization and how they may benefit us. Arranging for Bible students to view the video Jehovah’s Witnesses​—The Organization Behind the Name will let them see for themselves what it is accomplishing. Selected reports and experiences from the Yearbook can show the success of the work in countries and cultures other than our own. Other publications may also be used. Over a period of time, progressively explain such things as why we go from house to house, the purpose of our meetings, how we finance our work, and the worldwide scope of our activity.
8 Getting acquainted with other Witnesses can have a stimulating effect on new ones, broadening their concept of the congregation. To that end, invite other publishers to sit in on the study from time to time. Someone in the congregation with a similar background or similar interests might add a new dimension to your student’s outlook. Perhaps an elder can accompany you just to get acquainted. Arranging for the circuit overseer or his wife to visit the study may prove to be a real blessing. If there are Witnesses who live close by, getting them acquainted with the Bible student may provide additional encouragement for the student to attend congregation meetings.
9 Encourage New Ones to Come to Meetings: New ones need to realize how important it is to attend the meetings. Try to stimulate their interest. Point out articles that will be covered in the Watchtower Study. Mention titles of upcoming public talks. Relate highlights of the material to be covered in the Theocratic Ministry School and Congregation Book Study. Express your own feelings about what you learn at these meetings and why you feel the need to attend. If you are able, offer transportation. A phone call before the meeting might provide an additional incentive to attend.
10 When a Bible student does come to a meeting, make him feel welcome. Introduce him to others, including the elders. If he is attending the public talk, introduce him to the speaker. Show him around the Kingdom Hall. Explain the purpose of the literature and magazine counters, contribution boxes, library, and yeartext. Let him know that not only is the hall a house of worship but it is also a center from which the preaching work is locally organized.
11 Explain how our meetings are conducted. Show the student the publications we use. Point out that the Bible is our primary textbook. Everyone can participate, including young children. Explain that all the music and lyrics in our songbook were composed by Jehovah’s Witnesses for use in our worship. Call attention to the variety in the backgrounds of those attending. Make positive comments about the spirit of friendliness and hospitality. This kindly, sincere interest may be one of the strongest factors in prompting the student to come again.
12 Why Some May Be Holding Back: Often, in spite of all you do, some are reluctant to move closer to the organization. Do not quickly give up. Try to put yourself in their place. Up to this time, likely they have not really felt the need to attend religious services except on special occasions. Members of the family or close friends may be pressuring them. They may feel intimidated by neighbors who make disparaging remarks. And, of course, they may be subject to a variety of distractions associated with social and recreational pursuits. They may view these as insurmountable barriers; you need to help them to see things in proper perspective and “make sure of the more important things.”​—Phil. 1:10.
13 Give Scriptural reasons to persevere. Stress that all of us urgently need the encouragement and spiritual upbuilding that we receive from our association together. (Rom. 1:11, 12) Jesus made it clear that family opposition is not a valid reason to hold back. (Matt. 10:34-39) Paul urged us not to be ashamed to identify ourselves publicly as Jesus’ disciples. (2 Tim. 1:8, 12-14) Personal pursuits and distractions have to be controlled; otherwise, they become a snare. (Luke 21:34-36) Those who merit Jehovah’s blessing have to be whole-​souled, never halfhearted. (Col. 3:23, 24) Instilling appreciation for such Bible principles may open the way for them to progress spiritually.
14 The Doors Are Open: Jehovah’s house of true worship is elevated above all others. The invitation is being sounded in 229 lands around the world: “Come, . . . let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, . . . and he will instruct us about his ways, and we will walk in his paths.” (Isa. 2:3) A positive response by new ones can save their life. Directing their interest to Jehovah’s organization is one of the best ways we can help them.

