Vou XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y M SEPTEMBER 15, 1917 


No. 18 


THE FINAL CONFLICT 

'Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not against 

flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, 

against spiritual wickedness m high places." — Eph. 6:11, 12. 


Darkness hatea the light. "Ye are the light of the world," 
said the great Master concerning his people. The church is 
near the end of its earthly pilgrimage and the hour of the 
final conflict is at hand. To be forewarned is to be forearmed. 
The words of St. John now seem appropriate: "Look to yourselves
, that we lose not those things which we have wrought, 
but that we receive the full reward." — 2 John 8. 

For more than Bix thousand years a great battle has been 
waged between good and evil — light and darkness. The fight 
has involved the entire human family. God in his wisdom has 
permitted the forces of evil to prevail for a time, but the 
time is near at hand when the tide of battle shall turn. The 
conflict has resulted in great carnage, thousands of millions 


having succumbed to the agencies of darkness. It has been 
attended with untold sorrow. The fight had its beginning when 
our first parents were driven from Eden. It will end only at 
the end of the Millennial age. 

When Jesug was on earth he fought the same good fight 
of faith, and for a time it seemed that the enemy had van* 
quished him, but shortly he proved that he had triumphed 
over death and the grave. His victory was complete — -his reward
 the highest of all. Through him God brought life and 
immortality to light, and has made known his purposes to all 
who have imbibed his spirit and sought to follow in his footsteps
. 

Since Pentecost God has been selecting the church, the 


VII— 21 


[6141] 


(271-265) 


(275-276) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BCOOKLYN, N. Y. 


members of which are called to follow in the footsteps of the 
great Master, fighting as he fought, and they must gain the 
victory before receiving the "crown of life." 
THE GREAT ARMIES 

There are two great armies engaged in this conflict. On 
the side of evil is the army of darkness, marshaled by 
Satan, the prince of darkness. On the other side is 
the army of light with Jesus Christ as its Field-Marshal, leading
 his host on to certain victory. 

Every man and woman on earth is doing service this day 
for one or the other of these armies. There is no middle 
ground; as St. Paul clearly puts it, "Know ye not that to 
whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are 
to whom you obey; whether of sin unto death or of obedience 
unto righteousness?" — Romans 6:16. 

The Lord's army on earth is composed of those who have 
turned away from the world of sin and darkness and are 
following the Master whithersoever he goeth because of their 
full consecration and love for him. All such manifest the 
spirit of Christ; all others are in the army of Satan. Who 
is on the Lord's side? On which side are you? 

The church this side of the veil is the church militant, 
meaning the church at war. It is both an individual and a 
collective warfare. Each one must fight the good fight of 
faith and be victorious before he can attain to the position of 
joint-heirship with the Lord, and each one having the Master's 
spirit will fight together with all the other members of the 
body to maintain the spirit of unity in the body. All Buch 
must fight under the leadership of their Captain. The same 
admonition St. Paul gave to Timothy applies to each member
 of the body: "This charge I commit unto thee, son Timothy
, according to the prophecies which went before on thee, 
that thou by them mightest war a good warfare." "Fight 
the good fight of faith; lay hold on eternal life, whereunto 
thou wast called, and hast professed a good profession before 
many witnesses." (1 Timothy 1:18; 6:12) Again St. Paul 
said, "Only let the lives you live be worthy of the Gospel, that 
we may know who are standing fast in one spirit and one 
mind, fighting shoulder to shoulder for the faith and good 
news. Never for a moment quail before your enemies." — 
Phil. 1:27, 28. Weymouth. 

To a soldier* who engages in war it is of the greatest 
importance that he should know who his enemies are, their 
number and force. A good soldier will study to know what 
will be the method of attack by the enemy, and seek to 
strengthen his, position of defense that he may repel every 
assault. In the Christian warfare this is even more vital. Before
 we can successfully engage in the great and final conflict, 
the battle that must be decisive with us, it is of the utmost 
importance that we carefully consider the number, force and 
strength of the enemy, and his me£hod of attack. 
ENEMIES FOBESEADOWBD 

Gdliath pictured Satan and his cohorts. None of the host 
of Israel would attempt to fight him until David came upon 
the scene. Satan found none willing and able to cope with 
him until the antitypical David — Christ Jesus — championed 
the cause of righteousness on behalf of mankind. David represents
 the entire Christ, Head and body. Hie experiences 
foreshadowed the fight in which they must engage. 

In out text the Apostle Paul particularly warns the church 
concerning our enemies. Another translation renders it thus: 
"For ours is not a conflict with mere flesh and blood, but 
with spiritual beings in unseen places, despotisms, empires, 
the forces that control and govern this dark world, the spiritual
 host of evil [host of evil spirits] arrayed against us in the 
heavenly warfare." (Weymouth.) Our enemies or adversaries
 may be divided into four divisions, designated as the 
flesh, the world, the devil and the evil spirits. 
HOW JESUS OVSBOAMB 

That all the members of the new creation must fight these 
enemies is clearly shown from the fact that our Master was 
subjected to such trials, and further evidence thereof H the 
positive statements of the Apostle, It is important that we 
take heed to the Master's method of meeting these attacks. 

Alter our Lord had been fasting for 40 days and nights and 
was weak and emaciated, Satan approached him, first suggesting
 that he change stones into bread for the gratification of 
his own flesh. Jesus met this attack with the sword of the 
spirit, saying, "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by 
every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." Then 
Satan suggested to him that while it was true he was to be 
the King, it would require a long time for hfrn to convince 
the people, therefore he should go up on the Temple and 
jump into the valley, that Jehovah would save him and thus 
he would demonstrate to the people that he was more than 
an ordinary creature. In the same manner Jesus met this 


attack, "Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God." Then 
Satan made a direct attack upon the Master, suggesting that 
if Jesus would join him, he (Satan) would turn over to him 
all the kingdoms of earth, only Jesus must recognize and 
give proper honor to Satan. Yielding to either one of these 
temptations would have been a violation of his covenant. 
Jesus met this attack with the words, "Thou shalt worship 
the Lord thy God and him only shalt thou serve." 
PEINCIPLE VEBSTTS PASSION 

God governs the entire universe by fixed principles, and 
everyone who is governed contrary thereto is governed by passion
. This is clearly demonstrated in Jesus' method of defense
 against the adversary. Many seem not to he able to 
understand what is meant by "PRINCIPLE." Seemingly 
they think it is whatever they themselves may consider to be 
right when guided by their conscience, or by the argument 
of someone else. "Principle" means, a settled rule of action
; the governing law of conduct. This rule of action, or 
governing law of conduct, is set forth in the Bible, God's 
Word, and all who are governed by the Word of God are 
governed by principle. "Passion" means the capacity of being
 affected by external agencies; to be controlled by outside 
influence; susceptible to control from external influences. The 
new creature must avoid passion and be governed always by 
principle. If we are influenced or swayed in our judgment, or 
conclusion about anything, by reason of what others may say 
or do, we are governed to that extent by passion. If we 
prayerfully and diligently seek to know what is the Lord's 
will and what his Word says on the matter, and are governed
 by that, then we are governed by principle. 

Attack and temptation, within the meaning of the Scriptures
, are one and the same thing. We have no power to 
turn stones into bread, but have received spiritual powers 
which may be used for selfish purposes contrary to God's will. 
For example, making merchandise of the Gospel; preaching 
for the applause of men or using our spiritual powers for any 
other selfish purpose. Concerning such, the Apostle Peter 
says, "Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking 
oversight thereof, not by constraint but willingly; not for 
filthy lucre's sake, but of a ready mind." — 1 Peter 5:2. 

The "spirit of the world" is to follow methods that make 
outward show of great piety to attract attention. Any attempt
 on the part of a Christian to attract attention to himself
 is a manifestation of the spirit of the world, and a violation
 of principle and out of harmony with God's methods. 

All temptations are the effects of the adversary's influence
. He employs various methods in order ^hat he may deceive
. He makes some believe that they are not receiving the 
proper consideration, notice, and honor to which they are 
entitled. This leads into a wrong course. 

METHOD OF ATTACK 

St. Paul emphasizes the fact that the conflict of the church 
in the end of the age will be particularly with the evil spirits. 
These evil spirits have been restrained since the great deluge
, and their day of judgment is at hand. We therefore 
should expect that they would be able to exercise greater 
power over the human race now than at any time since their 
restraint. Many Scriptures clearly indicate that the real battle
 ground of the Christian is in the mind, therefore the attack
 of the evil spirit will be expected along this line. We 
learn from one who was long subject to the influence of 
these demons that their method of attack is as follows: 
First, by 

"Suggestion" : By this is meant that the demons intrude 
evil thoughts upon the mind. All Christians realize that 
they have a conflict in keeping out of the mind thoughts 
that are improper, and that it is a constant warfare to keep 
them out. But where one indulges in evil surmising, judging 
another, he is filling his mind with evil thoughts. Such are 
yielding to suggestions which, if persisted in, lead to the 
second stage, which is designated as 

"Abbreviation" : The word abbreviation means to cut 
short. It here means lack of continuity of thought, or lack 
of concentration of thought upon the Lord's Word. One 
who finds himself given over to evil surmising and evil 
thoughts will find great difficulty in concentration of mind 
upon the study of the Lord's Word, the "Sceiptttbe Sttjdies," 
or in prayer. Attempting either study or prayer, the one 
finds his mind suddenly turned away from his subject and 
turned to or set upon evil things. Thus continuing li« loses 
sight of principle, namely, the great truths of God's Word, 
and this leads to the third stage, designated as 

"Impression" which means that one is moved to act from 
sources other than the Word of God. The word "Impression" 
means sensible result of influence exerted from without; in 
other words, to be controlled by passion, not by the Word of 


[6142] 


SSPTKKBBH IS, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(277-278) 


God. For instance, one says, "I am moved to take this 
course because of what I have heard, or what influence another
 has brought to bear upon me," at the same time entirely 
ignoring the Word of the Lord covering the subject. This persisted
 in leads to the fourth stage, namely 

"Possession," whereby it i3 understood that the evil spirits 
take possession of the mind of the person and control his 
conduct. 

The Apostle tells us, "God resisteth the proud but giveth 
grace to the humble-minded." From this we would understand
 that humility of mind and heart would be a special 
protection provided by the Lord; and that any one manifesting
 spiritual pride or ambition, the Lord would remove from 
such one this protection, and the evil spirits would have 
special power over him. Time and again through the columns 
of The Watch Toweb the Lord's servant to the Laodicean 
church gave warnings of these enemies. We quote here a few 
of hi3 sayings: 

WHAT WE MAT SHOETLT EXPECT 

"The letting loose of these winds, or air powers (evil 
spirits), would seem to show that God will let go his^ hand 
of restraint; that be will have to do with the permission of 
the terrible trouble that will come. This outside influence 
will exercise a baneful effect upon men, when finally granted 
the liberty. These fallen spirits have been under restraint for 
these many centuries, but they have exercised their influence 
to whatever extent they have had permission. If they had 
had unlimited power they would have wrecked the world long 
ago; but they have been restrained. Apparently God will 
soon cease to restrain the fallen angels, and they will then 
proceed to vent their fury upon humanity, so that the whole 
eartli will be full of violence, the same as in the days of 
Noah. The power manifested by the demons when loosed, will, 
we believe, be with a view to the injury of mankind. We do 
not know but that many of our readers will have a share 
in that . injury. We have every reason to suppose that if 
these fallen angels shall get loose, they will vent their first 
anger upon the Lord's people. 

"As soon as the power that is now controlling them shall 
be removed, we shall have a reign of evil all over the earth. 
The evil spirits will do all the evil that is in their power* and 
this will constitute the trial of all the fallen angels — the 
lifting of the restraints to see whether they will go. contrary
 to the divine will. All who thus manifest their alliance 
with evil . in any way will become subjects of the second 
death; while others who -show their loyalty to God will 
mark themselves ad worthy, presumably, of everlasting life. 
It may be something in connection with the saints that will 
constitute the test of these angels. This will be the key, the 
secret connected with the awful time of trouble which the 
Bible tells us will mark the conclusion of this age and whjch 
will constitute the forerunner or beginning of the new dispensation
." 

THE TEST IS HOW OK 

"Symbolically, the earth represents organized society; the 
sea represents the disorganized masses (Daniel 7 :2 ; Luke 
21:25; Revelation 17:1,5) ; and the trees represent the household
 of faith. The letting loose suddenly of the fallen angels 
will account well for the suddenness of the coming trouble, 
which is mentioned everywhere in the Scriptures as one of its 
particular features — 'in one hour', 'suddenly, as travail upon 
a woman,' 'as in the days of Noah,' and 'as it was in the days 
of Lot/ There is only one way, so far as we can see, in which 
these fallen angels can have a trial, their trial consisting in 
having a fuller opportunity to sin, if they so desire, or in an 
opportunity to show, if they wish, that they are sick of sin and 
desire to return to harmony with God. We cannot think 
that God will allow this trial of the angels during the Millennial
 reign, for then nothing Bhall hurt, nothing shall destroy; 
Satan will be bound and all evil influences will be restrained. 
No; it cannot be then. And in order to be tried at all, tfcese 
fallen angels must have certain liberties granted, to prove 
them. Otherwise, where would be their trial? Consequently, 
reasoning along this basis (2 Peter 3:7), we reach the conclusion
 that the trial of these fallen angels is in the near future
 — perhaps to some extent already begun. In what way? 
'He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.' " 

Another says: "It is evidently God's purpose soon to allow 
the minds of many of his little ones to become an open battle 
ground, upon which the fallen angels shall be judged, and the 
manner in which we meet the tests will prove our worthiness 
bf crowns at the same time that it proves these disobedient 
spirits unworthy of life on any plane. This is something with 
which some, but not many, are yet familiar. Truly, we know 
the Apostle in writing of this evil day says, *We wrestle not 
against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against 


powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, 
against spiritual wickedness in heavenly places.' Truly 
we know the Lord Je«3U3 at the first advent began his ministry
 with forty days of conflict with the adversary, who 
all that time sought to sway his mind. Truly we have 
reason to believe he must have had other terrible battles 
when he spent 'all night in prayer, and especially when he 
was so depressed in the Garden of Gethsemane. But without
 actual experience it is quite impossible to conceive 
of the intensity of such struggles as are here indicated. 
{ Eph. 6:12) The base of the brain is seized as in a 
vise. Interpretations of Scripture, ingenious but misleading 
beyond description, are projected into the mind as water might 
be projected through a hose. Visions may be tried, wonderful 
illuminations of the mind as by a soft but glorious greenish or 
yellowish haze. Seductive suggestions may be made, based 
on circumstances of the environment. Offers of inspiration 
may be made. The privilege of sleep may be taken away for 
days at a stretch. All this is with the object of forcing the 
unfortunate into at least temporary insanity so as to destroy 
his influence and, if possible, his faith in God. Failing in all 
other attempts, the mind may be flooded with thoughts that 
are vile beyond description. Then remember the Vow." — 
Scbiptttbe Studies. Vol. VII. 

WICKED SPIRITS USE HITMAN AGENTS 

The evil ones use human agencies to attack members of the 
body. We may reasonably expect that all of the Lord's servants
 who are actively engaged in the closing hours of the 
harvest will he attacked through human agencies by these 
evil spirits. Time and again the enemy assaulted the reputation
 of our dear Brother Russell. He was taken away, however
 before the evil spirits were permitted to exercise their full 
power. Now we may expect that all manner of charges and 
attacks will be made by them through human agencies against 
the reputation, character and standing of others who are engaged
 in the harvest work, which will constitute a test to 
all the brethren, as to whether they will be governed by "pas* 
sion" [outside influence], or whether they will be governed by 
the "principle" of God's Word. The more prominent position 
occupied by one in the harvest work, the more venomous will 
be the attacks. Let each one examine his own heart carefully
 and see to it that his own conclusions are based upon 
right principles, namely, the Word of God, and not upon outside
 influences. No other course is safe. 

As an example of the methods of the evil ones and as a 
warning to the brethren, we deem it proper to here call attention
 to the fact that we have just learned that a man living 
in Enterprise, Alabama, who was once actively engaged in 
the truth but now seems to be the victim of evil spirits, is organizing
 and vigorously conducting a definite campaign against 
the International Bible Students Association and its officers
, particularly its president. We learn that he is publishing
 and proposes to send out a pamphlet charging many 
criminal things against the president of our Society, all of 
which are without foundation in truth. A brother in the 
truth who is firm and steadfast and who recently came in 
contact with the one who is now fomenting this trouble, writes 
us concerning him as follows: 

"I judge from statements he himself has made to me, he 
has made the Bible House no end of trouble in the past. He 
ia, by nature, a trouble-maker. He has made it his cnief business
 for eight years to fight the ecclesia of Enterprise. Now 
he is engaged in circularizing the friends far and near, drawing
 as many as possible to his notions. He was' once in harmony
 with present truth and very zealous and effective in its 
ministry, but has become sour because the friends did not 
endorse some of his unloveliness; and he has allowed this sourness
 to wreck his Christian character. He has practically 
abandoned his business and is putting in all of his time carrying
 on a voluminous, seditionary correspondence. He denounces
 the 7th volume as a humbug, both in the streets of his 
town and in his letters. He is shrewd enough to correspond 
with pilgrims, then to use their letters to his own advantage. 
When I first came South he wrote me that he felt called of the 
Lord to write the 7th volume himself (or words to that effect, 
and calculated to ^ive that impression) ; but that because of 
his lack of education and ignorance, he felt that a smarter 
brother ought to do it, and he therefore welcomed my coming. 
He would give me the ideas and let me frame them into choice 
language. I held a service in his neighborhood one Sunday, 
under his direction, hoping to be able to influence him against 
the evil of his course; but soon I saw it was no use — that he 
was determined to influence my course rather than allow me in 
the slightest to influence him. So I called off all further 
intercourse, and he regards me as a hopeless child of the 
devil. He is in very poor health, almost a nervous wreck, and 


[6143] 


(278-279) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y, 


1 think that in this unfortunate condition the evil spirits 
have obsessed his mind and are in full possession of him. He 
has avoided fellowship so long, constantly studying and 
meditating and brooding by himself, that he has become the 
most self -centered man I ever met. He seems to be unconscious
 of this and not guilty of deliberate selfishness, but irrationally
 so. He states in a letter I read last night, that he 
is organizing a definite rebellion against the I. B. S. A.; that 
thousands throughout the land are joining his cause, as 
he can prove by letters in hand, and that he will be the 
Moses of these poor, oppressed people." 

The Lord Jesus laid down the only method of procedure 
against a brother who has done wrong. (Matt. 18:15-18) 
Any other course pursued against a brother is out of harmony
 with the fixed principles of God's Word* We deem it 
only necessary to call attention to these things that the dear 
brethren everywhere may be warned against the wily methods 
of attack by the adversary and his coadjutors against the 
work of the harvest and those who are engaged in it. 

HOW TO REPEL ATTACKS 

All the Scriptures bearing upon the point indicate that 
the conflict will be more severe as we near the end. Referring
 to this time St. Paul says, "Finally, my brethren, be 
strong in the Lord and in the power of his might" — Ephesians 
6:10. 

The clear inference here is that each soldier of the cross 
must have special strength in order to stand at this time, and 
to repel the combined attack of Satan and his coadjutors. If 
we look at it from one standpoint, we would become dismayed 
and despair of winning, but looking at it from another viewpoint
, we know that he who is for us is greater than all who 
can be against us; and he being for us, none can prevail 
against us. We are now in the evil* day. How then may we 
have the strength needed? The Apostle tells us of the armor 
of God provided for us, which will prove invulnerable to all 
attacks of the adversary. "Wherefore, take unto you the 
whole armor of God that ye may be able to withstand [resist
] in the evil day, and having" done all, to stand [remain 
a victor]." (-Ephesians 6:13) The assurance here is that 
he who has this armor on, keeps it on and learns to use it 
properly, will be able to stand. 

While the Apostle used as an illustration the human warrior
, clothed in the proper and complete accoutrements of war, 
yet he did not mean that the Christian needs this kind of armor
. The armor of the Lord is for the new creature because 
his warfare is not a carnal warfare, but a spiritual warfare. — 

2 Corinthians 10:4,5. 

WHAT IS THE ABHOR? 

God is the maker of this armor through human instrumentalities
. The armor consists of his Wtfrd, the message of 
truth, put into proper Bhape to be used for the benefit of the 
new creation. Describing this armor in detail, the Apostle 


"Having your loins girt about with the truth." The girdle 
is a symbol of servitude, and suggests that no one is safe at 
this time unless he is a servant of the truth. Those engaged 
in evil surmising, faultfinding, backbiting, slander, libel or 
other works of darkness are not servants of the truth. On 
the contrary, let each one of us see to it that he guards himself
 against such wiles of the adversary, and that he possesses 
the zeal peculiar to the house of the Lord and earnestly and 
zealously follows in the Master's footsteps by serving his 
cause at this time. 

"And having on the breastplate of righteousness." The 
breastplate was used to cover the vital organs of the body, par* 
ticularly the heart. A proper condition of heart is vital to 
the new creature. A righteous heart indicates purity, righteous
 motives, righteousness of character. "Keep thine heart 
with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life." (Prov. 
4:23) "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see 
God." (Matt. 5:8) "The eyes of the Lord run to and fro 
throxighout the whole earth to show his strength in behalf of 
him whose heart is pure." — 2 Chronicles 16:9. 

"And your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of 
peace." The soldier who engages in warfare must keep well 
his feet. If they are not shod they become sore, and his attention
 is directed more to the soreness than to his duties. The 
new creature has now many rough roads to travel. Therefore 
the feet members should be clothed with the message of peace 
and see to it that all anger, malice, hatred and strife, ill will, 
backbiting, faultfinding, accusations of the brethren, be put 
aside. None other will be able to stand. "Follow peace with 
all, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord." 
(Heb. 12:14} Those who hunt trouble now will surely find 
it; they will find little else. Those who avoid trouble find it 


necessary to be diligent in keeping themselves in the^eace and 
love of God. 

"Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall 
be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked." The 
enemy is constantly firing wicked darts at the soldiers of the 
cross. These darts are liable to stir up in your mind doubts, 
fears, skepticism. The shield of faith is the protection. Faith 
means the intellectual understanding and appreciation of the 
Word of God' — true principles — and a confident reliance upon 
that Word. Without faith it is impossible to please God." 
'This is the victory that overcometh the world, even your 
faith." 

"And take the helmet of salvation." The helmet is fitted 
over the head and represents the intellectual understanding 
and appreciation of the divine plan. This knowledge of God's 
Word, and his methods and his information concerning the 
methods of the adversary, is absolutely essential in order to 
protect ourselves against the evil ones of this day. If we 
had no knowledge of the demons and their methods of attack
, we could not be forearmed against them. 

"And the sword of the spirit, which is the Word of God." 
This is both an offensive and a defensive weapon. We must 
have it and know how to use it. Jesus wielded it successfully
 to each attack made upon him. He said, "It is written," 
and such must be our battle cry. We are not to use carnal 
weapons, nor such weapons as Satan uses. We are to use the 
truth and let the truth do the cutting. 

It is noticed that the Apostle names only six parts of 
the armor, whereas the armor of the ancient soldier was in 
seven parts. Seven is also a symbol of perfection. The 
seventh part, the one not named by the Apostle, was the 
greaves, and was a metal shield fitting over the front part of 
the foot to protect it from the darts of the adversary. The 
feet members of the church are now engaged in the fight. 
The greaves, therefore, would properly and fittingly represent 
the Vow. When it was promulgated our attention was called 
to this Scripture: "When the enemy shall come in like a 
flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against 
him."— Isaiah 59:19. 

HOW TO PUT OK THE ABM OR 

The words of the Apostle assume that the persons addressed
 have renounced the world and enlisted under the banner
 of the Lord! by making a full surrender of their will to do 
God's will. Hence he says by illustration: — 

{ 1 . ) Girdle — Servitude, Be a zealous and faithful servant
 of the truth. Let there be but one motive for service — 
love for God and his righteous cause. "By love serve." 

(2.) Breastplate — Righteousness. Having on the robe of 
Christ's righteousness now, study to be approved of God. 
Learn the great and vital ^principles of his Word and apply 
the,m to daily living; be controlled by these and let them 
work out in you a righteous character. Keep a pure heart. 

(3.) Sanaa Is—Peace. Do not hunt trouble. Live in peace 
with all so long as God's law is not sacrificed. Accept your 
part of suffering with joy. 

(4.) Shield — Faith. Maintain an abiding faith in God 
and in his sure Word of promise. Rely upon his Word and 
not upon the advice or influence of others. Stand, leaning 
only on the Lord. 

(5.) Helmet — Salvation. Strive to increase in heart appreciation
 of God and the Lord Jesus. Continue in the study 
of the Word. Feed upon the food provided. Keep always before
 your mind the- strong hope of salvation and the high position
 to which you have been called. 

(6.) Sword — Word of ^ God, Know God's Word, in letter 
and spirit. Be able to give a reason for the hope you have. 
Use it deftly in repelling the adversaries. Let your battle cry 
be, "It is written." 

(7.) Vow. Daily put in practise the Vow in letter and 
spirit. Take the Lord Jesus with you in all things. Be filled 
with his Spirit. 

If you do these things you shall be strong in the Lord 
and have the power which his supreme strength imparts and 
shall be a certain victor. 

THE ITNAIi OOKFUOT OT THE "EVIL DAY" 

This is the evil day; the time when every man's work is 
being tried in the fiery furnace; these are perilous times of 
which we have been warned; it is the last battle, the great 
and final conflict. The enemy is advancing from every quarter
. Shall we quail before our adversaries? No, thank God, 
for he has made ample provision for his people. The whole 
armor of God is now supplied. It was never so much needed 
as now. Those who have it on and keep it on will stand. 
Others will not. 

Let us not be discouraged, dear soldiers of the cross; let 
us arise to the importance of the time and face the perils 


[6144] 


SSpr«MBi£R 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(280-283) 


of the hour with confidence in our Commander and Lord. The 
history' of ages is looking down upon us. The holy angels 
of heaven are beholding the final conflict. Jesus and the 
members of the bride who have passed beyond the veil are 
watching our course, how we are quitting ourselves. It is 
the greatest battle of the ages, and the enemy is making his 
final' onslaught. God's little band of soldiers, now clothed 
with the complete armor of the Lord, are marshalled for the 
last time upon the battle field. We hear the encouraging 
words of our Captain, "Be thou faithful unto death, and I 
will give thee the crown of life!'* Soon this army will emerge 
from the smoke of battle, clothed in wreaths of victory. Soon 
it will be asked, "Who is she that looketh forth as the morning
, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an 
army with banners?" (Canticles 6:10) Soon the answer from 


heaven shall ring out, "This is triumphant Zion, whose great 
Leader has forever put to flight the armv of darkness." She 
is pure, just, holy, good, and now stands in the glorious light 
of heaven with her glorious Captain. Terrible has been The 
Christ, and will continue to be, in the conquest of evil. The 
dawn of his glorious reign is here, the new government is now 
to be put in operation. Soon all men will have full opportunity
 to stand in the light of truth and be able by the grace 
of the Lord to free themselves from all the influences of evil 
and darkness. Be brave, be valiant soldiers, now! 

"Hear the call, gird your armor on, 
Grasp the Spirit's mighty Sword. 

Take the helmet of salvation, 

Pressing on to battle for the Lord ! " 


BLESSING GOD AND CURSING MEN 

[This article was a reprint of that published in issue of April 1, 1899, which please see.] 


PSALMS OF DELIVERANCE 


October 7. — Psalms 85, 126. 

ISRAEL'S DELIVERANCE FROM CAPTIVITY TO LITERAL BABYLON — THE APPROACHING DELIVERANCE FROM MYSTIC BABYLON THE GREAT — 
CHRIST THE ANTITYPICAL CYRUS — WIIY THE CHURCH CAN SING " SONGS IN THE NIGHT " OT EARTHLY SORROW — THE TRUE 
SOURCE OF THEIR REST OF HEART — THEIR JOY IN THE FULFILMENT OF THE ABRAHAMIC COVENANT— THE LONG-PROMISED BLESSING
 OF ALL THE FAMILIES OF THE EARTH. 

"They that sow in tears shall reap in jsy. M — Psalm. 126: 5. 


Psalm 85 may properly have several applications. The 
first of these would be to Israel's deliverance from the Babylonian
 captivity, when Cyrus, king of Persia, gave permission
 that all who desired to return to Palestine might do so. 
About fifty-three thousand availed themselves of this privilege
 and of his assistance. The Israelites rejoiced in this 
manifestation of the turning away of divine disfavor and the 
return to them of divine blessing. The pardon of their transgressions
 as a nation was evidenced in this privilege of returning
 to God's favor. 

A secondary application of this song of deliverance is 
just before us. During the past eighteen centuries Israel has 
been in a far greater captivity to Christendom. She has the 
promise, nevertheless, of a mightier deliverance. The Cyrus 
who gave them permission to return from literal Babylon was 
a type of the great Messiah who is about to give full liberty
 for the return of God's ancient people to divine favor — 
to Palestine. In Romans 11:25-29 the Apostle Paul refers 
to this coming deliverance. The great Deliverer will do more 
than merely regather Israel. He will do that which is predicted
 in Psalm 85; for, as the Apostle says, "This is my covenant
 with them when I shall take away their sins." See also 
Jeremiah 31:31-34; Hebrews 8:8-11. 

Israel's sins have not yet been taken away, even as the 
world's sins have not been taken away. The great Redeemer 
has indeed died for sin, and he is the sinner's friend. But as 
yet he has appeared in the presence of God only for the 
church— not for the world. (Hebrews 9:24) He is the Advocate
 for the church alone. He advocates for none except 
those who desire to approach to God; and these are the saintly 
only — those who love righteousness and hate iniquity. 

The world is enslaved by Sin and Death, the twin monarchs
 which are now reigning and which are causing mankind 
to groan. The Adamic race was born in this enslaved condition
, as the Scriptures declare. {Genesis 3:20; Psalm 51:5) 
Groaning under the weaknesses and imperfections thus inherited
 — mentnl, moral and physical — mankind long for the promised
 deliverance from the bondage of Sin and Death. Undoubtedly
 the majority of the race feel the gall of their slavery, 
and will rejoice to be set free. 

"HE GIVETH SONGS IN THE NIGHT" 

The great Deliverer of mankind is the antitypical Cyrus. 
Soon he will be victorious and will establish his kingdom 
under the whole heaven. (Daniel 7:27) Soon the church 
class, the saintly, the elect, will be glorified; and then the 
time will come for the blessing of the non-elect — for their 
restitution to human perfection and to a world-wide paradise
, which Messiah's power will produce. "He must reign 
until he hath put all enemies under his feet; the last enemy 
that shall be destroyed is death." (1 Corinthians 15:25-27) 
Death will be destroyed. Sheol, hades, the grave, will be 
destroyed, by the resurrection of the dead therefrom — "every 
man in his own order." 

While the whole creation groans under its load of sin and 
sorrow, the saintly few may sing, may rejoice, even in the 
midst of all the sorrows of life, and even though they share 
the results of sin as fully or more fully than do others. 


The secret of their joy is twofold : ( 1 ) They have experienced 
reconciliation to God; (2) they have submitted their wills 
to his will. They obtained this new relationship by the way 
of faith in the fcedeemer— faith in his blood of atonement. 
They entered by the "strait gate" and the "narrow way" of 
consecration to God — surrendering their own wills, and covenanting
 to do the divine will to the best of their ability. This 
submission to the divine will and the realization that all of 
their life's affairs are in God's keeping and under his 
supervision give rest to the heart. In this surrendered condition
 they have a rest and peace which they never knew when 
they sought to gratify self-will and ignored the right of their 
Creator to the homage of their hearts and the obedience of 
their lives. 

Similarly, these .have joy, peace and songs of thankfulness 
to God because to them he grants a knowledge of his divine 
purposes, and shows them things to come. These see, beyond 
the trials and tribulations of the present time, the glories 
which will follow the sufferings of the present. These see that 
the church, the saintly few of all denominations and of all 
nationalities, are prospective heirs of God — heirs of glory, 
honor, immortality and association with the Redeemer in his 
glorious kingdom. This prospect encourages them. They also 
see the outlines of the divine program for the blessing of all 
the families of the earth. When they thus perceive that God is 
interested in their dear ones who are not saintly and in the 
whole human family, very few of whom are saints, it causes 
them rejoicing. When they perceive that God has arranged 
that through Christ and the glorified church all the families 
of the earth shall be blessed, it makes them "joyful in the 
house of their pilgrimage" — while waiting for their own change 
from human to divine nature. 

"YE SHALL GO FdBTH WITH SINGING" 

The second part of today's study is Psalm 126. This Psalm 
seems to picture the return of the Jewish exiles from the 
Babylonian captivity. A writer thus describes the scene of 
their departure from Babylon: 

"Forth from the gates of Babylon they rode, to the 
sound of joyous music — a band of horsemen playing on flutes 
and tabrets, accompanied by their own two hundred minstrels 
and one hundred and twenty-eight singers of the Temple (Ezra 
2:41-65), responding to the Prophet's voice as they quitted 
the shade of the gigantic walls and found themselves in the 
open desert beyond: ^'Go ye out of Babylon, flee ye from the 
Chaldeans, with a voice of singing declare ye, telJ this, ntter 
it even unto the end of the earth; say ye, The Lord hath redeemed
 his servant Jacob.'" — Isaiah 48:20. 

We are interested in this narrative sympathetically, and 
also because we realize that the Lord's providences control 
in respect to all the affairs of his chosen people, Israel. But 
we have a greater and more profound interest in the events 
here related now that our eyes have been opened to see that 
the seventy years of desolation of the promised land represent
 the seventv jubilee cycles appointed to them, in the 
time of the fulfilment of which we are now living. (Jeremiah 
25:11, 12; 2 Chronicles 38:21; Leviticus 26:14-34) Our interest
 is still further awakened when we remember that during 


[6145] 


(284 287) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


B*OOM,YH, N. Y. 


this long interim of "seven times more" — 2520 years — God's 
favor was transferred from the Jewish house of servants to 
the Gospel house of sons; and that an antitypical Babylon has 
carried away captive the Lord's people and all the golden 
vessels of truth. See Studies in the Sckiptures, Vol. 2, 
Studies 4, 6. 

Spiritual Israel in captivity to mystic Babylon has long 
waited for the glorious deliverance to be brought about by 
Immatouel, the Deliverer greater than Cyrus the Persian king. 
Since our Lord's return in 1874 the cry has gone forth, "BabyIon
 the Great is fallen, is fallen!" and again, "Home out of 


her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that 
ye receive not of her plagues." (Revelation 18:1-5) A comparatively
 small number of them have had such love for the 
Lord, such reverence for his promises, such desires to be inheritors
 of those promises as to lead them to sever the earthly 
ties and the bonds which hold them satisfied in Babylon. But 
some have heard, some have rejoiced, some have stepped out 
and some are still leaving. Our antitypical Cyrus, our present
 Lord, has permitted us to bring back the golden vessels, 
the golden truths which for so long have been misappropriated
, misapplied, misunderstood, misused in Babylon. 


RETURNING FROM CAPTIVITY 

i This article "as a reprint of that published in issue of August 1, 1899, which please see.] 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


ENGLISH PRISON AS NEAB HEAVEN AS ANY OTHEE PLACE 
Dear Brethren: — 

Loving greetings in our dear Redeemer's name! You are 
aware that the younger brethren in Great Britain have been 
called upon to endure hardness as good soldiers of Jesus 
Christ. 

The largest work center for the employment of Conscientious
 Objectors to military service in this country is at Princetown
, S. Devon, where v the Conscientious Objectors are housed 
in Dartmoor Convict Prison — the most famous of British 
Prisons — which was built more than 100 years ago for the 
accommodation of prisoners of war in the time of Napoleon. 
It is also interesting to recall that American prisoners taken 
during the War of Independence were confined here, and the 
cemetery where some of them were buried is still preserved. 

At the present time there are between sixty and seventy 
brethren here. The number is constantly varying, as some 
are sent to work in other parts of the country, and others 
are arriving from Wormwood Scrubs Prison, London, where 
they have been serving terms of imprisonment for refusing to 
bear arms. 

I am sure you will be glad to know that 51 of us met together
 on April 5 to celebrate the "Memorial." We assembled
 in the Koncon for mist Chapel for the occasion. The Baptists
, who had the use of the room for that evening, very 
kindly curtailed their meeting so that we were enabled to 
commence our service at 8 o'clock. The wine we obtained at 
a local store. The proprietress manifested some curiosity as 
to who we were, and the brother making the purchase apparently
 answered to her satisfaction; for she kindly loaned 
us cloths and vessels. In return, our brother gave her a copy 
of Volume I. 

It seemed, dear brethren, as if the dear' Lord had arranged
 everything to enable us to concentrate our minds on 
the purpose for which we had assembled. Over the head of 
the brother who conducted the meeting was the picture of our 
Lord on the cross. On his left were pictures of Jesus before 
Pilate and the Institution of the Memorial; and on his right 
were two pictures of the Lord's resurrection. 

The meeting opened with Hymn 62, the Lord's blessing 
being then invoked upon up. We especially remembered our 
dear brethren who were still in prison, and unable to partake 
of the Memorial. Hymn 28 was then sung, followed by a 
short discourse based "upon Luke 22:1-30. We then joined in 
singing Hymn Ko. 2, after which we partook of the emblems, 
a blessing being asked upon each; the service closing with 
Hymn 277. The service was very impressive. We felt keenly 
the fact that we were not able 'to meet with our loved one3 
in the classes from which we have been drawn; but we remembered
 that Dartmoor is as near heaven as London, or 
any other place of our earthly pilgrimage. 

We" are thankful that we have been accounted worthy to 
suffer for Christ's sake. It is a proof that our sacrifice is 
being consumed, and that we are making our calling and 
election sure. We realize that under these conditions it is 
very difficult indeed to maintain that high moral standard 
which is set before us, it being so easy to get loose in our 
ways and actions. 

A thought which has been expressed, and which has proved 
very helpful to us, is that when St. Stephen was stoned for 
his fidelity to the truth, he cried with a loud voice, "Lord 
Jesus, receive my spirit"; or, as a footnote in the Diaglott 
expresses it, <f Lord Jesus, assist me to suffer." How this is 
in harmony with the context, and the circumstances in which 
he was then placed! Stephen was the first martyr; it may be 
that we younger brethren will be some of the last, and we 
pray that we may always be in that condition of heart where 
we can call upon our Savior, and say, "Lord Jesus, assist us to 
suffer," 


And naw, dear brethren, I commend you to God, praying 
fervently to the Father for you, that you may have an abundant
 entrance into that glorious kingdom which we believe 
is very soon to be ours. 

Your loving brother in the Beloved, 

Robert Edwin Dabby. — Eng. 
REJOICING IN THE TRUTH AT 68 
Deab Brethren: — 

I desire to express my joy and feeling to you for the 
unspeakable grace our heavenly Father has been pleased to 
bestow upon me. He pulled me out of that state of ignorance, 
darkness and superstition, in which I had been unfortunately 
plunged, first by having spent the first twenty years of my 
life as a Roman Catholic, afterward as a member of the 
Presbyterian church for some time, and finally as an unbeliever
 for a number of years. 

The blessedness I have experienced since I came to the 
knowledge of God's wonderful present truth is due absolutely 
to the efforts of that "faithful servant" of our Lord, the late 
Pastor Russell. Blessed be his memory; for the "crown of 
life" promised to every overcomcr on this side the veil must 
have been his reward. 

By the grace of God, I have had the privilege and opportunity
 to read and study lately the six volumes of Studies 
from his pen, and also 'The Watch Tower you have been 
kind enough to send me since November, 1916. Being willing 
to learn, I prayed the Almighty God to help me, and, 
blessed be the Lord, the result was that I was brought down 
to the feet of our Master and Savior Jesus Christ. Brother 
Nettletori, the elder of our Union Avenue ecclesia, always 
stood by me, assisting me in all my wants most generously. 

I am an old man, 68 years of age, a widower without children
. I am poor and afflicted with bodily pains and infirmities
 to such extent that, being unable to earn my living by 
ordinary work, I have been compelled, Bince a few years, to 
become an inmate of a benevolent institution. But although 
poor and afflicted in the -flesh, I feel like singing God's praises 
constantly. Being a French-Canadian, I am thoroughly well 
educated in the French language, besides being familiar with 
the English and Italian languages. 

Dear Brethren of the Editorial Committee, my prayers go 
up to the throne of grace for you, and may our heavenly 
Father help us all to carry on to the end the good work of 
spreading the glorious Gospel truth, "while it is yet day 
light, for the night will soon come when no man shall be able 
to work." 

Your brother in Christ, Joseph Daoust. — Can. 

DOES SOCIETY SUPERVISE CONVENTION EEPORTS7 
My Dearly Beloved Brethren in Christ: — 

Your very encouraging letter of the 20th received with 
great joy and I thank you for your words of comfort and 
counsel. Permit me, dear brethren, te ask you for a little information
 in regard to the Convention Beports published by 
Brother Jones in the past, and I notice that he is going to get 
them out this year also. Since a few things have happened 
this paBt year some of the friends would not order the Souvenirs
 until they hear from Headquarters. So please give us 
your opinion about it. Is it under the supervision of the Society
? or will the Society publish these Souvenirs? Will the 
seventh volume be published in any other language? 

Yours in Christian love, Geo. E. Kafoory. — Pa. 

Our R«ply 
With reference to the Convention Reports, or Souvenirs, 
we beg to say that the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society
 has nothing whatsoever to do with them. They are 
puhlished by Brother Jones on his own volition and responsibility
. It has never been the policy of the Society to publish 
the pilgrim brethren's discourses delivered at conventions. 
The Society has proceeded upon the theory that if anyone 


[6146] 


September 15. 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(2S7-274) 


else desired to publish what was delivered at the conventions, 
the Society would not interfere, granting to everyone the 
liberty of doing what he thinks is best. 

Our own opinion is that the Convention Reports, or Souvenirs
, are not particularly helpful or beneficial. We believe 
the time could be better occupied by reading the volumes of 
Studies in the Scriptures and The Watch Tower. 

"LOST IN WONDER, LO VB AND PRAISE " 

Dear Ones in Christ: — 

Truly, we are "lost in wonder, love and praise"! Wards 
are lacking in which to utter grateful thanks unto our dear 
loving Father and his dear Son for giving us the seventh 
volume. At first we were afraid to open it, lest some one 
not of our Lord's chosen channel had attempted to write it. 
But oh, how our hearts swell up with love and praise as we 
read it! 

Your sister in Christ, Mrs. Alice A. Dobbixs. — Ark. 
BELIEVES 7TH VOLUME SUFFICIENT TO OVERCOME 
Dear Friends and Colaborhrs: — 

Loving greetings! Such a wondrous gift was placed in 


my waiting, eager hands a few days ago, when the seventh 
volume came ! My joy and gratitude seem boundless, for 
this which came in a time of direst need: when nothing else 
seemed to satisfy. 

0) how adorable i3 our God to provide this just now, when 
the crucial test for the church is on! Trials and tests are 
rapidly increasing, but within the covers of this blessed book, 
I believe, is sufficient, by his grace, to overcome. 

Please find payment inclosed. 

Kindly thanking you for so graciously sending this, I remain
 with prayers and best wishes, 

Yours in Christ, Opal Sargent. — Neb. 

OVEBWHELMED IN BEADING IT 
Dear Fellow Servants: — 

I am sending you sixty cents for the seventh volume of 
Scripture Studies. Please pardon me for not sending it 
sooner. I have been so overwhelmed in reading it, and it 
has been so interesting, that I just could not spare the time 
to write you a little letter until now. 

Your brother in Christ, J. A. Heudspeth. — Texas. 


VOLUME VII 

We have been receiving many inquiries as to whether we 
shall bring forth Volume VII in the German language. The 
cost would be considerable and the time necessary for translation
 and printing would probably reach at least until January
 1st. In order that we may know whether it will be 
feasible to undertake the work or not. we would like to hear 


IN GERMAN 

from German friends who would care to have Volun/e VII in 
the German language. Do not order any but advise us by postcard
 how many volumes you would care for at the same price 
of the English Volume if it were published. An early reply 
from the German friends will be appreciated. 


PASTOR RUSSELL'S SERMONS IN BOOK FORM 


We are pleased to announce that arrangements are under 
way for the compilation of a book containing the principal 
sermons by Brother Russell. 

This will meet a long felt want on the part of the friends. 
As many of his sermons were to some extent more or less 
repetitions of other sermons the arrangement will contain all 
of his principal sermons covering all points of the plan as outlined
 in the various volumes of the Scripture Studies. Our 
thought is to eliminate any duplication of statements in 
order that it may be as convenient and complete as possible. 
We are glad to announce, also, that the book will contain additionally
 some special matter arranged by Brother Russell 
and never before printed. He had in mind' to publish it, but 
did not reach it before his death; and we feel sure the friends 
will take great delight in reading it. The binding will be uniform
 with the other volumes of the Scripture Studies and 
will contain from six to eight hundred pages. The price will 
be: Cloth, $1.00, postpaid; Leather Bound, $1.50, postpaid. 
We hope to have it ready by November 1st. Orders will be received
 at once, but we do not expect to make delivery bciore 
date named. 


NEW VOLUNTEER MATTER 


The output of volunteer matter this year so far has been 
something quite phenomenal. The friends have entered into 
the work with extraordinary zeal, and the result has been that 
in many cities work that has heretofore taken from four to 
eight months has been cleared up in from one month to six 
weeks. As the first number of volunteer matter, The World 
on Fire, was ready early in the year, the friends everywhere 
entered into the distribution with keen zest. Over seven and 
a half million were distributed within a short time, and the 
friends were ready for more. The second number, Why Do the 
Nations War? has already; passed the six and a half million 
mark j and the orders are still coming in, although many of the 
classes have completed the work and are anxiously waiting for 
more. We are surely glad to know this. 

The Lord has been so arranging to meet the increased cost 
of paper and other expenses through the means of the Tract 
Fund contributions that we are now arranging for a third 
number which we trust will be the best one yet, entitled 
The Fall of Babylon. 

We trust to have this Volunteer Edition ready by the 1st 
of October. Orders may be placed at any time and shipment 
-will begin as soon as ready. This issue will contain a number
 of articles from Brother Russell, calling attention to the 


long-promised kingdom and the joys which shall result therefrom
 and of the fact that we are now at its very door. When 
ordering please specify B. S. M. No. 99. 

We feel sure that the friends everywhere will be very much 
pleased with this forthcoming number, and suggest that all 
classes who have not finished distributing the last issue push 
the matter rapidly in order that the new work may be taken 
up at once and with full vigor. 

The blessing of the Lord has rested richly upon the work 
during the year thus far, and indications are increasing that 
he has some great work for us in the near future. Let us all 
unite our nrayers and our efforts to the end that he may 
grant us wisdom and strength to carry forward whatever he 
may open for us! 

The orders for the seventh volume are also coming in by 
the hundreds, and the friends everywhere are greatly enthused 
and encouraged. We believe there is a great work in the near 
future for every earnest worker, and that the Lord has a rich 
blessing for everyone who will enter therein. 

We are also glad to report that applications for territory
 from over one hundred new colporteurs have been received
 within the last few weeks, indicating a greatly increased
 activity on the part of the friends everywhere. 


THE WATCH TOWER EDITORIAL COMMITTEE 

*This Journal is published under the supervision of an Edi- The names of the editorial Committee are : j. f. Rutherford, 
torial Committee, at least three of whom have read and ap- w. E. van amburgh, g. h. fisher, f. h. robison, fi. H. 
proved each and every article appearing in these columns. hirsh. 

I. B. S. A. INCORPORATION 


Many of our younger students and recent subscribers to der 
The Watch Tower seem not to have noticed statement on the low: 
second page setting forth the mission of the Society and the 
journal to the thousands of Bible Students. We suggest a 
careful re-reading of this entire second page. In order that 
all may be conversant with the legal standing of the Association
 we append hereto a statement of the Assistant Registrar 
of Joint Stock Companies, London. The International Bible 
Students Association aa an organization has been in existence
 many years, but was duly incorporated in London, England
, under the above name on the 30th day of June, 1914, un- 

* First appearance of this paragraph in this form. 

[6147] 


the COMPANIES ACTS 1908 AND 1913, as shown heNo
. 136,776. UNLIMITED COMPANY 

CERTIFICATE OF INCORPORATION 
I HEREBY CERTIFY that INTERNATIONAL BIBLE
 STUDENTS ASSOCIATION is this day Incorporated
 under the Companies Acts 1908 and 1913. 

Given under my hand, at London, this Thirtieth day 
of June, One thousand nine hundred and fourteen-. 

GEO. J. SARGENT, 
Assistant Registrar of Joint Stock Companies. 

