Where Can You Turn for Good Advice?
The “advice industry” has now become a multibillion-dollar-a-year business. People want help. Mental-health professional Heinz Lehmann observes: “[In today’s society] there are educational and social deficits. Religious values are not what they used to be. Families are much less stable . . . , and consequently people flounder.” Author Eric Maisel says: “Those who once turned to their tribal shaman, pastor or family doctor for help with mental, spiritual and physical problems now look to self-help nonfiction to provide the answers.”
THE American Psychological Association set up a task force to investigate this booming industry. They said that while there is “tremendous potential to help individuals understand themselves and others . . . , the promotional claims and titles that accompany these programs are increasingly exaggerated and sensationalized.” A Toronto Star writer says: “Be aware of the amount of religio-spiritual counterfeits. . . . Beware especially of all self-help books, tapes or seminars that offer far too much, in far too short a time, for far too little effort or self-discipline.” Granted, there are a great many who are genuinely looking to support those in need. However, the sad reality exists that a number of unscrupulous individuals are capitalizing on people’s loneliness and suffering, offering no real help or solutions.
In view of this, what is a key source of help we can trust? Where can we find practical counsel that will consistently work?
Source of Unfailing Guidance
The 19th-century American preacher Henry Ward Beecher said: “The Bible is God’s chart for you to steer by, to keep you from the bottom of the sea, and to show you where the harbor is, and how to reach it without running on rocks or bars.” Another man said of the Bible: “Nobody ever outgrows Scripture; the book widens and deepens with our years.” Why should you give serious consideration to this source?
Recommending itself, the Bible says: “All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness, that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.” (2 Timothy 3:16, 17) The Bible’s contents originate with the very Source of life, Jehovah God. (Psalm 36:9) As such, he is intimately aware of our makeup, as Psalm 103:14 reminds us: “He himself well knows the formation of us, remembering that we are dust.” We can, therefore, have full confidence in the Bible’s value.
In fact, the Bible contains a host of principles and guidelines that can be applied beneficially in whatever circumstance you might find yourself. Through it God says to us: “This is the way. Walk in it, you people.” (Isaiah 30:21) Can the Bible really meet the needs of individuals today? Let us see.
The Bible Meets Our Needs . . .
In Coping With Anxieties. The Bible tells us: “Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving let your petitions be made known to God; and the peace of God that excels all thought will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.” (Philippians 4:6, 7) Has prayer proved to be effective in coping with the emotional anxieties associated with economic hardship, sexual and verbal abuse, or the death of a loved one? Consider the following experience.
Jackie, after learning of the sexual abuse of her daughter, acknowledges: “The feeling of guilt at being powerless to protect one’s child is beyond words. I have had to fight feelings of bitterness, resentment, and anger. These feelings were beginning to poison my life. I desperately needed Jehovah to guard my heart.” After reading and rereading Philippians 4:6, 7, she worked hard to apply its counsel. “I pray every day, repeatedly asking that I not let myself be destroyed by negative feelings, and Jehovah has helped me to develop a calm and happy heart. I truly feel peace within myself,” Jackie relates.
You too may find yourself in a situation that is beyond your ability to control or resolve and that brings with it emotional anxieties. By following the Bible’s admonition to pray, you can cope effectively. The psalmist encourages us with these words: “Roll upon Jehovah your way, and rely upon him, and he himself will act.”—Psalm 37:5.
For Encouragement. The psalmist made this expression of appreciation: “Jehovah, I have loved the dwelling of your house and the place of the residing of your glory. My own foot will certainly stand on a level place; among the congregated throngs I shall bless Jehovah.” (Psalm 26:8, 12) We are encouraged in the Bible to assemble together regularly to worship Jehovah. How can this association fill your needs? What have others found?
Becky relates: “My parents do not serve Jehovah, so they give me a hard time when I try to do anything that has to do with service to God. It takes great effort for me to attend the meetings.” Becky feels that many blessings have come to her because she has exerted herself to attend Christian meetings regularly. “The meetings strengthen my faith, so that I can withstand the day-to-day pressures as a student, daughter, and servant of Jehovah. The people at the Kingdom Hall are so different from the students at school! They are caring and helpful, and our conversations are always encouraging. They are real friends.”
Yes, by following the Bible’s direction to meet together regularly, we can have Jehovah fill our need for encouragement. Here is where we experience the truthfulness of the psalmist’s words: “God is for us a refuge and strength, a help that is readily to be found during distresses.”—Psalm 46:1.
For Satisfying and Worthwhile Work. “Become steadfast, unmovable, always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in vain in connection with the Lord,” advocates the Bible. (1 Corinthians 15:58) Is “the work of the Lord” truly satisfying? Does the Christian ministry accomplish something worthwhile?
Amelia expresses how she feels: “I studied the Bible with a couple who were on the verge of a breakup. I also helped a woman whose daughter was violently killed. The woman was tormented by the uncertainty of the condition of the dead. In both of these cases, the application of Bible principles brought peace and hope into their lives. I feel a great sense of joy and satisfaction because I have had a part in helping them.” Scott says: “If you have a good experience in the field ministry, start a new Bible study, or enjoy some success from witnessing informally, you will talk about it for years to come. The same feelings and excitement are relived with each recounting! The ministry is where the greatest and lasting joy comes from.”
Clearly, applying the Bible’s direction to become active ministers has filled the need of these individuals for satisfying and worthwhile work. You too are invited to share in this work of educating others about God’s ways and principles, at the same time benefiting yourself.—Isaiah 48:17; Matthew 28:19, 20.
Profiting From God’s Word
Unquestionably, the Bible is a trustworthy source of workable directions in today’s world. To benefit from it, we need to put forth consistent effort. We must regularly read it, study it, and meditate on it. Paul admonished: “Ponder over these things; be absorbed in them, that your advancement may be manifest to all persons.” (1 Timothy 4:15; Deuteronomy 11:18-21) God guarantees that if you work to apply his counsel as found in the Bible, you will be successful. He promises: “Trust in Jehovah . . . In all your ways take notice of him, and he himself will make your paths straight.”—Proverbs 3:5, 6.
[Pictures on page 31]
Following Bible counsel makes life satisfying and fulfilling

