Did You Say “Thank You”?
“BLOW, blow, thou winter wind, thou art not so unkind as man’s ingratitude.” Surely an exaggeration! Can man’s ingratitude possibly be more chilling than the depth of a harsh winter? Sadly, many have had reason to agree with Shakespeare’s observation.
Hardened by the cruel events of this 20th century, we still find ingratitude so very unkind because it strikes at the basic need we have for one another. Individually, we cannot be skilled at everything necessary for enjoying life. Few of us want to be hermits, or could survive as such. So we need one another.
Consequently, when our efforts to contribute to the common good are taken for granted or accepted patronizingly; when others give grudgingly the service we pay for; when we go out of our way to be kind, only to get a frown or a suspicious look; when our loving consideration for others is taken as a sign of weakness; then the chill of their ingratitude reaches into our very heart. Has this ever been your experience?
What causes a person to be ungrateful? It may sound rather severe, but basically it is selfishness. There are degrees of selfishness, of course, all the way from thoughtlessness to egocentricity. The thoughtless person may be surprised and even hurt when his failure to express gratitude is pointed out to him, but the egocentric cares nothing about it. Either way, it is obvious that we might have here a blemish that needs our attention.
Cultivating a Grateful Disposition
What can we do to cultivate a grateful disposition? First, never take any kind action for granted. How difficult is it simply to say “thank you” and really mean it? In some places, because of misguided tradition, people feel it is unnecessary to say, “Please” or, “Thank you.” Yet the Bible counsels us to ‘show ourselves thankful.’​—Colossians 3:15.
Next, we can heighten our appreciation of what others do for us. This would include almost everyone with whom we have dealings, especially those closest to us at home. For seven days a week a wife may be shopping, washing, preparing meals, cleaning, caring for the children. A marathon of a job! Do we show, by deeds as well as in words, that we appreciate her? Or, with the passing of the years, have we come to take her efforts rather for granted? Have you asked yourself recently, Are my expressions of appreciation adequate for all that she does to make our home a haven from the harsh world outside? On the other hand, do those of us who are wives show that we appreciate to the full our husband’s efforts as breadwinner under the tough and often discouraging conditions that he faces every day in the working world?
In these days when many wives go out to work, there is extra pressure. The many household chores have to be crammed into evenings and weekends. Sometimes one of the casualties is gratitude. Tired people tend to have short tempers and little time for the courtesies and kindnesses of life. In such circumstances there has to be a readiness for all in the family to make allowances and be forgiving.
And what about gratitude to our children? How rewarding it is to watch them grow in body and mind, respond to training and care; to see them apply themselves to their chores because you have taught them that they are part of the family team; to sense their trust and confidence in you; to feel their loving arms around your neck as you kiss them good-night. Yes, there are plenty of reasons to be grateful to our children, grateful to their mother who gives so much time to training them, and most importantly, grateful to God, as he is the Originator of the family.
Outside the family, our colleagues at work and the many who provide services of various kinds all contribute to our well-being. So we should be grateful for what they do too. Usually we can show some kindness in return. It might be as simple as a smile or a warm “thank you.” The main thing is not to be so busy or preoccupied that we neglect to register genuine appreciation. Show that, quite apart from any payment involved, you value what was done for you and the spirit in which it was done. Doing so will make others happy, and that is a fine objective to have in life.
Are You Grateful to God?
In Luke chapter 17 we read of ten lepers who met Jesus and begged his mercy. Having in mind to heal them, he told them to report to the priests as the Law required. As they were leaving “their cleansing occurred.” But only one came back to thank Jesus and glorify God for the deliverance.
Jesus could have been disappointed. “Where, then, are the other nine?” he asked. “Were none found that turned back to give glory to God but this man of another nation?” (Luke 17:11-19) The nine failed to express gratitude for something so precious to them​—release from a dreaded disease, leprosy. Jesus saw fit to draw attention to this. But how pleasingly different was the attitude of the Samaritan who did return to express his gratefulness so positively!
Now where do you personally stand concerning the giving of thanks and glory to Jehovah God and his Son? Do you think there is anything for which to be grateful?
Evidently many did not think so in the apostle Paul’s day, for he commented to fellow Christians in Rome: “All that may be known of God by men lies plain before their eyes; indeed God himself has disclosed it to them. . . . There is therefore no possible defence for their conduct; knowing God, they have refused to honour him as God, or to render him thanks.”​—Romans 1:19-21, The New English Bible.
Likewise today, how many people are unseeing and ungrateful? Could you be one of them?
A grateful heart adorns the person. It brings peace and satisfaction to the one who cultivates it. It enhances the personality. It wins God’s blessing. “Thank you” are two simple words that warm the heart. So express gratitude generously in both word and deed if you would make glad the heart of God and man.
[Picture on page 16]
Grateful husbands do not take a wife’s work for granted
[Picture on page 17]
“Please” and “thank you” should be normal expressions of good manners
[Pictures on page 18]
There are plenty of reasons for being grateful to our children
A “thank you” for everyday services can mean so much

