From Our Readers
Young People Ask
Thank you for the hard work in preparing the articles for “Young People Ask.” No doubt this series has helped millions of young people, including me. The articles tell me why I do some of the things I do and how to avoid making foolish mistakes.
F. B., Louisiana
I agree wholeheartedly with your article in “Young People Ask . . . Where Can I Turn When I Have a Problem?” (July 8, 1983) I just started Junior High School this year, and like many teenagers, I had many problems. I was afraid to take these small problems to my parents. But when I finally did so, my parents helped me solve them. This help was 100 percent better than any help I would have got from my peers. My parents left me feeling that I could take any problem to them.
M. S., Canada
I perfectly agree with the counsel in the article “Where Can I Turn When I Have a Problem?” I know by experience. When I was young, many girls used to scoff at me because I didn’t dress like them and didn’t confide my problems to them. My closest friend was my mother. So they excluded me from their company, making me feel very lonely. The result? I have had the opportunity to share the company of adults, thus increasing my knowledge and experience and becoming mature both emotionally and spiritually.
C. R., Italy
I was overjoyed to receive the August 22, 1983, Awake! with the article “How Can I Cope With Disappointment?” When you read these articles for young people it’s like talking to a friend that really understands. I treasure the information as if it were silver and gold. Thank you very much.
T. P., Virginia
Teenage Marriages
I’m writing to tell you how much I appreciated your articles on teenage marriages. (September 22, 1983) I really could relate to many of the situations you mentioned. I had felt that because I was 18 I could do what I wanted. I was wrong! I told my parents that I knew what I wanted. Now I understand what they were trying to say. I hope other youths will pay close attention to those articles. If they do, it can spare them a lot of hurt.
M. M., Ohio
Alcoholism
This refers to your article on “Alcoholism” (July 8, 1982) and the letter from me that appeared in “From Our Readers” in the issue of November 8, 1982. More than a year has gone by and it occurred to me I might share my joy with you, because I still ‘have not drunk another drop of anything alcoholic, no matter what.’ I truly owe it to the way that information was presented; I was able to understand it and apply it to myself. Thought you’d enjoy a follow-up as much as I’ve enjoyed being sober!
A. N., Virginia

