“They Lived Happily Ever After”
“Once upon a time in the middle of winter, when the flakes of snow were falling like feathers from the sky, a Queen sat at a window sewing . . . she had a little daughter, who was as white as snow . . . and she was therefore called Little Snow-white.”
THE German brothers Grimm recorded that story in the early 19th century and made it a part of their famous collection of fairy tales. In 1934 Walt Disney came up with concrete ideas about a film based on that very tale. He had made his reputation as an animator with his Mickey Mouse cartoon films. But now he wanted to do a full-length feature film that would include animated humans, not just animals. The result, three years later, was Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. Maybe you are one of the millions who have enjoyed it.
Why does the simple story of Snow White fascinate so many? Perhaps because it deals with the basic conflict of evil against innocence and the final triumph of innocence. See how children react to the wicked stepmother Queen as she systematically tries to do away with beautiful Snow White! Finally, in spite of the efforts of the dwarfs to protect Snow White, the Queen appears to achieve her aim to become the “fairest one of all” in the land. By guile she gets Snow White to eat a bite of a poisoned apple that causes her death. The Queen’s rival is now out of the way at last! But Snow White comes back to life and a handsome prince marries her. The wicked Queen is punished.
“But as to all the rest​—the Prince and his Princess Snow White, and the seven little dwarfs—​they all lived happily ever after.”
And in those final words we have the clue to the childhood, and sometimes adult, fascination with fairy tales​—most of us yearn for a happy ending, to “live happily ever after.” Many film producers have been aware of this yearning among the greater number of mankind and have used it in animated films.
But to what extent do these films really succeed in communicating happiness? Doubtless you have enjoyed this type of entertainment. Did it make you feel happy? Was it true happiness or only a fleeting emotion based on fantasy? Is real lasting happiness possible? The third article of our series, by a film technician, will tell the story of his search for true happiness.
But first of all, have you ever wondered how an animated film is made? Awake! interviewed an expert animator who explained how film animation is achieved.

