





Keys to Contentment

All of us​—whether single or married, young or old—​want to be happy and content. Our Creator wants us to feel that way too, so he has given us excellent advice.



Work Diligently

“Let him do hard work, doing good work with his hands, so that he may have something to share with someone in need.”​—EPHESIANS 4:28.
Our Creator encourages us to have a positive view of work. Why? A person who works hard is happy because he is able to provide for himself and his family. He may even be able to help someone in need. His employer will value him too. So a good worker is more likely to keep his job. The Scriptures rightly describe the rewards of hard work as “the gift of God.”​—Ecclesiastes 3:13.



Be Honest

“We trust we have an honest conscience, as we wish to conduct ourselves honestly in all things.”​—HEBREWS 13:18.
If we are honest, we have self-respect, we enjoy inner peace, and we sleep better at night. Additionally, others will trust and respect us. Dishonest people rob themselves of those good things. Also, their conscience may trouble them, and they may live with the fear of one day getting caught for their dishonesty.



Have a Balanced View of Money

“Let your way of life be free of the love of money, while you are content with the present things.”​—HEBREWS 13:5.
We need money for food and other necessities. However, “the love of money” is very dangerous. It can cause a person to use most of his time and energy striving to make more money. This quest for money can put a strain on his marriage, rob him of time with his children, and even harm his health. (1 Timothy 6:9, 10) What is more, a person who loves money may be tempted to be dishonest. A wise man said: “A faithful man will receive many blessings, but the one hastening to get rich will not remain innocent.”​—Proverbs 28:20.



Choose the Best Education

“Safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability.”​—PROVERBS 3:21.
A good education helps us to be responsible adults and parents. But a fine secular education alone cannot guarantee lasting security or happiness. To be truly successful in all aspects of life, we need the education God gives us. The Scriptures say of the person who listens to God: “Everything he does will succeed.”​—Psalm 1:1-3.



I Feel Happy and Content
“In my community, many people work hard to obtain an extensive education as well as wealth and fame. Yet, they still struggle to find lasting happiness​—even after achieving their goals. I gained a balanced view from the Bible. I learned that money can protect us in some ways, but it cannot buy happiness or true love. I feel happy and content because the Bible helps me make wise decisions about money and work.”​—Kishore.








Learn more:
For more practical advice from our Creator about employment, money matters, and education, go to jw.org and look under BIBLE TEACHINGS > PEACE & HAPPINESS.


