





Wisdom for Family Happiness

Marriage and children are precious gifts from our Creator. He wants us to have a happy family life. So by means of an ancient sacred book, he has given us guidance that can make our family life better and happier. Consider the following wise counsel.



Husbands, Love Your Wives

“Husbands should love their wives as their own bodies. A man who loves his wife loves himself, for no man ever hated his own body, but he feeds and cherishes it.”​—EPHESIANS 5:28, 29.
The husband is head of the family. (Ephesians 5:23) But a good husband is not harsh or demanding. He values his wife and takes good care of her material and emotional needs. He also tries hard to please her, not always insisting on doing what he wants. (Philippians 2:4) He communicates openly and listens when she speaks. He does not become “bitterly angry” with her or hurt her physically or emotionally.​—Colossians 3:19.



Wives, Respect Your Husband

“The wife should have deep respect for her husband.”​—EPHESIANS 5:33.
When a wife respects her husband and supports his decisions, she promotes family peace. If he makes a mistake, she does not belittle him, but she remains mild and respectful. (1 Peter 3:4) When she needs to bring a problem to his attention, she chooses a good time to do so and speaks to him respectfully.​—Ecclesiastes 3:7.



Be Faithful to Your Marriage Mate

“A man will . . . stick to his wife, and they will become one flesh.”​—GENESIS 2:24.
When a man and a woman marry, they form a close family bond. So a married couple should work hard to keep their marriage strong through heartfelt conversations and small acts of kindness. They should also be faithful to each other by not having sex outside the marriage. Infidelity is cruel. It destroys trust and can break up the family.​—Hebrews 13:4.



Parents, Train Your Children

“Train a child in the way he should go; even when he grows old he will not depart from it.”​—PROVERBS 22:6, footnote.
God has given parents the responsibility to train their children. That includes teaching them how to behave and setting a good example for them. (Deuteronomy 6:6, 7) When a child misbehaves, a wise parent does not overreact. He or she is “quick to listen, slow to speak, slow to anger.” (James 1:19) If the parent determines that discipline is needed, he or she administers it in love, not in anger.



Children, Obey Your Parents

“Children, be obedient to your parents . . . ‘Honor your father and your mother.’”​—EPHESIANS 6:1, 2.
Children should obey their parents and treat them with deep respect. When children show honor to their parents, they bring much joy into the home and contribute to family peace and harmony. Adult children honor their parents by ensuring that they are well cared for. That may include helping them to maintain their home or giving them needed financial assistance.​—1 Timothy 5:3, 4.



I Became a Better Husband
“Because of my family background, I used to be very demanding. But I learned that as head of my family, I should listen to my wife and not be selfish or domineering. In God’s eyes, she and I are one flesh, and I should treat her as my own body. Thanks to that wise guidance, I have become a much better husband, and I enjoy a happy family life.”​—Rahul.








Learn more:
For more practical advice on how you can improve your family life, go to jw.org and look under BIBLE TEACHINGS > MARRIAGE & FAMILY.


