Draw Close to God
Fulfilling Our Obligation to God
HAVE you ever wondered, ‘What is the purpose of life?’ Jehovah endowed us with not only the capacity to ask such a question but also the deep, inner need to know the answer. Thankfully, our loving God has not left us in the dark. The answer we yearn for is in his Word, the Bible. Consider the words of King Solomon found at Ecclesiastes 12:13.
Solomon was in a unique position. He could well comment on how to find happiness and meaning in life. Blessed with extraordinary wisdom, enormous wealth, and kingly authority, he was able to make a careful search of human pursuits, including the quest for riches and prominence. (Ecclesiastes 2:4-9; 4:4) Then, under divine inspiration, he summed up his findings, saying: “The conclusion of the matter, everything having been heard, is: Fear the true God and keep his commandments. For this is the whole obligation of man.” Those words outline the most rewarding and noble human endeavor.
“Fear the true God.” The idea of fearing God might not seem appealing at first. But this fear is a healthy disposition of heart. We might think not of a slave who is terrified of enraging a harsh master but of a child who is eager to please a loving father. One reference work says that fear of God is the “attitude of reverence and awe that His people show to Him because they love Him and respect His power and His greatness.” Such an attitude moves us to submit to God’s will because we love him and we know that he loves us. This wholesome fear is not just a feeling; it is manifested by actions. How so?
“Keep his commandments.” Fear of God moves us to obey him. It makes sense to give Jehovah our obedience. As our Maker, he knows the best way for us to live, just as a manufacturer knows the best way to use its product. In addition, Jehovah has our best interests at heart. He wants us to be happy, and his requirements are designed to promote our well-being. (Isaiah 48:17) The apostle John put it this way: “This is what the love of God means, that we observe his commandments; and yet his commandments are not burdensome.” (1 John 5:3) Our obedience demonstrates our love for God, and his commandments reflect his love for us.
“This is the whole obligation of man.” These words highlight an important reason to fear God and obey him. Doing so is our obligation, our duty. Jehovah is our Creator, so we owe our very life to him. (Psalm 36:9) We also owe him our obedience. When we live as he wants us to live, we are fulfilling our obligation.
What, then, is the purpose of life? Put simply, it is this: We are here to do God’s will. There is no better way to fill your life with meaning. Why not find out more about Jehovah’s will and how you can bring your life into harmony with it? Jehovah’s Witnesses would be pleased to assist you.
Suggested Bible reading for November:
◼ Proverbs 22-31; Ecclesiastes 1-12–Song of Solomon 1-8

