Announcements
● Literature offer for April and May: Watchtower subscription. One-year subscriptions to semimonthly editions are available on a complete donation basis. Six-month subscriptions to semimonthly editions and one-year subscriptions to monthly editions can also be obtained. When the subscription is not obtained, two magazines and a copy of any brochure, except the School brochure, may be offered. June: Survival Into a New Earth. July and August: Any 32-page brochure, except the School brochure.
● District convention badge cards for 1990 in English and Spanish will be consigned to congregations and included with April literature shipments. It will not be necessary to order these. Based on the size of each congregation, consignments in lots of 25 will be made. If additional badge cards are needed by the congregation, these should be ordered on a Literature Order form (S-14). It is necessary to order plastic badge card holders for any in the congregation that desire them. The holders are available from the Society.
● Where practical, elders should intensify arrangements for congregations to share in evening witnessing as daylight hours increase.
● The material on pages 266-9 of the Reasoning book may be helpful in inviting persons to attend the Memorial. However, for up-to-date information on John 6:53, 54, refer to The Watchtower of February 15, 1986, pages 19, 30, 31.
● Starting with the week of June 18, 1990, and continuing through the week of September 17, the brochure Should You Believe in the Trinity? will be considered at the Congregation Book Study. Questions to be used for this study will be published as an insert to the June 1990 Our Kingdom Ministry. This detailed consideration of the Trinity brochure will require careful preparation on the part of the book study conductor and all who attend. Being present each week at the Congregation Book Study will help equip us to use this brochure more effectively in the field service.
● New Publications Available:
The Bible​—Laotian
The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s?​—Cebuano, Iloko, Tagalog
Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work—​Cebuano, Iloko, Tagalog
Reasoning From the Scriptures​—Romanian
Should You Believe in the Trinity?​—Cebuano, Iloko, Japanese, Tagalog
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Jehovah’s Judgment Against Law-Defying People​—Drama (single cassette)—​English
Listening to the Great Teacher (set of five cassettes and a book in an album)​—Portuguese
Numbers (set of three cassettes)​—Spanish
Deuteronomy (set of three cassettes)​—Spanish
● The February 15, 1990, Spanish-language issue of The Watchtower should have listed an additional English-language convention for JUNE 21-24 as follows:
LOS ANGELES, CA (Sign language also), Dodger Stadium, 1000 Elysian Park Ave.
The Los Angeles, CA, convention listed for JULY 12-15 should have read as follows:
LOS ANGELES, CA (Spanish only), Dodger Stadium, 1000 Elysian Park Ave.
● The dates for the Bismarck, North Dakota, district convention have been changed to June 28–July 1, 1990, one week earlier than previously listed.

