Be Wise​—Apply the Things That You Learn
1 It is the goal of most humans to live a happy, peaceful life. Thousands of books and articles give advice on how to have a successful marriage, how to raise children, how to succeed financially, how to acquire and maintain good health, and numerous other subjects related to helping people achieve happiness. Although some practical wisdom may be found in worldly publications, most people in the world are anything but happy and peaceful. Why is this so?
2 The answer can be found in the Bible at Proverbs 1:7, which says: “The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of knowledge. Wisdom and discipline are what mere fools have despised.” A person cannot expect to have peace and happiness if he does not acknowledge and respect the Source of true knowledge and wisdom, Jehovah God.
3 The world is spiritually impoverished​—famished. Ironically, this sad state of affairs is self-imposed, since an abundance of spiritual food is available to all throughout the earth, and it is free for the taking. (Prov. 1:20, 21; Rev. 22:17) Because people in the world reject wisdom from Jehovah, they continue to stumble about in spiritual darkness. (Prov. 1:22-32) On the other hand, as Jehovah’s people, who respect his laws and follow his commandments, we are spiritually well-fed and happy. (Isa. 65:13, 14) Also, the love that abounds in God’s organization identifies us as Christ’s true disciples. (John 13:35) Yes, the worldwide brotherhood of Jehovah’s Witnesses gives living proof that adherence to Bible teachings is the wise course to follow.
4 Still, some who are associated with Jehovah’s organization may not be experiencing the happiness that could be theirs. They may even adversely affect the happiness of others around them by the things they say and do. How could this be so? It is simply because they do not apply God’s wisdom in their lives. They may attend congregation meetings, circuit assemblies, and district conventions. They may be up-to-date on what the Society’s publications say, but their life-style and the manner in which they deal with others, including fellow Christians, does not reflect application of the truth they have learned. What needs to be done? Such persons need to concentrate on “sowing with a view to the spirit” so that they may bring true happiness into their own lives and contribute to the happiness of those around them.​—Gal. 6:7, 8.
WHAT TO APPLY
5 If we individually become lax, let down our guard, and succumb to Satan, the world, or our imperfect flesh, we will lose the joy of having a close relationship with Jehovah. Now, more than ever before, it is necessary to be alert to apply the things we learn at our congregation meetings and assemblies as well as through other provisions of the organization. The world in which we live is a dangerous place that is constantly changing. We need to be alert to apply the counsel Jehovah lovingly provides through “the faithful and discreet slave,” recognizing it as food at the proper time.​—Matt. 24:45-47.
6 In the current program for our special assembly day, much good information is provided on how to stand firm as one flock. Practical suggestions are given on how to combat weakening influences, such as discouraging circumstances, the worldly spirit of independence, and time-wasting distractions. Are we putting into practice the good counsel to trust fully in Jehovah and his ways, to recognize and submit to theocratic authority, to be humble and modest, and to buy out the opportune time for theocratic pursuits? (Mic. 6:8; Eph. 5:15, 16; Heb. 6:10; 13:17) Are family members helping one another to conform to a Christian course of life? Our selection of entertainment, our habits, and our daily routines should be affected by the counsel we receive from the Scriptures. Unless there is diligent effort to apply the things learned, there will be little or no spiritual progress, and our peace of mind and happiness will be affected adversely.​—Phil. 4:7-9; Jas. 1:22-25.
7 A concerted effort in personal and family study is needed. The Watch Tower Publications Index can direct us to detailed information about the application of Bible principles. The Young People Ask book is an excellent aid for parents to use in helping their children cope with today’s complicated satanic world. By referring to such material, we will get Jehovah’s viewpoint on matters and can be guided by righteous principles. Not doing this would be like having medicine for an illness but never taking it, even though we know it would alleviate the malady afflicting us. Regular personal and family study will make our faith grow and give us the strength to endure. In a time of testing, our faith will not wither, causing us to fall away.​—Matt. 13:6; Luke 8:13; Heb. 2:1.
8 Elders and ministerial servants must set an example in presiding over their households. This would include helping their wives and children to apply the things they are learning from God’s Word and organization so as to keep spiritually strong. In this way, the family as a whole can be exemplary in Christian living and provide encouragement for others inside and outside the congregation.​—Eph. 6:4; 1 Tim. 3:4, 12, 13.
WHO TO HELP
9 Among those attending the Memorial each year are many who need further encouragement to apply what they learn and to associate actively with the organization. Loving consideration can be shown to our Bible students by teaching them how to apply Bible principles in their lives and how to carry out God’s righteous commands. We should demonstrate concern for those who are progressing toward becoming our brothers and sisters in the faith.
10 Any who have become irregular or inactive should be helped to see the need to share in regular activity with the organization. They need to regain the peace and happiness that they previously enjoyed when serving Jehovah more fully. (John 13:17) By kindly helping them to rekindle their appreciation for the truth and “offer to God a sacrifice of praise,” they will be able to apply the things they learn and stay on the road to life.​—Heb. 13:15; see Our Kingdom Service, June 1979, page 7, and February 1977, page 3.
11 All God’s people need to keep pace with Jehovah’s fast-moving organization. We cannot allow ourselves to be lured into complacency. We must always maintain our spirituality, keeping abreast of the latest information provided through God’s organization and making ready application of it. This takes diligent effort and at times personal sacrifice. But Jehovah does not ask of us what we are not capable of doing. He is our Creator, and he knows what is best for us. Let us therefore prove ourselves wise by continuing to be taught by Jehovah and to apply the things we learn. This will bring praise to him and result in everlasting benefit for us.​—Isa. 48:17; 54:13.

