Boldly Declare the Good News
1 Historically, true Christians are known for their boldness. The apostles Peter and John are prime examples of this. Despite being thrown into prison and threatened, these apostles fearlessly and boldly continued speaking the truth. (Acts 4:18-20, 23, 31b) Paul too boldly carried on with his ministry in difficult territory even though he experienced much persecution.​—Acts 20:20; 2 Cor. 11:23, 28.
2 How is it that despite great adversities, the apostles as well as other Christians throughout history were able to continue boldly declaring the good news? The apostle Paul answers that question at 1 Thessalonians 2:2, where he says, “We mustered up boldness by means of our God to speak to you the good news of God.” In like manner, Peter and John as well as the other disciples were able to proclaim the good news boldly. After being released from their prison bonds, Peter and John reported back to their fellow disciples. In prayer they implored Jehovah to give them the courage and strength ‘to keep speaking his word with all boldness.’ This prayer was immediately answered by God when “they were one and all filled with the holy spirit and were speaking the word of God with boldness.”​—Acts 4:29, 31.
DISPLAYING CONFIDENCE IN JEHOVAH
3 The apostles were confident Jehovah was backing them up. All the promises Jehovah had made through his Word were proving true. And the ones to be fulfilled were guaranteed by means of Jesus Christ. Do we have this same confidence to declare boldly the good news? While we do not speak in tongues or heal the sick, we nevertheless have abundant evidence of Jehovah’s backing. When we see the fulfillment of Bible prophecy, are we moved to speak the good news of God’s Kingdom with boldness?
4 It is to be expected, though, that such bold preaching will meet with opposition. (John 15:20) Such was the case with Jesus and the first-century Christians. But this did not hinder them nor diminish the intensity with which they preached. In fact, such opposition often gave them greater opportunities to spread the Kingdom good news. (Acts 4:3, 8-13a) Because of our Christian adherence to God’s Word on vital issues, we are oftentimes called on to give a reason for our stand. We view such occasions as opportunities to declare boldly the good news. By doing so, we imitate Jesus Christ and his apostles.
5 Auxiliary pioneering affords us greater opportunities to declare the good news. Many will be auxiliary pioneering during April and May, while others are arranging to do so during the summer months. Will your circumstances allow you to apply? By making the effort to share in the auxiliary pioneer work, we prove ourselves to be like Paul and Barnabas. At Acts 14:3 it says that “they spent considerable time speaking with boldness by the authority of Jehovah.” If we are able to buy out time from other activities to spend at least 60 hours in the field ministry during one month, our blessings will undoubtedly increase.
6 Being bold in the ministry is especially helpful when offering subscriptions. The magazines contain a lifesaving message based on God’s Word. So let us not hold back but preach with boldness in imitation of our Exemplar, Jesus, and his apostles.

