Honor Jesus Christ​—The Foundation of Our Faith
1 Understanding the role of Jesus Christ in the outworking of Jehovah’s purposes is vital. Jesus gave his life as a ransom for obedient mankind. (Matt. 20:28) Without Jehovah’s loving provisions through Jesus Christ, we would continue to be in a dying condition with no hope for the future.
2 During the Memorial season especially, we reflect on Jesus’ life, his teachings, and his sacrifice. (Luke 22:19) Appreciating that “God recommends his own love to us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us,” we are motivated to honor God and Christ by enthusiastically sharing with others the good news. How can we do this?​—Rom. 5:8, 10.
DEMONSTRATING GRATITUDE
3 We recognize that Jehovah’s visible organization works under the headship of Jesus. Here on earth, the faithful slave class gives us the spiritual nourishment we need. From his youth onward, Jesus showed deep appreciation for his Father’s Word, and we want to follow his example by studying and digesting the spiritual food provided with a view to teaching others effectively. (Matt. 24:45, 46; Luke 2:46-50) Our gratitude for the organization and the spiritual provisions it supplies is shown by our following its direction and cooperating with the elders.
4 We can also show honor for Christ and adorn our ministry by applying what we learn from God’s Word. Jesus was a high priest without fault, “separated from the sinners.” (Heb. 7:26) He was not guilty of saying one thing and doing another. As fellow slaves, we need to live up to the same high standard. So when we tell others about the righteous new system Jehovah has promised, we want to be living now in a way that will identify us with that new world.​—Matt. 7:21; 1 John 2:17.
PREACHING UNDER CHRIST’S HEADSHIP
5 During April and May, we will offer the Watchtower subscription on a donation basis. We can honor Jesus by showing prospective readers that the purpose of The Watchtower, as explained on page 2 of each issue, is to encourage “faith in the now-reigning King, Jesus Christ, whose shed blood opens the way for mankind to gain eternal life.” Be sure to offer the subscription first whenever possible. If the subscription is not accepted, you may present two magazines and a brochure, thus planting some seeds of truth. Publishers must be discerning so that magazines and especially subscriptions are not wasted. (Isa. 26:10) After accepting a subscription, those who are truly interested will generally show it by a donation. When an interested person cannot give a donation and a subscription is placed, the publisher who obtained the subscription may have an increased responsibility and privilege to honor Jehovah with his valuable things.​—Prov. 3:9.
6 A huge crowd of people who are not yet Witnesses show respect for Jesus by attending the Memorial. Could these be helped to make greater spiritual progress through a personal Bible study? It would be good to make sure that someone calls on them and offers the help they need. With loving assistance, some may progress to the point of sharing in the ministry before the next celebration of the Lord’s Evening Meal.
7 How thankful we are for the loving sacrifice of our Redeemer, Jesus! He has provided us with a sure hope. His life pattern and the record of his ministry serve as a perfect example for us to follow.

