Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING APRIL 2
Song 87
10 min: Local announcements. Remind all that Memorial will be Tuesday evening, April 10. Give time of celebration, and outline local arrangements. Special effort to be made on weekend to invite interested persons. Demonstrate inviting Bible student to Memorial.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Boldly Offering Subscriptions.” Questions and answers. After paragraph 4, present a demonstration using new Topic for Conversation. Feature points from lead articles on peace in The Watchtower. One making presentation should be positive when offering subscription on a complete donation basis.
15 min: “Memorial​—The Christian Celebration.” Questions and answers. After paragraph 6, briefly demonstrate calling to remind one previously invited, then ask congregation to relate how they plan to invite new ones to the Memorial and help them to attend. Remind congregation that printed invitations are available.
Song 181 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 9
Song 148
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Demonstrate two 30- to 60-second presentations for current magazines. Inform congregation of field service report for March. Commend for good work accomplished.
18 min: “Honor Jesus Christ​—The Foundation of Our Faith.” Question-and-answer discussion.
17 min: The Value of the Good News in Our Lives. Talk. Material can be found in January 1, 1990, Watchtower, pages 4-6. Arrange prepared comments from the congregation as to how the good news has helped them to improve their lives.
Song 193 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 16
Song 23
10 min: Local announcements and pertinent Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
20 min: “Boldly Declare the Good News.” Question-and-answer discussion of material. Read paragraphs as time allows.
15 min: The Bible’s Viewpoint. Talk and demonstration. Since the July 8, 1985, issue of Awake!, “The Bible’s Viewpoint” has been an interesting feature of the magazine. The articles concerning the Bible’s position on the subjects discussed are designed for the inquiring mind, whether a person believes in the Bible or not. Oftentimes the articles give a fresh approach to subjects explained previously. Are we using this feature in the field ministry? The articles are short and to the point, being two pages in length. Review with audience several of these articles that are appropriate to your local territory. Demonstrate how articles may be featured in the ministry.
Song 92 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 23
Song 106
10 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News. Speaker should also discuss with audience what could be said when featuring May 1 issue of The Watchtower. One might say that true peace could only come by means of a ruler strong enough to guarantee it. Psalm 72:7 says God’s Kingdom under Christ will bring abundance of peace. As a righteous ruler, he could do away with the wicked and even assure the resurrection of those who have died. (Ps. 37:10, 11) Point out specific points from May 1 issue that may be used on magazine day or when offering subscription on a complete donation basis.
25 min: “Be Wise​—Apply the Things That You Learn.” Elder discusses material with audience. Emphasize need to study publications carefully so that what is learned may be remembered and applied. Call attention to practical points from recent publications that have local application. Examples: how youths can deal with situations at school; how to handle problems encountered at place of employment; how to resolve problems between brothers or marriage mates. Use information that will be most helpful to local congregation.
10 min: Blessings From Applying What We Learn. Have well-prepared experiences related on how things learned have been applied and the blessings that have come to individuals who have applied them. Local experiences are best, but if needed, ones from 1990 Yearbook may be used.​—See pages 7-9, 43-5, 50-3, 57-8, 64.
Song 75 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 30
Song 200
10 min: Local announcements. Ask for experiences enjoyed by those who auxiliary pioneered during April.
15 min: Planning Ahead for Spiritual Good Times. Presiding overseer discusses with audience the plans that need to be made for coming months, including attending assigned convention (accommodations, travel arrangements, time off from work, preparation for baptism by prospective candidates, and so forth), auxiliary pioneering, and possibly working seldom-worked territory. Summer months allow for increased activity by youngsters who are on vacation. Make this a summer to remember by wise planning now.
20 min: “Bearing Fruit With Endurance.” Talk on material on pages 253-5 of the 1990 Yearbook. Warmly commend publishers for the local congregation’s share in boldly witnessing and bearing fruit despite trials and difficult circumstances.
Song 72 and concluding prayer.

