Presenting the Good News​—By Boldly Offering Subscriptions
1 The Watchtower is unquestionably the finest Bible study magazine on the face of the earth! Are you convinced that this is true? If so, then should not everyone be given the opportunity to obtain it?
2 How have you personally been helped by reading The Watchtower and Awake!? Likely we could each relate ways the magazines have helped us. Some might say that they have been the primary means of alerting us to the significance of the times in which we live. Or they have enabled us to learn the true meaning of “the signs of the times” that perplex mankind today. (Matt. 16:3) Others would say that they have been comforted by the good news that God’s Kingdom will soon destroy those who oppress their fellowmen. The Watchtower has championed that thought from its very beginning over 110 years ago. The Awake! has alerted people to the significance of the events in our time for over 70 years. Undoubtedly we would all say that these remarkable Bible journals have helped us to build faith in the ransom provision that gives imperfect humans the opportunity to gain eternal life. Others need to learn these truths.
BE POSITIVE IN YOUR OUTLOOK
3 God’s wisdom and not human reasoning is stressed in The Watchtower and Awake! (Isa. 55:8, 9) Such wisdom is desperately needed by everyone today. It can improve lives and help develop right motives. This is necessary in order to “keep living.” (Prov. 9:1-6) Being thus convinced, we will offer the subscription with a positive attitude, recognizing that we have what others need. Carefully pore over each issue to find statements that you believe may be helpful to householders. Such advance preparation will aid you in reflecting a positive spirit when presenting these magazines in the ministry.
4 In the past, some may have been negative about offering subscriptions. Perhaps the cost of the subscription has held some publishers back from offering it. Offering subscriptions on a complete donation basis should prove exciting to all proclaimers of the good news. It will also be challenging. Why? Costs for mailing, paper, and printing presses continue to rise. We cannot afford to waste our valuable magazines. For the Society’s subscription arrangement to continue, contributions to the Society for its worldwide work will have to keep pace with these costs.
CARRY ON WITH BOLDNESS
5 We have every reason to be bold in our ministry​—we have Jehovah’s backing. (Acts 14:3) One of the primary instruments that Jehovah is using to spread the good news today is The Watchtower. If we place subscriptions and then follow up with encouragement to read the magazines, our diligent effort may save people’s lives. So let us enthusiastically and boldly offer subscriptions to all we know and to those we meet in the field ministry.

