Assembling at “the Navel of the World”
Have you ever heard the words “Te Pito o Te Henua”? In Rapa Nui, the original language spoken in Easter Island, it means “the Navel of the World.” What made an assembly here so special?
ISOLATED, mysterious, exotic. These are some words used to describe Easter Island, or Rapa Nui as its inhabitants call it. It is indeed an isolated area located far out in the South Pacific Ocean, 2,350 miles [3,790 km] from Santiago, Chile. It became a province of Chile on September 9, 1888.
With an area of 64 square miles [166 sq km], this triangular island is basically composed of three extinct volcanoes. In fact, like many Pacific islands, it is made up of just the tips of enormous underwater mountains. The entire island has been declared a natural monument. No doubt it is best known for its mysterious statues of stone, known as moai.a
Besides the attractive landscapes and historical sites, Easter Island offers an exotic array of delicacies. From the land come such fruits as pineapples, avocados, papayas, and nine varieties of bananas. And the sea provides a great variety of fish and other seafood.
The weather is mild on Easter Island, with regular rains and rainbows, which grant visitors clean air and spectacular views. Currently, there are about 3,800 residents. Modern inhabitants descend from the first settlers, mixed with Europeans, Chileans, and others. Hundreds of tourists from Europe and Asia visit the island, making tourism an important part of the economy.
Kingdom Seeds First Planted
The 1982 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses reported: “For a time we had an isolated publisher on Easter Island. She was helped spiritually through correspondence with a missionary sister at the branch [in Chile]. Though she has since returned to the mainland, we do have record of Watchtower subscribers on the island. Much to our surprise, in April 1980 we received a long-distance telephone call from an interested person wanting to know when to celebrate the Memorial. Then later on in the same year a married couple from Valparaiso moved there, and they have been conducting Bible studies with interested persons. In April of 1981 a Memorial meeting was held on this island for the first time, there being 13 persons present. How pleased we are that the ‘good news’ is penetrating this isolated area!”
Later, on January 30, 1991, the branch sent a special pioneer couple, Dario and Winny Fernandez, to the island. Brother Fernandez recalls: “A five-hour flight brought us to the most isolated part of the planet, to a culture enshrouded in mystery.” The meetings and preaching activity were immediately organized with the support of a local brother and of a sister who had recently arrived with her two children. In spite of family pressures, religious fervor, and certain life-styles that are common in Polynesian cultures, they saw Jehovah’s blessing on their efforts. Brother and Sister Fernandez are no longer special pioneers, but they remain on the island, where they are raising their son, who was born there. Today, there are 32 joyful Kingdom publishers. Among them are Rapa Nui natives, as well as those who settled on the island or moved there to serve where the need for Kingdom proclaimers was greater.
Preparations for a Circuit Assembly
In view of the great distance between the island and the continent, three times a year the congregation would receive video tapes of the special assembly day, circuit assembly, and district convention programs. But by the end of 2000, the idea of having their own assembly, the first of its kind there, was being considered by the Branch Committee in Chile. Finally, it was decided to hold a circuit assembly in November 2001, and an invitation to attend this special occasion was extended to a limited number of brothers and sisters from different parts of Chile. Because of the airline schedule, the assembly would be held on Sunday and Monday.
The 33 invited delegates were excited at the thought of traveling to the island to participate in the first circuit assembly to be held in that remote area. After a long flight over the Pacific Ocean, the delegates were relieved to be welcomed by the local brothers waiting for them at the airport. The delegates were greeted with beautiful leis (necklaces made from flower petals), a typical gift on the island. Then they were taken to their accommodations, and after a short sightseeing tour of the island, all those who would participate in the assembly program met at the Kingdom Hall.
Publicity From an Unexpected Source
While driving to the assembly, some delegates were surprised to hear on the radio the local priest commenting about their visit. He mentioned tourists from the continent who would be visiting homes to talk about the coming end of the world. Although he urged his parishioners not to listen to the visitors, his announcement helped to publicize the presence of a large group of Jehovah’s Witnesses on the island. This stimulated expectation among the islanders. During the following days, the delegates tactfully shared with them the encouraging message of the good news.
The Assembly Begins
On Sunday morning, the local brothers were waiting in the entranceway of the Kingdom Hall to welcome the delegates as they arrived for the first day of the assembly. “Iorana Koe! Iorana Koe!” “Welcome!” Some sisters wore traditional dress and adorned their hair with beautiful flowers in true Polynesian style.
After a pleasant musical prelude, a hundred voices joined in singing “Be Steadfast, Unmovable!” as it had never been heard in the island before. The local brothers were moved to tears when the chairman extended a warm welcome in their native language, Rapa Nui. During the midday intermission, three new Witnesses symbolized their dedication to God by water baptism. When the first day’s program ended, everyone felt closer to Jehovah and to the entire brotherhood.​—1 Peter 5:9.
Morning Witnessing
Because of special circumstances on the island, the program on the second day of the circuit assembly began after lunch. Therefore, the delegates took advantage of the situation and used the morning to participate in the field ministry. What experiences awaited them?
An elderly woman with eight sons and daughters told the Witnesses that she could not talk to them because she was a Catholic. After they told her that they wanted to talk about the problems that everybody faces, such as drug abuse and family troubles, she agreed to listen.
An elderly local woman gave a Witness couple a cool reception. She told them to go and talk to the people on the continent who were so cruel to others. The couple told her that the message of the “good news of the kingdom” is offered to everyone and that their purpose in coming to the island was to attend an assembly that would help all to grow in love for God. (Matthew 24:14) They asked her if she would enjoy a long life in paradisaic conditions, similar to those on the island but without sickness and death. After they reasoned with her about how many years the volcanic craters on the island have existed, she meditated on the shortness of life and asked: “Why do we live only for such a short time?” She was surprised when she read Psalm 90:10.
At that point, the Witnesses suddenly heard shouting from next door. Although they did not understand the yelling, the woman told them that the neighbors were shouting insults and were making clear that they did not want to be visited by the Witnesses. However, this woman was the nua, or eldest daughter of the family. Since her father had died, it was her duty to decide what was in the best interests of the family. In front of her relatives, she defended the brothers in her native language and kindly accepted the publications she was offered. Later that week, when driving past the Witnesses, she told her brother to stop the car. Despite his evident displeasure, she bade farewell to the brothers and wished them success in their ministry.
Although some islanders initially seemed to reject the message preached by the Witnesses from the continent, it became obvious to the visitors that the Rapa Nui are naturally kind and friendly. Most of them gladly listened to the good news. In fact, 6 of the 20 Witnesses who have been baptized on the island are local residents. One first learned Bible truth by listening from a nearby room to a Bible study being conducted with his wife. He and his wife are now baptized Witnesses, and he is a ministerial servant in the congregation.
The Spiritual Program Continues
After lunch, the second day’s program began. Once again, the 32 local brothers and sisters and the 33 delegates were joined by a number of interested people. Close to one hundred listened to the program, including the public talk “How Love and Faith Conquer the World.” In fact, those present were seeing a living demonstration of the love that exists among Jehovah’s people, even among those of different cultures.​—John 13:35.
At the time of the circuit assembly, the circuit and district overseers held a special session with the pioneer ministers. The three regular pioneers from the island were accompanied by delegates who were regular or special pioneers. All were greatly encouraged.
The next day, some of the local brothers who work as guides gave the delegates a tour of the island. They visited a stone quarry where moai were carved, as well as volcanoes where ancient competitions were held and, of course, the beautiful golden-sand Anakena beach, where the first settlers of the island disembarked.b
The last opportunity to be with the local brothers was at the Congregation Book Study. After the meeting, the local Witnesses surprised their guests with a typical meal. Later, in their characteristic garb, they presented a fine demonstration of folk dancing. The delegates, as well as the Rapa Nui brothers and sisters, were sure that the efforts made to prepare the assembly had been well worth the effort.
All who had come as delegates felt deeply attached to their isolated brothers and sisters, with whom they had spent a thrilling week. Leaving the island was hard. They will always cherish the new friends they made as well as the spiritual encouragement received. At the airport, the local brothers adorned the necks of the delegates with seashell necklaces that they had made.
As the delegates left, they promised: “Iorana! Iau he hoki mai e Rapa Nui ee,” which means: “Good-bye! I will return to you, Rapa Nui.” Yes, they long to return to visit their newfound friends and spiritual family members on the exotic, isolated, mysterious, and friendly Easter Island!
[Footnotes]
See Awake! of June 22, 2000, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
On the crater of the Rano Raraku volcano, there are many petroglyphs. The starting point of a competition among those who wanted to rule the island was located on Rano Kau. It consisted in going down the cliff, swimming to one of the small islands, fetching an egg of a local bird, swimming back to the main island, and climbing up the cliff with the egg undamaged.
[Box on page 24]
Witnessing on Easter Island
  About two years before this memorable assembly, a circuit overseer and his wife visited the island and enjoyed many pleasant experiences. For example, imagine their surprise when the sister who took them to their accommodations reminded them that they had studied the Bible with her in southern Chile when she was a teenager some 16 years earlier. Later that seed bore fruit on Rapa Nui.
  They also had this amusing experience: The owner of a souvenir shop accepted the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and the Bible study aid Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life, both published by Jehovah’s Witnesses. When they returned to visit him, he told them that he could not read that Bible. They had left with him a Bible in French, not in Spanish! The problem was quickly solved, and he found out with the help of local Witnesses and, of course, a Bible in his own language that the Bible was not so hard to understand after all.
[Map on page 22]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
EASTER ISLAND
CHILE
[Pictures on page 23]
Two of those baptized at the circuit assembly
[Pictures on page 25]
Slope of the Rano Raraku volcano; inset: Wild fruit called guayaba grows on the island

