When Global Harmony Will Prevail
HAVE you ever seen a pair of expert ballet dancers, ice skaters, or trapeze artists performing their routines? Their every move is a work of art, reflecting perfect cooperation and coordination. How pleasant it would be if life today were more like that—harmonious and free of friction and conflict. Instead, people are “not open to any agreement,” just as the Bible foretold concerning our time.—2 Timothy 3:1-5.
Yet, in this difficult setting, millions of honesthearted individuals are learning to live in true peace and harmony with one another. How? By accepting the warm invitation recorded in the Bible at Isaiah 48:17, 18. It says: “I, Jehovah, am your God, the One teaching you to benefit yourself, the One causing you to tread in the way in which you should walk. O if only you would actually pay attention to my commandments! Then your peace would become just like a river, and your righteousness like the waves of the sea.”
When we accept that heartfelt invitation, Jehovah becomes, in a sense, our Benefactor. He shows us how to “walk” in genuine peace and harmony. The alternative—to adopt the theories and philosophies of imperfect humans—is folly. Repeatedly, human history confirms the fundamental truth stated at Jeremiah 10:23: “To earthling man his way does not belong. It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.” Simply put, it is not within our capacity to govern ourselves and establish a sound and universally acceptable moral code. Those prerogatives belong to God.—Isaiah 33:22.
Genuine Peace and Harmony
Soon God will bring harmony to our earth. He promises a time when “the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.” (Isaiah 11:9) Yes, permanent peace will at last prevail.
In fact, life on earth will experience a new type of harmony, for God will teach his loyal human subjects how to be good caretakers of their terrestrial home. He will even “conclude a covenant,” as it were, with all predatory beasts, causing them to live in peaceful submission to humans.—Hosea 2:18; Genesis 1:26-28; Isaiah 11:6-8.
This hope is not wishful thinking. Indeed, in his Sermon on the Mount alone, Jesus referred to it twice. First, he said: “Happy are the mild-tempered ones, since they will inherit the earth.” Then, when showing his disciples how to pray, he said: “Our Father . . . , let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.” (Matthew 5:5; 6:9, 10) At the end of his life, Jesus summed up what that will mean for humans in one beautiful word—“paradise.” (Luke 23:43) Indeed, Jesus’ shed blood makes the hope of everlasting life in an earthly paradise a certainty!—John 3:16.
[Picture on page 12]
In God’s coming Paradise, life on earth will experience a new type of harmony

