Youths Who Give a Powerful Witness
Many youths among Jehovah’s Witnesses boldly speak up about their faith both at school and in the Christian ministry, and they have had great success in doing so. Consider the following examples.a
“When I was in third grade,” says Kristina, “the teacher gave each of us a journal in which we were to write about our daily activities. The teacher would read our journals and then write something back to us. I decided to write in my journal about my upcoming talk in the Theocratic Ministry School. The teacher seemed impressed, so I invited her to come to the Kingdom Hall to hear my talk. Not only did she come but my first-grade teacher came as well. Back in school, the teacher told the whole class how much she enjoyed my talk. I was very happy. But that is not all. About a year later, I was able to relate my experience at a circuit assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and my teacher came to that meeting as well. Later, a pioneer friend and I visited her and presented her with the book Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life. She has even come to one of our district conventions!”
At six years of age, Sydnee was adept at boldly speaking to classmates about the truths of God’s Word, including the condition of the dead and Jesus’ position in relation to God. “She has been a zealous and fearless little minister,” her mother says. At the end of her first year at school, Sydnee expressed sadness. “I’m worried about my classmates,” she said. “How are they going to learn about Jehovah?” Sydnee had an idea. On the last day of school, she gave each student a gift-wrapped present. It was the publication My Book of Bible Stories. Sydnee distributed 26 copies in all, telling the students that they could open their gift at home with their parents. Sydnee treats her classmates as her personal witnessing territory. She even called them on the phone to see how they enjoyed the book. One girl said that she reads her copy every night with her mother.
When she was 15, Ellen gave her history teacher several issues of Awake! “He loved them,” Ellen says, “and he has been reading Awake! now for two years.” Ellen continues: “Recently I gave him the publication My Book of Bible Stories, and he told me that his two daughters were enjoying it very much. So I then gave him the book Learn From the Great Teacher. Later, he gave me a card. It said: ‘Thank you so much for the books. The girls and I are absorbing them. It is very pleasing to see a young person as grounded and focused as you. There is no gift that can compare with the gift of your faith. You have taught me more than I could possibly teach you!’ This experience showed me how much people appreciate Bible truth when we make an effort to present it to them.”
Daniel was six years old when he started his first Bible study. “I had been on studies with my mom,” he says, “but I wanted to teach someone myself.” Daniel chose Mrs. Ratcliff—an elderly woman with whom he had left Bible literature. “I want to show you my favorite book, My Book of Bible Stories,” he told her, adding: “I would like to know if I can come every week and read it to you.” Mrs. Ratcliff accepted Daniel’s offer. “We began studying with Mrs. Ratcliff later that day,” says Laura, Daniel’s mother. “Daniel and Mrs. Ratcliff took turns reading paragraphs, and then Daniel had her read selected scriptures cited at the end of the story. I accompanied Daniel, but Mrs. Ratcliff seemed intent on discussing these matters only with him!” In time, Daniel and Mrs. Ratcliff began studying the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. By then Daniel’s younger sister Natalie was old enough to read, so she joined in. Mrs. Ratcliff had many questions—some of them quite complex. But Daniel and Natalie used the booklet Bible Topics for Discussion and the concordance in the back of the Bible to help them give Scriptural answers. Mrs. Ratcliff, a Catholic all her life, was thrilled with what she was learning. “I wish I had started studying the Bible years ago!” she said at the end of one session. Sadly, Mrs. Ratcliff recently passed away at the age of 91. But studying the Bible enabled her to become acquainted with precious truths, including the Bible hope of a resurrection to a paradise earth. Daniel is now ten years old and conducts two Bible studies. Natalie, now eight, studies the Bible with a young girl her age.
Youths like Kristina, Sydnee, Ellen, Daniel, and Natalie bring joy to their Christian parents. More important, they make Jehovah’s heart rejoice, and he will not forget the love such young ones show for his name.—Proverbs 27:11; Hebrews 6:10.
[Footnote]
All publications referred to in this article are published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
[Pictures on page 18]
Kristina (at top) and Sydnee
[Picture on page 19]
Daniel and Natalie
[Picture on page 19]
Ellen

