R324 : page 1 

VOL. III. 
PITTSBURGH, PA., MARCH, 1882. 

NO. 9. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper-money or three cent stamps to the amount of two dollars by 
mail at our risk. Larger amounts by Check, P.O. Money Order or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 



FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Postal Money Orders. 

N.B.-This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who 
will send a card yearly requesting it. 



R324 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The interest still continues over the entire Zion. Letters expressive 
of very deep interest come in daily in great numbers, and show that 
the people are being stirred to an examination of the Scripture as 
never before. We append a few letters for your benefit. Many of the 
best are too personal to admit of publication. 

These expressions of gratitude to God for heavenly food and 
spiritual strength, received through a discernment of his plan and 
better understanding of His Word, are from consecrated children of 
God in various social stations, but not many, though some from the 
ministers of churches. It is strange indeed, that the ministers and 
people do not seize the joyful tidings and carry it with one glad 
shout of praise to God, o'er all the earth- wherever Christians dwell. 

But while they are well aware that the various sectarian creeds 
contradict each other, and that many parts of Scripture are not in 
harmony with any of them, yet they are unwilling to examine these 
things which God is now opening up— because it is now due time 
for his plan to be understood by his children-and shun them as 
though they were poison instead of FOOD. 

R325 : page 1 

Poor things, they are afraid to read lest they should be unsettled; 
but the whole difficulty is, that they are already unsettled and their 
faith being built on the sandy foundations of human traditions 
instead of on the rock, they are in constant danger of the floods of 
skepticism and infidelity sweeping their little all, away. 

Meanwhile, ministers seem to become alarmed, because the best 
elements in their flocks, give heed to and relish the "Food" now 
being provided the sheep by the chief Shepherd. Many of these 
ministers seeking "honor one of another" and the approbation of the 
worldly element of their churches, are far less prepared for this 
"meat in due season" than some— more humble— of their flocks. 
Even some good men in the ministry feel so confident that the 
Great "Babylon" that they have builded is all right, that they, 
without giving the subject study, join with others in saying: "Stop 
thinking," "Don't read it," ("Food for Thinking Christians,") "Burn 
the book. " How strange-how pitiable, that men-Christian men- 
ministers of the Word of God, should treat thus, anything based 
solely on the Word of God and manifesting only the spirit of Christ. 

Those who read and think are convinced, not by any confidence in 
the teachers of the "TOWER," but by the Word of God; and when 
such meet the Doctors of Divinity, their Scriptural knowledge is 
more than a match for the earthly learning of the latter. And thus "a 
little one may chase a thousand." See how fully Isa. 29:9,14, is 
being fulfilled in this, our day. 



How much the present methods remind us of the way in which 
Papacy treated all Protestants and their writings. As the priests once 
claimed that none should have the Bible, because only the priests 
could understand or expound it; so Protestants now say: yes, read 
the Bible but you can understand only such small parts as we can 
expound. And even that small part each denomination construes 
differently, to the amusement of infidels and dismay of all thinking 
Christians. Yet so great is the reverence for CREEDS and traditions 
of men, that each party would prefer to see an opposing creed 
succeed rather than that truth should step in and furnish the 
connecting link, which would not only harmonize the creeds with 
each other, but also with the Bible. 

Why this opposition? As seen from the TOWER, it appears to be 
because of a love of sectarianism. All are sectarian who love a 
Christian specially or more, because a member of their sect or 
division of the church, and whose time and interest is in the 
upbuilding of their division and not in the cause of truth. Such 
oppose our teachings because they realize that it opposes some 
features of their creed. And it is for this cause that we are hated of 
all men, (not new creatures) for Christ's sake, because our teachings 
are in opposition to some features of every sect. The world also 
hates us, because we are still more separate from it than the 
nominal church. But this is our work -"To bear witness to the 
truth. " And blessed are those who are beheaded for the witness of 
Jesus and the Word of God, and who worship not the BEAST 
neither his IMAGE, but God only. 

Another laborer goes into the vineyard this month, a Bro. 
Tackabury, of Ohio, a member until now of the M.E. Conference. 
Should he come your way bid him God-speed. God grant to use 
him much in his service and for the blessing of the household. We 
may expect occasional notes from his pen in the TOWER. 

Favorable reports come from Lynn, Mass., and Ft. Edward, N.Y., 
where Bro. Keith has been preaching during the last month. 

Bro. Sunderlin is nearly well again. (He has been laid up for nearly 
five months, by reason of over-exertion, incident to the 
arrangements for the distribution of the "Food" in Great Britain and 
Ireland.) He is busy in the vicinity of his home, to the extent of his 
present ability. 

page 1 



KEOKUK, Feb. 20th, '82. 

"ZION'S WATCH TOWER"-Dear Friends :-Sample copies of the 
"TOWER" received, together with the "Tabernacle," and I assure 
you their contents pondered over and over, each time with 
increasing zest and delight. I cannot find language to express my 
thanks to the gentleman who, apparently in an accidental way, met 
and handed me a copy of "Food for Thinking Christians," at the 



same time asking me if I would read it if he gave it me, thereby 
exciting my curiosity to know its contents. May God bless him and 
all of you in the holy work of Love. To me it has been a feast— 
"Food" indeed. So much Bible truth, so many of its precious 
promises and utterances have been explained and brought into 
requisition that I never before had any use for, or appreciation of. 
Enclosed find "TOWER" subscription. 

Yours truly, 



NOTTINGHAM, ENGLAND 

ZION'S W.T. TRACT SOC'Y-Brethren: -I have read with much 
pleasure the little book, "Food for Thinking Christians." I am 
indeed grateful to you for the manner in which you have explained 
several of the most difficult points in theology. God in His infinite 
goodness must have opened your eyes to see these wonders of His 
divine plan, and I am thankful that I have lived to see this day. I 
may say that I fully indorse a great deal of the new teaching, and 
shall adopt it for the future. I pray God to abundantly bless you for 
your great philanthropic resolve to bless the world by giving away 
these pamphlets. 

I always reverenced the Bible as the Word of God-but since I have 
read your publications, I look upon it as my most PRECIOUS 
POSSESSION. 

Yours most sincerely, . 



MANCHESTER, KY., Feb. 20th, '82. 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER-Dear Brethren:-I received the 
September No. "Food for Thinking Christians," and read it through 
four times and loaned it. I am much pleased with it and think the 
views correct as far as I am capable of judging. Recently, by 
request, you sent me the same in pamphlet form, which I keep 
loaned out. I also received a copy of the "Tabernacle and its 
Teachings," which I have read through three times, and can truly 
say, that I am more than pleased with it; also WATCH TOWER, for 
which I subscribe —am waiting to see if I can't get others to send 
with me. Please send me three copies more of "Food"; I will see 
that they are placed with those who will read them, and give the 
contents serious consideration. 

Geo. O. Barnes, the Kentucky evangelist, held a series of meetings 
here last spring; he preached in part your views- "Love of God," 
first and all the time, and perhaps the mind of this community is 
better prepared to accept this Food than it otherwise would have 
been. May the Master speed and help in your work. 

Yours, etc., . 



CHARLESTON, S.C., Feb. 20, 1882. 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER:- 

I wish to express my appreciation, of the value of the two tracts— 
both of which I have perused with no little interest and pleasure. 
Their broad views and clearness on these glorious themes are 
equally as clear to the simplest understanding, as to the most 
metaphysical mind. 

The "second coming of our Lord," has been a subject of the deepest 
interest to me for a long time; and the pamphlets (in their humble 
guise) contain to me the most Godly and enlightened views I have 
yet met with. 

With the earnest wish that they might fall into the hands of all 
Christians, who may be walking in the narrow way, yet who may be 
like myself, often in the darkness, and longing for more light-to 
such I would say, "read, and ye shall find that for which ye seek. " 

Enclosed please find a contribution of two dollars for the Z.W.T. 
Society. Please send me two copies of "Food," and two of the 
"Tabernacle. " 

Respectfully, 
R325 : page 2 

THE PASSOVER. 

"Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, therefore, let us keep the 
feast." 1 Cor. 5:7. 

From the account of the instituting of the Lord's supper, furnished 
in Matt. 26:26,28, and Luke 22:7-20, and 1 Cor. 11:23-26; we 
incline to the view that it was designed to be a yearly remembrancer 
of our Lord's death, and that it is properly observed on its 
anniversary. Apparently it was instituted by Christ Jesus "our 
Passover," "The lamb of God which taketh away the sins of world," 
(John 1:29) as a substitute for the Jewish Passover. 

For this reason we meet each year for its commemoration on the 
anniversary of our Lord's death. (The 14th day of the first month- 
Jewish time.) 

We do not quarrel with any who prefer to commemorate more 
frequently, neither do we regard it as a binding or compulsory 
observance. We observe it because we rejoice thus to remember our 
ransom price- "the propitiation (satisfaction) for our sins, and not 
for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. " 

The time for the observance of the Lord's death this year will be 
after 6 P.M. of April 2d, which we believe to be the date 
corresponding to the time at which Jesus and his disciples ate of it; 
3 o'clock P.M., the day following corresponding to the hour of 
Jesus death. Matt. 27:46-50. 



Accordingly, there will be a meeting at the residence of J. L. 
Russell, No. 80 Cedar avenue, Allegheny City, at 7:45 P.M. of 
Sunday April 2d, for commemorating the breaking of the body and 
the shedding of the blood of Christ. Thus, "as oft as we do this, (on 
its anniversary) we do show the Lord's death till he come"-till the 
last member of his body being dead with him, shall be like him, 
glorified and perfected as a new creature. For "the cup of blessing 
which we bless is it not the communion [sharing by us] of the blood 
[death] of Christ? The bread which we break is it not the 
communion of the body of Christ [in his death]? For we being 
many are one bread [loaf] and one body." 1 Cor. 10:16. Hence, 
when we eat and drink, we show not only our interest in his 
sacrifice, but also express our own covenant to be dead with him, 
and to drink of his cup. (See, Matt. 20:22,23.) 

These are always precious seasons here; and letters received from 
various groups of twos, threes, twenties and fifties last year, 
indicated that they enjoyed a similar blessing. "Christ our Passover 
is sacrificed for us, therefore, let us keep the feast"— putting away 
all leaven of malice, envyings, etc., let us be of the unleavened loaf- 
-the body of Christ -each member, not puffed up, but easily 
broken. 

We generally use unleavened cakes (which may be purchased of 
any Hebrew family) and raisin juice. 



R325 : page 2 

TRUTH, when it is won, is the possession of the whole nature. By 
the action of the whole nature only can it be gained. The king must 
go with his counselors at his side, and his army at his back, or he 
makes no conquest. The intellect must be surrounded by the 
richness of the affections and backed by the power of the will, or it 
attains no perfect truth. -Phillips Brooks. 

We have many questions, some of which will be answered in next 
issue. 



R325 : page 2 

THE PROGRESS OF INFIDELITY. 

It is acknowledged by all unprejudiced persons capable of judging, 
that infidelity is on the increase. Speaking upon this subject, the 
Chicago Tribune says: "It is idle for the people of a religious habit, 
and especially for those who are charged with nursing and 
promoting piety, to ignore the progress which infidelity has been 
making during the past few years. The contrast between the 
crowded auditorium in which Col. Ingersol delivered his lecture 
recently, with the sparse attendance which awaited similar 
appearances a few years ago, furnishes a striking evidence of its 



progress." The writer continues his theme, and very truthfully says: 
"The progress of infidelity, as signalized by Ingersoll's success, 
likewise denotes the growth and spread of irreverence. Perhaps this 
is the worst feature of the new order of things. The danger of 
irreverence is its invasive tendency. Beginning with its forms, it 
soon extends to the essence; starting with dogma, it is apt to 
proceed at a rapid rate to principle, society, and the family. The 
infidel must provide his own morality, and impose his own 
restraints. No man or sect is his guardian, and his code of ethics is 
of his own making. The modern spirit of progress is creating sad 
havoc with the traditions and precedents which might continue their 
influence even when the inspiration of Scriptures is doubted. " 

It is a very sad fact, that at this time, when God, His Christ, and His 
Holy Book are so ruthlessly assailed 

R326 : page 2 

by these godless, profane infidels, that the church has very nearly 
lost its power to withstand the oncoming tide. The finely written 
essays of her ministers are blank cartridges, when directed against 
such batteries. The pomp and glitter of modern worship, with 
sensational story-telling for Gospel, is as powerless to resist this 
overwhelming infidelity, as a shadow would be to stop a cyclone. 
The Tribune further says: 

"There is naturally great diversity of opinion as to the effect of the 
palpable growth of infidelity that marks our age. The aggressive 
infidel like Ingersoll believes it to be an essential and valuable part 
of the world's progress. To him it denotes the downfall of 
superstition and the spread of reason and enlightenment. The 
conservative doubter is inclined to deprecate the contagion of 
infidelity. He believes himself and most of those who have 
exchanged their doubts with him to be capable of shaping their 
morals in the right direction, but fears that the removal of restraints 
will lead the masses to excess and riot of free thought and 
irresponsible actions. The churchman condemns without 
qualification the new departure as sacrilegious and wicked, leading 
to all the penalties in this life and the future which the strictest 
construction of the church tenants impose upon the infidel and the 
scoffer. These various sentiments can find no common ground upon 
which to meet, and infidelity must take its course, except as it may 
be restrained by moral and social influences, for the day of the rack 
and the thumb-screw, the terror of the cross and the stake are gone 
forever. " 

It would seem to be a cruel accusation to make, to say that the 
church has done much to produce this fearful increase of infidelity, 
but so it appears from what infidels and all unprejudiced writers 
say. Not that the church had intended any such thing, but many of 
her dogmas, such as unconditional election, man's inherent 
immortality, endless torture as punishment for sin, the endlessness 
of evil and rebellion against God, appear so unreasonable and 



arbitrary, and present the character of a just and merciful Creator 
and Ruler in a contradictory light, that these infidels, assuming that 
the teaching of the church is in harmony with the Bible, have, 
without critically testing these dogmas by the Scriptures, rejected 
the Church, the Bible, and its Author. If this be true, then the only 
antidote for this infidel poison is the presentation and adoption of 
the true Bible theology, by which God and His revelations shall be 
presented in their true character. 

Brethren, the present period, with all the wonderful circumstances 
crowded into it, offers the most glorious opportunity to the loyal 
servants of Christ to defend Deity, Jesus Christ, and the holy 
Scriptures, that was ever offered to any generation of God's 
servants since the world began. The present hours are truly filled 
with grand opportunities, sublime duties, such as angels and 
prophets were amazed to see in vision, and such as holy men have 
desired to enjoy, but died without enjoying the grand privilege. 
May the God of all grace give us wisdom not to waste these golden 
opportunities in children's play, striving about personal, carnal 
things, catching motes, while golden crowns are within reach- 
Selected. 



R326 : page 3 



THE BRIDE OF THE LAMB. 

In the world despised, neglected, 
Deemed its refuse and its dross, 
She whose Lord the earth rejected, 
Shares his sorrow, bears his cross. 

By the Dragon's fury driven, 
Nourished in the desert drear, 
Rocks and caves and stars of heaven, 
All her lonely sighings hear. 

In the worldlings' gay carousal, 
How her bridal hope they spurn! 
"Where's the vow of his espousal, 
Where the pledge of his return?" 

Yet, in all the gloomy midnight, 
Sang her heart its virgin lay; 
Watching, waiting, till the daylight, 
"Till the shadows flee away. " 

From the wilderness returning, 
Who is she with radiant face; 
In the early dawn of morning, 
Coming to her rightful place? 



Tis the Bride-the Lord's espoused, 
Leaning on the Bridegroom's arm; 
Shafts of error, words of malice, 
Now are vain, to do her harm. 

Then He's present-came the Bridegroom, 
To escort her to his home? 
Ended is her night of sorrow- 
Has Millennial morning come? 

Yes, He's present and in power; 
Soon his glory all shall see; 
For 'tis written, "Filled with knowledge, 
All of earth, now soon shall be." 

"In a moment"— Oh what wonder!- 
"In the twinkling of an eye," 
Parted from the earth asunder, 
She is with her Lord on high. 

Come up hither! I will show thee 
The Lamb's wife enthroned in light, 
Sharing all his kingly glory, 
Clothed with glory and with might. 

He has kept the vow he plighted; 
Praise the Lord in song and psalm! 
Blessed they who are united, 
By the marriage, to the Lamb. 



-Repaired. 



R326 : page 3 



WHAT IS MEAT? 

"Who then, is a faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord hath 
made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season? 
Blessed is that servant whom his Lord, when he cometh, shall find 
so doing." Matt. 24:45,46. 

We understand these words to have been spoken to the disciples 
originally, but were for the instruction of the church throughout the 
Gospel age, but especially at its close. 

As some of the times and events spoken of by our Lord have come 
and gone, and as Christians have marked these passing events with 
careful anxiety, because they gave corresponding indication of the 
ending of trial and trouble to the children of God, many of them, for 
some reason, seem to have come to think that the exact knowledge 
of the time of our Lord's coming was the most essential thing to 
attend to. 

Far be it from us, in this connection to throw cold water upon the 
expectations of any who are watching for the revelation of the 



world's coming King; and far be it from us to join in the cry of 
objection so often urged: "O, we don't know anything about it; 
Jesus said, 'no man knoweth the day nor the hour;' I don't think we 
ought to pry into such things," etc. But, while we would do neither 
of these, let us carefully consider the words of our Saviour in the 
text quoted. In the preceding verse he says, "In such an hour as ye 
think not the Son of man cometh." Notice he is not speaking to the 
world now, but to the disciples, and doubtless to all those who 
should afterward "believe on him through their word. " As much as 
to say, I have now answered your questions regarding these 
important events; you and the succeeding members of the body of 
Christ, the little flock, can mark by the fulfillment of these signs at 
different points in this good-news age, something near the time of 
my coming and presence. (They had been asking when there should 
not be "one stone left upon another" of these magnificent buildings, 
and what should be the sign of his presence, and of the end of the 
age.) See vss. 2,3. Though they were not to be overtaken as a thief 
(the world would be), nor to be in darkness regarding it (1 Thes. 
5:4), yet they were not to know the hour, i.e., the exact time of his 
coming, yet if they were to watch closely they would not mistake 
the signs of his presence, viz., that it would be with the world as it 
was in 

R327 : page 3 

the days of Noah, careless and thoughtless, the whole attention 
given to fleshly desires, not understanding nor caring for the 
spiritual; verses 37,38,39, and saying "where is the promise of his 
coming." 2 Peter 3:4. But a very striking sign of his presence would 
be that the evil servant would be smiting his fellow servants and 
saying, "My Lord delayeth his coming" (presence). 

The nominal church is now doing this, and it is cause for regret that 
it is not confined to it. But, while he charged them to watch that 
they might not be like Jerusalem, ignorant of the time of their 
visitation, and as a consequence unprepared, he follows it up with a 
question which embodies an exhortation to a still more important 
duty, which, while being done, should not leave the other undone, 
viz., "Who is a wise and faithful servant" ...giving "meat in due 
season" to the household? What household? The household of faith. 
Then it is spiritual things he is speaking of, similar to those spoken 
of in the sixth chapter of John, 53d to 63d verse inclusive. Please 
read those words, "they are spirit and they are life. " Take them in at 
the expense of being called a spiritualist. If it is spiritual things that 
are spoken of, what must be the nature of the meat given to the 
household of faith by the faithful and wise servant? Jesus says 55th 
verse, "My flesh is meat indeed. " But the words which he is 
speaking are spirit. Then he does not mean that his physical body is 
the thing spoken of; no, for "the flesh profiteth nothing" (O, that we 
could keep this in mind when studying the nature of Christ's 
coming, and his dealings with the household of faith), and yet just 
before— 53d verse he says, "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of 



man and drink his blood ye have no life in you. " Then the faithful 
and wise servant will be feeding the household of faith with the 
body and blood of Christ. Then, as this is a figure, it must be that 
somehow we take in, and take on, the nature, the character, and the 
life of Christ; if we "eat his flesh," is it not a strong mode of saying 
that we assimilate the essential principles that made up the Christ, 
and thus become like him? 

Let us consider, then, the apostle and high priest of our profession, 
Christ Jesus, that we may find what those principles are. 

What was the great work which he proposed to accomplish? 

"To save a world of sinners lost. " 
How did he begin that work? 

By laying aside the glory which he had with the Father. "Though he 
was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor. " Humility, then, was 
the first blade that shot forth from the seed which was to become a 
tree, the leaves of which should be for the healing of the nations. 

The "mighty" came down to man's estate, but the wondrous stoop 
was within sight, and so far as we have anything to sacrifice we are 
to imitate him. Then the faithful and wise servant will have the 
household partake of the humility of Christ. He will not be offering 
them bones of contention, nor setting them examples of arrogance 
and self-sufficiency; he will not by example nor precept have them 
partake of the spirit which on one occasion caused certain ones to 
contend "who should be greatest," and certain ones at a later date, 
who should be "leaders." If any are leaders, and Christ appointed, 
they will be partaking of this humility, and by every means causing 
the household to partake of it also. 

After humbling himself by taking the body prepared for him, his 
first act (when the body was mature) was to formally deliver it up 
to death; and this he signified by making a living picture (his 
baptism) of his submission to death and consequent sufferings 
preceding it, and of his resurrection. Here is an important element, 
that the faithful servant will be giving to the members of the 
household, though some may think that they can live without it. 

His next act was to submit to be led (but of the spirit) into the 
wilderness to be tempted, to be brought directly in contact with the 
powers of darkness. To stand as a man alone in the presence of the 
ruler of the darkness of this world to be tempted. But why was he 
tempted? It would not make him any purer nor better surely; he was 
without sin already. 

He came down to the condition of the perfect man; he was the 
second Adam. The first Adam with no preference for evil, but 
having no knowledge of its terrible nature, was tempted and fell, 
the second Adam, with no preference for evil, but with a knowledge 
of its awful results, and of the power of God (By his knowledge 
shall my righteous servant justify many. Isaiah 53:11), was as really 
tempted, and triumphed. He evidently was free and could have 



yielded; in fact, he was tempted TO yield, but gloriously resisted 
and vanquished his foe. 

Now again we ask, why did he pass through this ordeal? To show 
us how to overcome. Being the Captain of our salvation, the Leader 
of a little band of conquerors, his example was necessary, for 
through them "all the families of the earth" are to be blessed. "Now 
to Abraham and his seed were the promises made". ..and that seed 
"is Christ." Gal. 3:16. Now, if we "be Christ's (if we feed on him 
and partake of his life), then are we Abraham's seed, and heirs 
according to the promise." Gal. 3:29. 

Then here is a choice principle for the household to feed on; the 
knowledge of Christ, or Christ's knowledge. But, says one, his 
knowledge was divine, and though he was tempted, he knew he 
would not be overcome. That is just the point we wish to make 
prominent right here. He has opened for us the way to the same 
source of knowledge, divine word and spirit, and Christ's example 
to feed on. But, says one, if I could know, as he did, that I would 
come out of the conflict all right I could endure it too. But you 
would know that just as surely as he, if you would feed on his 
knowledge. Here is a bit of it, take it and let it strengthen thine heart 
when trial comes, as it did his: "God is faithful who will not suffer 
you to be tempted above that you are able, but will with the 
temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear 
it." 1 Cor. 10:13. This is divine knowledge, and just the knowledge 
that he had. If you believe it and appropriate it, (feed on it) you will 
triumph just as he did. 

But there are many other portions of knowledge that strengthened 
him for his labor of love and life of suffering, terminating with 
death, and the same knowledge will so strengthen and support us. 

These portions may be summarized under the general term of God's 
plan for the salvation of the world. O, how it fired him with love 
and zeal, and by parable and figure he held it up to the view of 
those whom he wished to have see it. 

But, says one, did he not wish to have all see it? No, not then; he 
only wished to have those see it who would accept the blessed 
truth. See Matt. 13:13,14,15, and Matt. 7:6. It was for those referred 
to by Paul (Acts 13:26), when he said, "Whosoever among you 
feareth God, to you is the word of this salvation sent. " There are yet 
many persons whose ears are dull of hearing, and such ones would 
and do trample upon these pearls. This bread of life they reject. 
Like the Pharisees of old, publicans and harlots will enter the 
kingdom before them. 

This knowledge which so supported him will so support us. Modern 
Pharisees would withhold from us this love-begotten plan of God; 
but let the faithful servant give it plentifully to the household of 
faith. 



We said he passed through this ordeal of temptation and suffering 
to show us how to overcome, giving us the same facilities for 
overcoming, i.e., knowledge of God's will and plan, and his Spirit 
to give us an understanding and to support us. 

But was this example for all the world? O, no, not directly; 
comparatively few of the world know, or ever knew of it, and but 
few of those who do, care much about it. 

But his mission was twofold, to redeem the whole human race from 
death by his death (the forfeit of sin), and to be the Leader of a 
"peculiar people" by his life, and through this "peculiar people" in 
the "ages to come," he is to show to the world "the exceeding riches 
of his grace." (Eph. 2:7.) His death for the world (including those 
who became heirs) entitles them all to life; the same kind of life lost 
in Adam; this is the "common salvation," Jude 1:3, and 1 Cor. 
15:22, and his life vitalizes and raises to a high and glorious 
condition those who hear and believe (the little flock), those who 
feed on him, those who appropriate the divine which was in him, 
and thus are "made partakers of the divine nature." 2 Peter 1:3,4; 
Rom. 5:10; 2 Cor. 4:11. 

We apprehend that the life of Christ by which we are saved (have 
life MORE abundantly) is the life principle which manifested itself 
in a series of loving labors and sacrifices for the good of others, that 
such a life taken in, lived (eaten), is the begetting (through the 
spirit) of a higher life-the pledge of immortality. This we 
understand to be "the faith once delivered to the saints." Jude 1:3. 
This is "the meat that endureth." Jesus said, John 4:34, "My meat is 
to do the will of him that sent me. " That was his life, and if we 
partake of his life on earth, we shall be partakers of his resurrection 
life— made "like unto Christ's glorious body." 

R327 : page 4 

Then let the humility, the sufferings, the trials, the labors, and the 
knowledge, which, by the spirit, supported him— in short, the 
CHRIST be our daily food; and the faithful and wise servant will be 
found giving it to the household in due season, and receive the 
approval of his Lord. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R328 : page 4 

A WORD FROM BRO. A. D. JONES, 
OF ZION'S DAY STAR. 

Most of ZION'S WATCH TOWER readers will remember, that 
some time ago we took the position that it was more than probable 
that the "dead in Christ" were raised, or were then being raised, and 
we yet believe that the position was a true one. One thing is certain, 



that if Rev. 14:13, is now due [and it seems to be], then the other is 
true; for we will not be changed until the dead are raised. 

We believe that the words, "from henceforth," are applicable at the 
present time. This being understood now, is strong evidence that the 
time of favor to come into the "little flock" ended this last fall. In 
harmony with the thought that the dead saints are raised, we refer 
our readers to Rev. 19:5-16 "And I saw heaven opened, and behold 
a white horse; and he that sat upon him was called Faithful and true, 
and in righteousness he doth judge and make war. " This verse 
introduces Jesus as present in power; and by reading Rev. 3:14 it 
will be observed that he is the "Faithful and true witness," as John 
spoke of him in addressing the Laodicean Church. 

This will help us in fixing the time of the above scene, because the 
nominal churches not having been true witnesses were given up by 
him, spewed out of his mouth in the spring of 1878. While Jesus is 
represented in that spiritual condition of power, there are also 
others with him. "And the armies which were in heaven followed 
him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean. " 
Verse 14. This company must be the risen dead, for the "fine linen" 
"represents the righteous acts of the saints;" (verse 8: E, D,) so that 
if Jesus is now present in the spiritual body [judging and making 
war in righteousness, verse 11], they must be also, for both are 
represented in the same spiritual [heavenly] condition. 

According to the parallel, Jesus was due to enter on his Kingly 
office in the spring of 1878, and so when seen in power with his 
armies, "He hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, 
King of kings, and Lord of lords." Verse 16. 

While Jesus and the dead saints are shown as in the heavenly, 
spiritual condition, the living saints who are not yet changed, are 
used as his mouthpiece. "And a voice came out of the throne 
[through them], saying, Praise our God, all ye his servants, and ye 
that fear him, both small and great." Verse 5. Is it not significant 
that the teachings are now to the servants, believing, as we do, that 
the door is shut to the high calling? "And out of his mouth (the 
saints his mouthpiece) goeth a sharp sword, the word of truth, that 
with it he should smite the nations." Verse 15. And again, "How 
beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him [the living saints 
his feet] that bringeth good tidings [restitution], that publisheth 
peace;. ..that saith unto Zion, thy God reigneth" Isa. 52:7. 

"And his name is called the word of God," so we would proclaim 
no other word. Our teachings are not the "doctrines of men," but 
God's Word. Some may say we are not right in our teachings, for 
"he had a name written that no man knew but he himself. " Verse 
12. 

No man [unregenerated] does know, but we (his body) may know, 
for the name written is "King of kings and Lord of lords." Do we 
not proclaim Jesus as now in this position, having entered on his 



Kingly office—and moreover, that the dead saints are risen, "kings 
and priests" unto God, so that Jesus is King of heavenly kings? 

But no man knew "but he himself. " True, but we are of him, we are 
the members of his body: his "feet," therefore a part of himself. 
Dear saints, what a glorious position is ours. The nominal churches 
have been spewed out of his mouth, they are in darkness, and know 
not that Jesus has entered on his reign as King; and hence they 
know not the name written; nor do the servants yet know, for they 
are not of his body, not reckoned as part of Himself. What could 
more clearly set forth our relationship to him than those words 
which reveal to us that name? It also indicates that we shall soon 
enter on our reign with him and his armies. 



page 4 

A WORD FROM BRO. J. B. ADAMSON. 

BELOVED IN CHRIST:-After several months engaged in 
distributing and preaching the Gospel, you will doubtless be glad to 
hear from me again. I have had good opportunities for observing 
how this Gospel of the grace of God is received by the different 
classes in and out of the nominal churches. Only those who go forth 
into the world, with the real Gospel of gladness, can have a full idea 
of the joy and rejoicing of God's true people, when presented with 
these truths. And only such can realize how bitter is the opposition 
of many of the clergy (Scribes) and false religionists (Pharisees) 
who abound in the churches now, as they did in the Jewish. 

I worked in nearly all the large towns of twenty states, being 
present also at nearly all the leading Camp Meetings, Conferences, 
and Assemblies of the year: distributing thousands of books, and 
addressing many people. At Camp Meetings it was impossible to 
give away books with much discrimination, but after the season for 
such gatherings ended, I found time and place for seasonable words 
about our hope, joy, heirship, and the restitution of the world at "the 
manifestation of the sons of God. " I soon began to realize what a 
blessed work I was engaged in, and the glorious privilege of being a 
mouthpiece for the Lord. 

The true people of God who are really making good their promises 
of entire consecration of all to the Lord, received me with every 
sign of gratitude and love, and praise to God for this message of 
grace and love, expressing surprise that the "Food" had reached 
them, and gratitude to God for "meat in due season." Limited in 
time, I devoted it principally to those who seemed to "have an ear 
to hear"-the truth hungry, passing by those who seemed to think 
themselves rich and increased in goods and needing nothing; thus 
following the example of our Forerunner— convinced that now, as 
then, no man can come into the light except the Father draw him by 
his Word and Spirit of truth. There is no inducement of a worldly 



character to lead one of the world-conforming, Babylon people into 
the narrow way and race for glory. On the contrary, this teaching is 
most repulsive to the larger portion of the nominal church, and 
those who deliver them are continually subject to contempt, 
reproach, and dishonor. Those who for years have been carrying the 
honors of the world with the name of Christ in self-indulgence, feel 
outraged by the teaching that glory, honor, and immortality will 
only be given to those who take up their cross, deny self, and 
follow their Leader in a life separate from the world. 

Most bitter in their opposition are the clergy who doubtless feel 
their craft endangered— some of whom obtained the books from 
their people when I was gone and burned them. This was especially 
true among the sect calling themselves "Second Adventists," 
strange as it may seem. They greatly fear, that which they cannot 
gainsay. 

I now gladly recur to the effect of the truths we hold, upon the dear 
sainted people of God who only are the church- yet for the present 
much mixed up in Babylon except to God's clear vision. These 
were glad to get out of her, and hailed the message and the result, as 
a deliverance from sin. Many infidels and worldly people got to 
hear the message also, and often spoke of God's plan in the ages, as 
something reasonable, and as demonstrating his Wisdom, Justice, 
and Love. 

Being a willing instrument in God's hand, subject to any use I can 
be fitted to, I now try a preaching tour, and expect to meet many of 
the brethren and labor together with them. Again desiring your 
prayers, I remain your brother and fellow worker in Christ Jesus. 

J. B. ADAMSON. 



R328 : page 4 



SACRIFICE. 



I entreat you, therefore, brethren, by the tender compassions of 
God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, well-pleasing, 
to God— your rational religious service— Rom. 12:1. — Diaglott. 

There is very much involved in the above quotation. In fact all that 
precedes it, to which the word therefore refers, as a reason why a 
certain thing should be done; but we will call especial attention to 
the term sacrifice. 

It is translated from the Greek word, thusia, and means a slaughter, 
or an animal slaughtered. 

We have natural-animal-bodies now— 1 Cor. 15:44-46; and if we 
have accepted of Jesus as our ransom, they are not our own, but 
have been bought with a price; and we are exhorted to present them 
a living sacrifice, to be slaughtered— killed. But why give them? 



There must certainly be a reason for so doing. The term bodies 
seems to include all there is of our earthly existence. Jesus gave his 
life a ransom for many-Matt. 20:28-and he gave his body-Heb. 
10:10. All there was of the man Jesus, was given as ransom— 1 Tim. 
2:5,6.— and we are exhorted to have the same mind that was in him. 
Phil. 2:5. 

As he became obedient unto death, so ought we. Hereby have we 
known love, that as he laid down his life for us, we ought to lay 
down our life for the brethren. 1 John 3:16. 

For the bodies of those beasts whose blood is brought into the 
sanctuary by the High Priest, for sin, are BURNED without the 
camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with 
his own blood, suffered without the gate. Let us go forth therefore 
unto him without the camp, bearing the reproach- Heb. 13:11-13. 

To present our bodies a living sacrifice, then, means to be crucified 
with Christ; baptized into his death; dead with him as men; but 
alive unto God as new creatures. 

The proclamations of Rev. 14:6-1 1 having been given; Paul's 
mystery, "we shall not all sleep," is now due. And from this time, 
"Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord," they shall not sleep- 
become inactive— but be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and 
while they will have ended the toil and weariness of this present 
condition of corruption, of dishonor and weakness, they will be 
changed to a condition of incorruption; glory and power; and "their 
works follow with them. " 

"Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a 
covenant by sacrifice." Ps. 50:2-5. 

Many seem to get the idea that all that is required, is to give a 
certain portion of our time and substance. Cain came with such a 
sacrifice, and it was not received. Abel offered an animal to be 
killed, typifying the better sacrifice, and it was accepted. If we 
present ourselves we will surely present all we have also. 

B. W. KEITH 



R328 : page 4 



"WHAT IS MAN?" 



"What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that 
thou visiteth him? For thou hast made him a little lower than the 
angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honor. Thou madest 
him to have dominion over the works of thy hand; thou hast put all 
things under his feet: All sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the 
field." (Psa. 8:4-8.) 

We believe that a failure to rightly understand what constitutes A 
PERFECT MAN, is a fruitful source of error among Christians, and 



tends to shroud in mystery, many Scriptures otherwise easily 
understood. 

It is the common view, but we think unsupported by a single text of 
Scripture, that a perfect man has never been seen on earth-in fact 
that all that is seen of man on earth is only the embryo, imperfect, 
undeveloped man; that to reach the perfection of his nature (perfect 
manhood) he must become a spiritual being like unto angels, etc. 
This view, we think, sadly mixes Scriptures, (as well as students) 
instead of developing harmony and beauty, by "rightly dividing the 
word of truth. " 

We understand the Scriptures to teach that there have been only two 
perfect men— Adam and Jesus— Adam was created in the image of 
God: A fleshly image of a spiritual being; an image, in the sense 
that he possessed capacity for reasoning, planing, ruling, and 
protecting-for Benevolence, Justice, and Love, and ability to 
execute these, in earthly matters: characteristics which resembled 
his Creator. To such an extent he is an image, that God can say 
"Come, let us reason together. " 

As Jehovah is ruler over all things, so, man was made a ruler over 
all (earthly) things-"In our likeness, let him have dominion" -over 
the beast, foul, fish, etc. Thus as our text declares, God crowned 
him with 

R329 : page 5 

glory and honor and placed him (in dominion) over earth. Thus 
David agrees with the account in Genesis, as to man's high honors 
originally— with all earthly) things under his feet, or subject to him. 

Genesis tells us, that God recognized the man whom he had made 
(not merely commenced to make, but completed) and God 
considered his creature "Very good." David in our text expresses 
the same thought when he says: "Thou hast made him a little lower 
than the angels." (Not a little while, as if a matter of time, but 
clearly and distinctly a little lower in degree.) Should we say then, 
that because man was a little lower, it means that he was a little less 
perfect than angels? Nay, but they were totally different kinds of 
beings; the one a lower degree of spiritual being, of which Jehovah 
is the highest; the other, the highest degree of animal (or earthly- 
fleshly) being, of which beasts, fouls, etc., are the lower degrees. 
Yet the highest of these earthly creatures was "a little lower than 
the angels," or lowest order of spiritual beings- Yet both were 
perfect, each according to his nature. Yes, God created man perfect 
and upright but he sought out many inventions through sin, by 
which he has woefully degenerated. 

Ah yes, there is a wonderful contrast between man as we now see 
him, degraded by sin, and the perfect creature God called "very 
good." Sin has gradually exchanged the expression and features. 
Hundreds of generations of ignorance, licentiousness, and general 
depravity, have so changed humanity, that it is no longer an 



IMAGE of the Divine. The moral and intellectual qualities are 
dwarfed and the animal propensities overgrown. He has lost 
physical strength to such an extent, that with all the aid of medical 
science, his average of life is about thirty years, whereas, at first, he 
survived nine hundred and thirty years under the same penalty. 

Man, who was thus degraded and defiled by sin and its penalty 
death, working in him, is to be restored to his original perfection of 
mind and body, and to glory, honor, and dominion, during, and by, 
the Millennial reign of Christ; because his ransom has been found 
in the person of Christ; and "as in (or by) Adam all die, even so, in 
(or by) Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:22.) The things to 
be restored by and through Christ, are those things which were lost 
through Adam's sin. (Rom. 5:18,19.) Man did not lose a heavenly, 
but an earthly paradise. Under the death penalty, he did not lose a 
spiritual, but a human existence; and all that was lost is purchased 
back by his REDEEMER. 

If any one be not yet satisfied that Adam was a perfect MAN, we 
can furnish conclusive proof that the perfect MAN is not a spiritual 
being, as follows: 

Jesus in his pre-human existence, was, we are told, "in a form of 
God," i.e., he was a spiritual form or being, but since to be a ransom 
for mankind, he must be a MAN, and of the same nature as the 
sinner whose substitute in death he was to become, therefore it was 
necessary, for him to change his nature; and Paul tells us that he 
took not, or changed not, to the nature of angels, but to the nature of 
men— he became a man. (Heb. 2:16.) Now notice, that this teaches 
not only that angelic nature is not the only one on the spiritual plane 
of being, but that it is a lower plane or nature than that which Jesus 
was before he became a man. And Jesus was not then so high as he 
is now, for-Him hath God highly exalted: (Phil. 2:9), because of 
his becoming our RANSOM. He is now of the highest form of 
spiritual being -a partaker of the divine (Jehovah's) nature. 

But, not only do we thus find that the Divine, Angelic, and Human 
natures are separate, distinct, and totally different; but this proves 
that to be a perfect MAN, is not to be an angel, any more than to be 
a perfect angel implies that they must become equal with Jehovah, 
for Jesus took not the nature of angels, but a different NATURE- 
the nature and form of men; not the imperfect human nature as we 
possess it now, degraded and marked by sin, but-A PERFECT 
HUMAN NATURE. 

Jesus must have been a perfect man, else he could not have kept a 
perfect Law, which was the full measure of a perfect man's ability. 
He must have been a perfect man, else he could not have given a 
ransom for imperfect, sinful MEN; for since by MAN came death, 
by MAN also came the (right to a) resurrection of the dead." (1 Cor. 
15:21.) 

Now we have the question fairly, in another form, viz. : If Jesus in 
the FLESH was a perfect MAN, does it not prove that a perfect man 



is a human and fleshly being, full of the glorious IMAGE of his 
Creator, and crowned with glory and honor-"a little lower than the 
angels," and not an angel, not like angels, nor in any sense a being 
of their order and nature? Paul so teaches in Heb. 2:9. [I know your 
questions and texts and will answer quickly.] Let me go further, and 
say that if Adam was a perfect man, any subtraction or addition 
(except of knowledge) must render the manhood IMPERFECT, for 
perfection cannot be made MORE perfect. 

Again, look at the second perfect man, Jesus: Possessed of all the 
qualities of perfect manhood, he could not be made more perfect as 
a man. He possessed all those qualities of perfection (shown but 
slightly in his sacrificial life), which could have commanded 
obedience of all imperfect men. 

Under promise of an after high exaltation, from the human to the 
divine nature; to glory, honor, and immortality, he consecrated all 
human (earthly) hopes, aims, interests, pleasures, and with them 
human NATURE, too, to death. Because it is impossible to possess 
two natures at the same time, the human nature was given up to 
death before the divine nature could be received. The human ("form 
of a servant") was only taken for the purpose of becoming our 
ransom- "that he by the grace of God, might taste death for every 
man." (Heb. 2:9.) 

He received the divine nature fully, when, having been put to death 
in the flesh, he was quickened, raised to life, in the Spirit. He 
received an earnest, or foretaste of this birth to the divine 
(Jehovah's) nature, when he was begotten of the Spirit. When 30 
years of age, he commenced his ministry by consecration, typified 
in baptism, and was sealed as accepted to the divine nature, by the 
Holy Spirit of promise. (John 6:27; Eph 1:13.) 

And now, he who paid our ransom, and is to bless and restore man 
to perfection, and then to restore the dominion of earth to him- 
blessed with knowledge of good and evil to such an extent that he 
will be able always thereafter, to choose the good; this one, now 
highly exalted above angels and men, and of a higher nature than 
either, sharing the perfection of the divine nature, is selecting a 
"little flock" to share with him those honors, and to partake of that 
same divine nature. (2 Pet. 1:4.) They, as joint heirs, are, with him, 
to be engaged in blessing and restoring mankind to the perfection of 
their nature-the human, with all the earthly glory and dominion as 
at first, but with knowledge and appreciation increased. 

Because the present age is devoted exclusively to the development 
of those who shall change their nature -Christ and his Bride; and 
because the epistles of the apostles are devoted to the description of 
the interests of the "little flock" and the prize for which they are 
now running a race, it should not be inferred that God's plans end 
with the completion of that choice company. Nor, on the other 
hand, should we go to the opposite extreme, and suppose that these 
choice things— divine nature, spiritual bodies, etc., are God's design 



for ALL mankind. No, to rightly divide the word of truth, we 
should see that the Scriptures recognize the perfection of the divine 
nature in the little flock, and of the human nature in the restored 
world, as two separate things. 

The same Word of God contains earthly promises and "heavenly 
promises"; and it symbolically likens the earthly class to the "sands 
of the sea," and the heavenly class to "the stars of heaven." (Gen. 
22:17.) Of the one class it is said: All the LAND which thou seest, 
to thee will I give it, and to thy seed forever. (Gen. 13:15.) "And 
they shall build houses and inhabit them; plant vineyards and eat 
the fruit of them and long enjoy the work of their hands." (Isa. 
65:21,22.) To the other class, who will change their nature from 
human to spiritual-divine promises are made- "EXCEEDING 
GREAT and precious promises" (2 Pet. 1:4.)— "heavenly 
promises." Theirs is a "heavenly calling," a calling to a heavenly or 
spiritual condition; it is a call to become joint heirs with Jesus, and 
to sit with him "in his throne. " This heavenly calling is confined to 
the Gospel age; was never made before it, and will, as the 
Scriptures inform us, never be made after this age. The earthly call, 
was made before the high calling, and we are Scripturally told will 
follow after, the Gospel age. It is during the Millennial age that 
mankind will have the glorious opportunity of reaching human 
perfection, and earthly glory, honor, and dominion; their right to 
that restoration having been purchased by the sacrifice of the 
humanity of the Christ. 

Now, who cannot see a distinction between these natures, and that, 
though both will finally reach perfection (except those who are 
"cast away" as unworthy), yet, because of different natures, the 
perfected creatures will be totally dissimilar, except that in common 
they will have dispositions to do the Creator's will. We know that 
they will be thus alike-in harmony— one, because the perfect 
human was made an image of the perfect divine. 

The ancient worthies obtained a good report (record) through faith, 

R330 : page 5 

but received not the things God promised them, viz.: the land, 
peace, etc., "God having provided some BETTER thing, for us [the 
Gospel Church], that they [the faithful-Abraham, Samson, Moses, 
Isaac, Jacob, and Rahab, whose faith amounted to the hiding of the 
spies, etc.], without us, should not be made perfect:" (Heb. 11:40) 
i.e., These, to whom the earthly promises are made, cannot obtain 
their fulfillment until the Gospel Church is finished, and receives 
the spiritual things promised to it; then, through it, the earthly 
promises will be grandly fulfilled. 

Beloved, it will help you amazingly to keep clearly in view these 
differences of calling and of nature. It will enable you to see why, 
we who would attain the high, spiritual promises should not look to 
Samson, Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob as illustrations of— crucifying the 
flesh— or following in the footsteps of Jesus; they were running for 



the earthly prize, we for the heavenly. Look unto Jesus as the 
pattern and illustration of how we ought to so run as to win the 
spiritual prize. He was the first to run for the spiritual prize, the 
"forerunner," the Leader. Look, too, to others who ran in his 
footsteps, Peter, Paul, James, John, etc. These are illustrious 
examples, of those who crucify the human nature and sacrifice it, if 
by so doing they might attain the new nature offered-the prize of 
our high-calling. 

While your steps and mine may not shine so brightly as the 
mentioned apostles', yet the only difference in our sacrifices and 
work, should be those of ability and opportunity. Our wills should 
be as thoroughly sanctified as theirs; and if so, we may feel assured 
that our sacrifice is as well pleasing and acceptable to our Father by 
Jesus Christ, as was theirs. 

But fall not into the error of supposing that crucifying the flesh 
means the putting away of sin. No, Jehovah would never accept 
sins as a sacrifice. Sins should be put away, shunned, exterminated 
to the best of your ability; but you sacrifice, when you deny 
yourself personal ease, comfort, pleasures lawful to the natural 
man, but which you relinquish, to do something which you 
recognize as the will of God. In our crucifying, etc., we are to 
follow in Jesus' footsteps. Did his sacrifice consist in forsaking 
sins? No, in Him was no sin to forsake; but he denied himself 
things lawful and proper to him as a man, even life itself-and thus 
sacrificed. 

To show the contrast, we will look at Paul as compared with 
modern preachers. Many preachers of this day, choose the ministry 
as "a profession" which is honorable, has the respect of the world, 
and a comfortable and easy living, etc. Paul was called to the 
ministry by the grandeur of the "glad tidings of great joy"-he could 
not help preaching it, so overwhelmed was he by the "high calling, " 
so anxious to obtain it for himself and to enable others to attain the 
same. He preached it despite the persecution, disgrace, and frown 
of the world— at the sacrifice of earthly opportunities, honors, ease, 
pleasures; and accounted it a pleasure to be permitted to preach, 
even though, instead of luxury, he was obliged to "labor, working 
with his hands" at very humble employment, and was often in 
hunger and poverty and danger. He was willing to endure all this, 
because he had a correct appreciation of the good tidings he 
preached, and of the prize it presented. And it is from a failure to 
apprehend either of these that the clergy of to-day deserve the 
severe 

R330 : page 6 

words applied to them by the prophet: "His watchmen are blind; 
they are all ignorant; they are all dumb dogs; they cannot bark; 
sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber: yea, they are greedy dogs 
which can never have enough-and they are shepherds that cannot 
understand; they all look to their own way [self-interest], every one 



for his gain from his quarter." Isa. 56:10,1 1. Because they hold the 
traditions of men, they cannot see the great prize of our calling. 
They have not "good news," but very BAD NEWS to tell-the very 
worst and most awful news that could be imagined, viz. : That the 
God of love, possessed of all power and all wisdom, prearranged 
for the eternal misery of nine-tenths of his human creatures. 

Oh, when will God's children learn that their fear toward Him is 
taught by the precepts and traditions of men (read Isa. 29:10-14), 
and that his true character is Love? When will they learn that it is 
because "His mercy endureth forever" that he has provided for 
human restitution in the next age, and for the development of the 
little flock in the present age, through whom to communicate the 
coming blessings to earth. 



page 6 



THE REVIVAL SEASON. 



"The spiritual barrenness in our local churches has been the cause 
of great anxiety to the official and leading men in them, and has led 
to some prayer and efforts for the betterment of this condition of 
things. The net addition to the Presbyterian churches of the North 
during the last ecclesiastical year was a fraction of one convert to 
each church. In some parts of the country the Congregationalists 
have not had a dozen additions to their churches in the same 
number of years. Baptists and Methodists do a little better but not 
much. The net addition of Baptists to the 874 churches of their 
faith, in this State for the last ecclesiastical year, for instance, is 
only 286, which is about one-third of a member for each church. 
More than one-half of the churches had not a single convert. The 
proportion of Methodists is between two and three new members to 
each church of their order. In view of these facts and figures the 
Presbytery of New York, the Baptists' Association and the 
Ministers' Conference of both Baptists and Methodists have 
endeavored to increase the number and improve the quality of their 
church members and converts, by special efforts begun with the 
new year and continued with much regularity and interest since. 
Days of special prayer have been held and evangelists, male and 
female, have been brought hither from other cities and states." - 
New Yew Herald. 

It might be added that nearly all of the additions above mentioned, 
few though they be, are from the Sunday schools; and many of 
them, so young as to be incapable of intelligent action. Few, very 
few, are converts in the true sense of the word. 

Yes, the church is losing the worldly respect which for some years 
has been the great attraction for the worldly element. They, as well 
as the most pious of God's true children are getting ashamed of the 
hollowness of Churchianity. Nominal Zion, is beginning to lament 



her inability to bring forth children— "Woe unto them that are with 
child in those days." 



R330 : page 6 

SEVEN PORTRAITS OF THE 

MILLENNIAL KINGDOM OF CHRIST 

AND ITS WORK. 

Revelation 20 to 22 contains eight portraits of the true Kingdom, 
just as we have seen that chapters 12, 13 and 17 contain repeated 
descriptions of the false Kingdom— Anti-Christ's. 

This repetition of the same things from different standpoints, and 
with other details, is a principle which applies especially to this last 
book of the Bible. A failure to recognize this, is, we think one of 
the reasons why so many of those who study this book, fail to get 
sense from it. 

The portion of Scripture we are about to consider, is frequently read 
as though it were one connected narrative, instead of several 
repetitions of the first statement. Because of failure to rightly 
divide, some get the thought, that the "great white throne" is to be 
established after the Millennial age, and after Satan is destroyed; 
consequently, are at a loss to know why the dead are raised at that 
time, or how they could have a probation after the Millennial Age, 
and are much confused generally. 



To better illustrate the distinctness and harmony of these portraits, 
we have diagramed them as follows: 



DIAGRAM OF REV. 20-22. 



Satan (Evil) loosed a 
little season, after the 
one thousand (1,000) 
years. 


END 

OF 

THE 

ONE 

THOUSAND 

YEARS 


Satan Bound for a Thousand (1,000) years — 
Evil and Vice under thorough restraint. 


Rev. 20 1-3 




Earthly Thrones cast down, and the 
Overcomers Reign with Christ a Thousand 
(1,000) years. 


Rev. 20:4,5 


Satan Loosed. 
The Evilly Disposed 
deceived and 
destroyed 


The Holy and Blessed of the First Resurrection 
life and Reign a Thousand (1,000) years. 


Rev. 20: 6-10 




The Great White Throne. 

Heaven and Earth Flee. 

The Dead Judged from Opened Books. 

Second Death. 


Rev. 20: 11-15 


Second Death, of the 
Unbelieving and 
Abominable. 


New Heaven and Earth. 

The Holy City (Government). 

Its blessings to mankind — Pain, sorrow and 

death abolished. 


Rev. 21 1-8 




The Bride — The Holy City — The Kingdom of 

God — come to Earth. 

The Light of the World. 

The good may enter the Kingdom. 


Rev. 21:10-27 




The water of Life flows freely. 
The World's troubles healed. 
The Curse (Sin, and its result, Death) 
Destroyed. 


Rev. 22:1-3 



R331 : page 6 



FIRST VIEW. 

SATAN BOUND.-EVIL RESTRAINED. 

Let us more particularly examine these pictures, all of which 
clearly pertain to the same period, the Millennial Age. The first, 
shows us that a restraint will be put upon evil, during that age of 
peace and blessing. This naturally commends itself to us, as the 
order for a reign of righteousness presupposes a restraint of 
unrighteousness. Satan is the best representative of evil principles, 
practices and persons, being the chief and leader in wickedness. 

An angel is seen, with the key of the abyss, (covered, secret, hidden 
place,) and a chain. The key represents authority, and the chain 
represents strength. The word angel signifies messenger, and this 
picture shows us, that God will send some messenger with authority 
and power to subdue Evil-the adversary of truth and right. In this 



work of binding, many agencies will doubtless take a part— an 
increase of knowledge probably being one of the strongest. Yet all 
of these agents, are typified by the one messenger. There is that 
about this figure, which seems to indicate that Christ Jesus, and his 
body, the church of the first born, is the one in whose hand is the 
power and authority to bind and control Evil- "To bind their kings 
with chains and their nobles with fetters of iron; to execute upon 
them the judgments written-this honor have all his saints." (Ps. 
149:8,9.) The language, too, reminds us of one who declares that he 
has the keys. (Rev. 1:18.) 

The binding or suppression of evil during the Millennial Age, will 
result from the exercise of authority and power, by our Lord, when 
he shall take unto himself his great power and reign. (Rev. 11:17.) 
But we have reason to think that the manner in which our Lord 
takes his great power, and binds Evil, will differ much from the 
general conception of it. We believe that truth binds error, and error 
binds truth: like light and darkness, they are constantly opposed to 
each other. During this Age the powers of darkness and error hold 
control; but light and truth will come with the new rulership. 

We believe that this New Ruler has already come, (visible only, as 
are all the glorious and spiritual things, to the eye of faith 
enlightened by the Word of God,) and that the binding is already 
commenced. As is God's rule- "Judgment [trial] must begin at the 
House of God." (1 Pet. 4:17.) Errors and evils- the devil in the 
church, must be bound first, and truth set free, among those who 
profess to be children of the light; and then it will progress, 
overturning errors, injustice and bad government among the 
World's people —thus blessing both nominal church and world, 
though the experience may for a time, seem a curse to both. 

Many may be the instruments used in this work; some fine and 
polished tools from the Lord's laboratory; some moral and upright 
Infidels, honest in their unbelief; and some God-dishonoring and 
defiant unbelievers; to displace errors and prepare a place for truth. 
So too, among the nations, he may make the wrath of man to praise 
him, and perhaps use bloody-handed Communists, as advocates of 
civil rights, and for the overthrow of evil and oppressive 
governments. But the result will be, that Satan shall be bound for a 
thousand years. The loosing for a little season, we will examine 
presently. 

SECOND VIEW. 

GOVERNMENTAL POWERS OVERTHROWN, 
AND SAINTS REST AND REIGN. 

"I saw thrones and they sat upon them and judgment [Rotherham- 
judicial sentence] was given unto them. " The thrones are those of 
earthly kingdoms at the present time, and all under the "prince of 
this world." (John 14:30) These are all condemned as unfit, and are 
to be overthrown, to give place to the kingdom of Christ. [The 



Greek word rendered judgment here, is the same rendered 
condemnation in the following passages: Luke 23:40; Jas. 3:1; Jude 
4.] 

"And I saw the persons of them that were beheaded for the witness 
of Jesus, and for the Word of God. " We believe that a few of this 
class are now living. It is not a literal beheading, but in keeping 
with other figures; it is a symbolic beheading. [Some suppose this 
to refer to all the martyrs of past ages— but of them the fewest 
number were beheaded.] 

Beheading, is to cut off from a head. There are many so called 
bodies of Christ: the Methodist body, Presbyterian body, etc., are 
common expressions. (The Scriptures, of course, recognize no such 
division into sects; but assure us that there is only one body and one 
head.) Of course, each body must have a head or authority, from 
whence comes its government and laws. These are Conferences, 
Assemblies, etc., and we predict that any one connected with any of 
these who will "witness for Jesus," as the only head of the church, 
and for the "Word of God," as the only standard of doctrine, will 
very quickly be treated as described— beheaded— cut off from those 
church heads. This is in harmony with the next clause 

R331 : page 7 

which says they worshiped not the Beast, neither his Image, neither 
received his mark. These, we saw in our last number, represent 
sectarian systems. 

This Scripture shows that such as are of this bounden class, not 
separated -beheaded— cut off-from others than the true head, are 
not overcomers, while the class described, of all ages, who will live 
and reign with Christ a thousand years, are. "This is the first 
resurrection." (Vs. 5. -We omit the first clause of the verse, which, 
as heretofore explained, is wanting in several of the oldest MSS.) 

This reference to the first resurrection, seems to indicate that it 
includes all of the first fruits company-bofh those who "sleep in 
Jesus," and the living who shall not sleep, but be changed at the 
moment of death. * 

THIRD VIEW. 

THE BLESSED REIGN AND END OF EVIL. REV. 2:6-10. 

"Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the (chief perfecting) first 
resurrection; on such the second death hath no power, but they shall 
be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand 
years." 

This seems scarcely to require comment. It shows the holiness, as 
well as blessedness of all that reigning company. Another thought 
is suggested, by the fact that these shall be priests to teach, as well 
as kings to reign. They will not only see to the execution of God's 
laws, but will give instruction and assistance to mankind, such as 



will enable them to render obedience. Yes, it is a blessed thought, 
that we will be both kings and priests, (Rev. 5:10) and reign with 
him a thousand years. 

During this reign of the Christ, all will have been brought to a 
knowledge of the truth, (1 Tim. 2:4) the true light will have 
enlightened every man, ever born into the world. (Jno. 1:9.) All will 
have been brought to a recognition of Christ; those in heaven, 
(angels) those on earth (living men) and those under the earth, 
(those now in their graves who must be brought to life). All will 
have been brought to recognize the power of Jehovah's anointed; 
and unto him every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess. 
(Phil. 2:10,11.) And all nations that God ever made (Sodomites and 
all) shall come and worship before him. (Rev. 15:4.) All people 
shall be blessed by having an opportunity to reach human 
perfection, and consequent perfect happiness, and life ever-lasting. 
This kingdom over earth, after subduing all evil, will cease by 
being delivered up to God, even the Father (Jehovah), as Paul tells 
us: "He must reign till he hath put all enemies under his feet: [in 
subjection] The last enemy that shall be destroyed, is death." [The 
destruction of death implies the raising of mankind out of it, to 
perfection of humanity: abolishing death and all of its incipient 
stages of sickness, pain, etc. This will be a gradual process, 
requiring all of "the times (1,000 years) of restitution" for its 
complete accomplishment.] 

It should be remembered, that to humanity the Millennial Age is not 
the perfect, but the perfecting age, to be followed by that which is 
perfect; even as to the Bride of Christ, the Gospel Age is not the 
perfect, but the perfecting period, to be followed by ages of glory 
and perfection, of which the Millennial is the first. 

And when all things shall be put under him, then shall the Son, also, 
himself be subject unto him (Jehovah) that put all things under him 
[that gave him the power]; that God may be all in all." (1 Cor. 
15:25,28.) 

But since all things before presentation to Jehovah must be perfect, 
whatever their nature; and since no sin is to go beyond the 
Millennial Age; therefore, it would seem but proper, that those who 
had experienced the blessings of knowledge and restitution, should 
be proved or tested, before they should be considered sin-proof. 
Having then reached, perfection of being and having had a previous 
knowledge of sin and its results, perfect obedience should be 
expected. Therefore Satan —evil— will be loosed a little season, in 
order that it may be manifested, 

whether their obedience results from a fear of the punishment of 
evil doing, or from a heart love of God, and a desire to do those 
things well pleasing to him. 

As evil will be bound by the infliction of punishment on the evil 
doer, so we may presume, it will be loosed by allowing evil deeds 
for a time to go unpunished; much as it is during this age. (See Mai. 



3:15-18.) With full liberty to do good or evil, the actions of each 
individual, will show his true disposition. Some will remain 
faithful, called holy ones (saints) others from among all nations. 
(The world will then be very populous— "as the sand of the sea"), 
will join the insurrection of evil; and the two classes will thus be 
manifested. (Vs. 7-10.) Then fire-judgments-will come upon 
them, and they will all be cast into a lake of fire and brimstone, [fire 
representing judgment, trouble, and brimstone representing 
extinction of life-no life is proof against the fumes of brimstone- 
hence the force of the symbol, as a representative of extinction.] 

The trouble and judgment into which the devil and those followers 
will be cast, is of the same sort as that into which the symbolic 
BEAST AND FALSE PROPHET, (image) are cast at the end of 
this Gospel Age. These we have seen to be symbols, representing, 
not persons but systems: and these systems are said to go alive 
(while they are yet active and powerful systems) into the same lake 
of fire or gehenna fire of trouble and destruction. This fire, is 
already burning we think; beginning to torment those systems and 
to cause pain to all who do not recognize their true characters, and 
the end God has marked out for them- destruction. 

The devil and those followers shall be tormented day and night for 
ever and ever; more properly- "unto" the ages of ages or "until" the 
perfect ages are due. 



*The word anastasis, here rendered resurrection signifies-"a 
standing or rising up"-to bring to perfection. The bringing to 
perfection of mankind in general, will be a gradual work, requiring 
all of the Millennial Age, while the resurrection or bringing to 
perfection of the Bride of Christ-the little flock, will be 
instantaneous, and at the beginning of the Millennial Age. 
Remember, too, that though both reach perfection, yet one is a 
human and the other divine perfection. 

The attainment of the divine perfection is called the first 
resurrection, and signifies the chief or best perfection. The same 
Greek word (protos) is translated best in Luke 15:22, and chief in 
Acts 13:50; 16:12; 17:4; 25:2; 28:7; 7:17, etc. 

R332 : page 7 

FOURTH VIEW. 

THE THRONE OF RIGHTEOUSNESS AND 
THE WORLD'S TRIAL FOR LIFE. REV. 20:1 1-15. 

"And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from 
whose face the earth and heaven fled away, and there was found no 
place for them. " 



The throne or kingdom of Christ will be a pure-a righteous one, 
here symbolized by white, the symbol of peace and purity. "A 
scepter of righteousness is the scepter of thy kingdom." (Heb. 1:8.) 

The one who sat in the throne represents The Christ-primarily 
Jesus, the head, but also the overcomers who sit with him or share 
his glory and power (Rev. 3:21)-yet all one. 

Now call to mind the definitions of the symbols, earth, heaven, and 
sea, given in our last issue; you will find them of service here: 
heaven— spiritual control; earth— organized society; sea— the 
turbulent masses without religious restraint. From before, or at the 
presence of, this enthroned Christ, all forms of evil oppression and 
injustice must flee-no place is found for them, indicating that they 
will be driven from one place after another, but can remain 
nowhere. 

Earth— society— as at present organized, is a series of layers, or 
strata, or classes, each holding its position by oppressing those 
below it. (This class oppression is less in degree, in this land than in 
any other; yet even here, social caste is easily discernable.) The 
"lower classes" and "upper crust" are recognizable in the entire 
social fabric; both in the nominal church, and in the world. The 
upper classes are usually proud and haughty— the meek are oftenest 
found in the under strata, among the oppressed. The present system 
of society will pass away— not be permitted anywhere, when the 
throne of Justice is established in the earth; and a new earth (system 
of society) will take its place; viz. : the recognition of merit, not of 
pride and power. Then, love to God and mankind will be the ruling 
principle. 

This change of (earth) society begins immediately on the 
commencement of the dominion of Christ's kingdom. (This, we 
understand the Word of God to teach, was due in the spring of 
1878. If correct, the elements for the overturning should already be 
in preparation-and we believe they are.) 

A symbolic statement by the prophet (Isa. 24:1,2) is in keeping with 
the above exposition, God says he will turn the earth up-side-down 
-the "upper crust"-the proud, will be debased and the humble and 
meek will be exalted. 

Another prophecy, often mis-applied by "Second Adventists," and 
others, and supposed to mean that the earth will be melted by fire, 
and when cooled off, be a perfectly flat surface, without hills or 
mountains, and thus a new earth, is found in Isa. 40:4. "Every 
valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made 
low: the crooked (perverse) shall be made straight, and the rough 
places plain. " This we understand to be but another way of showing 
that society (earth) is to be reconstructed and equality of classes 
obtain, in which individual merit will be recognized, blended with 
humility and benevolence. 



But, not only does the present ("earth") society pass away, but also 
the present "heavens" or spiritual powers of control. Satan is 
declared to be "the prince of the power of the air" (heavens) who 
"now worketh (operates or rules) in the children of disobedience. " 
(Eph. 2:2) This one called at present, "The prince of this world" 
(John 14:30), we have seen, is to be bound; consequently his 
control, or spiritual power, now exercised in favor of evil doing, 
etc., will cease, or pass away; gradually, because his binding, as 
shown by some prophecies, will not be fully accomplished for some 
33 years. 

The fact that the present "earth" and "heaven," are to be succeeded 
by, or give place to, a "new earth" (society), and a "new heaven" 
(new spiritual powers of control also unseen, good and not evil— of 
Christ and not of Satan), is not here mentioned, but is afterward. 

"And I saw the dead, small and great (high and low-humble and 
proud) stand before God; and the books were opened-and another 
book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were 
judged out of those things which were written in the books, 
according to their works." 

That this will not be a marshaling of mankind in ranks, and rows, 
before a literal Judgment-bench, we have heretofore shown. We 
believe that the world of mankind, during their day (age) for trial of 
worthiness or unworthiness of perfect human life, will be tried in a 
similar way to that in which certain ones are now being tried and 
tested in this day (Gospel age), to prove whether worthy or 
unworthy of the perfection of the DIVINE nature. The Greek word 
here rendered judged, has the significance of tried or tested. Paul's 
use of the same word will prove this. We here give a quotation, in 
which he uses the same word (krino) three times: (We italicize the 
words translated from this Greek word.) "Dare any of you, having a 
matter against another, (1) go to law before the unjust, and not 
before the saints? Do ye not know that the saints (2) shall judge the 
world? and if the world (3) shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy 
to judge the smallest matters?" (1 Cor. 6:1,2.) 

Here Paul refers to the coming trial of the world, when the 
overcomers of the present trial, shall be their judges— judges, who 
like their Head, Jesus, will not only be able to assist the world as 
the kings, but also to sympathize with them— having been 
themselves tempted, in all points. 

The first illustration gives it clearly -"go to law"-or stand trial. 

"The dead," includes all of the Adamic race, who, during this 
Gospel age do not escape from the condemnation that is on the 
world- DEATH-by becoming partakers of spiritual life through 
Jesus. "By the offence of one [Adam] judgment came upon all men 
to condemnation," but there is "now no condemnation to them 
which are in Christ Jesus;" for the law of life in Christ made such 
free from the condemnation of death. (Rom. 5:18; and 8:1,2.) 



As during this age a little fragment of humanity escapes 
condemnation (death), by obtaining spiritual life offered on certain 
conditions, so we understand the world are to be privileged to 
escape from the death condemnation, by obedience to certain laws 
of natural life. Their right to this privilege of running for life comes 
as a consequence of Jesus having ransomed them. 

This verse relative to the dead, 

R332 : page 8 

shows us how all those death condemned ones, will be on trial 
before the White Throne. And so surely as it is a throne of purity 
and Justice, their trial, as ours now, will be full, fair and impartial. 
The Judge himself, has already become their bail, so that they shall 
have a full and sufficient trial before himself, to attain perfection of 
human life. 

The books opened, according to the rulings of which they will be 
tried, we understand to be the books of the Bible. The church, now 
on trial, is being judged according to these same books— and none 
now are on trial, to whom those books are not to some degree 
opened (understood). This too, accords with Jesus' words: "My 
words shall judge you in the last day (period)-the Millennial day. 
John 12:48. (The word here translated judge is the same word as in 
our text and in 1 Cor. 6:1. And the same word is rendered "sue at 
the law" in Matt. 5:40.) 

The words of Jesus will no longer be hidden under parables and 
dark sayings, that hearing the people might hear and not 
understand; but the secret things will be uncovered ("The mystery 
of God"-the church -being finished) the books will be opened, and 
the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth. For God "will 
have all men to be saved, [redeemed] and [then] to come unto the 
knowledge of the truth." 1 Tim. 2:4. 

R333 : page 8 

The succeeding verse is in harmony, and says that "the sea 
(masses of mankind not under religious restraint) delivered up the 
dead which were in it:" i.e. mankind will be taken out of that 
condition, and brought under the restraints of the White Throne. 
(Consequently, when all are restrained there will be "no more sea"- 
see Jude 13, Jas. 1:6.) "And death and the tomb delivered up the 
dead which were in them, and they were judged every man 
according to their works." (During that age or day.) 

This trial includes all the world, (but, not the saints-John 5:24,) and 
is indeed the grand prospect held out before them. By means of that 
trial, the entire groaning creation, may be delivered from the 
bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty (freedom from 
death) of the sons of God. Rom. 8:21,22. 

Another book— of life, was opened. This suggests to us that as there 
is a book (record), of life, in which the names of all the Gospel Age 



overcomers are recorded, who are worthy of divine life, so there 
will be a book or record kept in the next age of those worthy of 
perfect human life. 

The book of life now about finished, will not be opened-the results 
or record will not be known until the full end of this age; then we 
will see those deemed worthy to be of the Bride the Lamb's wife: so 
too, the records of the next age, will not be opened until the end of 
that age, when those worthy of receiving back the dominion of 
earth, lost by Adam, will receive it. 

Another feature of difference between the world's judgment of that 
age and ours of this, is, that though they will be required to have 
faith, yet their trial will be based on works -"judged according to 
their works." We, on the contrary, live in an age when perfect 
works are impossible, and our judgment depends largely on faith: 
According to thy faith be it unto thee, and works only according to 
our ability. 

In the end of that age of trial, death and the tomb, and all not found 
written in their book of life, will be cast into the lake of fire- 
already described as representing wrath and destruction. That the 
lake of fire is symbolic, is readily seen, because death and the tomb 
are represented as going into the same— the tomb will be no more, 
and the Adamic death will be no more. (Isa. 25:7,8.) All men who 
are then judged unworthy of life, die: but it is the second death, and 
is attributable to willful sin on their own part; for the Adamic death 
and all its results will have been destroyed. 

FIFTH VIEW. 

THE HOLY CITY (GOVERNMENT)- THE BRIDE- 
GOD'S DWELLING AMONG MEN. 

SORROW PAIN AND DEATH ABOLISHED. REV. 21:1-7. 

This brings the glory side of this glorious Millennial Age to view. 
The former heaven and earth and sea passed away entirely, and the 
new are fully inaugurated at the opening of this scene. The new 
heavens (the spiritual dominion of Christ) and the new earth, (the 
reconstructed condition of society) being now established; as a 
matter of course there will be no more sea— people unrestrained. 

The New Jerusalem coming down from God to earth, hereafter to 
be God's dwelling place, is a beautiful representation of the church 
as a kingdom or government over the earth. 

As the false system, or church (anti-Christ) has during this age 
attempted to govern the nations of the earth, so the real church- 
made one with the true Christ, will possess the true kingdom over 
earth's nations. The one, is in Scripture called "that great City 
(government) that reigneth over the kings of the earth," and is also 
called "Babylon"; (confusion) so the other is to be a strong City 
called Zion and The New Jerusalem (or "the city of the Great 



King"-King of kings and Lord of lords.) "God is in the midst of 
her, she shall not be (re-) moved. " 

Being the dwelling place of God- it will be the place from which 
he will operate in blessing all the world; for "reconciliation for 
iniquity" having brought mankind into harmony, and having blotted 
out sin, it will be meet that God's power should be engaged in 
lifting up and blessing all -"as God has spoken by the mouth of all 
the holy prophets." (Acts 3:21.) 

Yes, God himself shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. It was 
God's plan from the very first-God so loved the world that he sent 
Jesus: and so, of him and through him and to him are all things and 
we through him. (2 Cor. 5:18.) Not only do the past features of the 
plan indicate that God was in Christ reconciling the world to 
himself, (paying the ransom exacted by his own Justice,) but now 
we learn, that the Millennial work is still His. He it is, who will 
wipe all tears, etc. Yet, as in times past, he will use means and 
agencies— Christ Jesus and His Bride are to be the agencies; and as 
it has been all along it will still be, God in Christ and Christ in you. 

How blessed the thought that we soon shall share in the wiping 
away of all tears from humanity. Yet this shall be our glorious 
mission work during that age, for wiping is a gradual work. And the 
tears will last so long as their cause— imperfection, pain and death 
exists; and these will not be fully removed until the end of that age- 
-Then "there shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, 
neither shall there be any more pain; for the former things are 
passed away." All those evils are part of the curse— results of sin; 
and all being redeemed by him who was made a curse for us it is 
proper that in due time all should have these blessings, and the 
curse be forever removed. 

"He that sat upon the throne said: Behold I make all things new." 

Yes, for this cause he became a man, then gave his human life as 
man's ransom price from sin. And thus having bought him in his 
low estate, he by his new (divine) life is to bless him with full 
ability to regain his lost estate, as perfect man— the image of his 
Creator. 

He that sitteth in the heavens has already declared— a "time of 
restitution" or making new-by the mouth of all his holy prophets, 
and he now tells John that promise is faithful and sure— "Write, 
these words are faithful and true." (margin.) 

He is the A and Z, the beginner and ender of the great salvation of 
mankind. He surely will, as he has said, give to all that are 
ATHIRST of the water of life freely— all men who will, may come 
into harmony and live forever. 

Those who are worthy of the perfect human life then, are called 
overcomers and "inherit these things"— the earthly kingdom, just as 
the overcomers of this Gospel Age are called "overcomers" and 
inherit spiritual things, and the heavenly kingdom. 



But those who do not then renounce fully the works of darkness, 
have their part in the lake of fire and brimstone— are subjects of the 
second death. This death is for their own sins, and is everlasting; 
will never be ended or interrupted by a resurrection. No, Christ 
dieth no more, and there is no ransom from that tomb, as there was 
from the Adamic death. 

Then— sin blotted out-sinners extinct -all things in heaven and in 
earth shall sing praises and thanks, to the King eternal, immortal, 
invisible, the only wise God. 

SIXTH VIEW. 

THE NEW JERUSALEM THE LIGHT OF THE NATIONS. 
REV. 21:19-27. 

This view seems to come back to our day, as its starting point. 
John representing the living members of the Bride company, is 
shown the Holy City (government) coming down to earth. But 
before he could see it, he had to go, in spirit, as high as possible 
above the earthly level. So we, the anti-type, may now see the 
kingdom of God coming:— the rule of the Highest commencing to 
direct and overthrow earthly things, preparatory to the full reception 
of the will of God on earth as in heaven." 

We can see his coming judgments as they circle all the earth, 
The signs and groanings promised, to precede the second birth, 
We read his righteous sentence in the crumbling thrones of earth, 

Jerusalem come down! But all cannot see this kingdom as already 
on its way to earth— "coming down." To thus recognize it, we must 
get away from the world and its standpoint of view; we must go in 
spirit (by and by in person) to the great and high mountain 
(kingdom of God), i.e. we must come into full sympathy and 
loyalty to that heavenly kingdom before sharing the King's 
confidence, so as to be shown its glory and power, and our future 
position as the Bride of the King. 

From our present standpoint, we can see what very few seem to 
see- that that kingdom will be an all powerful one, a spiritual one- 
"Having the glory (majesty and power) of God. " 

We have here a symbolic description of this glorious government of 
earth. The entire city is of pure Gold-divine glory, an untarnishing 
glory-the glory of God. It has "walls of salvation"; (Isa. 60:18.) 
protection and security abide in it. Its walls will never crumble nor 
fall, for the foundations are built of precious jewels, and the wall 
itself of Jasper, clear as crystal-(probably a diamond). The 
salvation walls rest securely on the finished redemption -the 
completed foundations as expressed by Jesus, the Apostles, and 
Prophets. (Eph 2:20.) 

The city lieth four square, the height, length, and breadth being 
equal— a cube, a perfect figure. This is another way of showing its 
perfection; it is perfect toward God, as well as toward earth. 



R334 : page 8 

We have already seen, that when God's kingdom (dominion) is 
established on earth, mankind will be brought into harmony with it, 
and the literal earthly city of Jerusalem will be rebuilt upon her old 
heaps, and will again become the great city of earth and Israel (the 
children of Abraham according to the flesh), as God promised-the 
channel through which a blessing will flow to all the nations of 
earth, from the spiritual seed-Christ. (Gal. 3:16 and 29; compare 
Rom. 1 1 :25-33.) And when we read that it has gates in every 
direction, and the names of the twelve tribes of Israel inscribed 
thereon, it seems in perfect accord, to show Israel's position as 
channels, gateways, by which the world may approach to the 
heavenly government, and through which may come the blessings 
to mankind. At the gates were twelve messengers (angels). This 
would seem to teach that Israel will in due time be the messengers 
to communicate the Love and Knowledge of the Lord to all 
creatures. 

The city had no need of the Sun (Gospel message), neither of the 
Moon (the Gospel reflection- "The Mosaic Law") to shine in it; for 
it is filled with the glory of God. Now we know in part, and see as 
through a smoked glass dimly; then, we shall know even as we are 
known, being made perfect as divine beings, having the glory of 
God. 

But the nations of earth will still need the symbolic also the natural) 
sun and moon. In fact, it is when "the books shall be opened," that 
the pure and full light of the Gospel and of the Law will shine out 
and bless mankind. The prophet says: "The light of the moon shall 
be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be seven fold 
(perfect) ...in the day that the Lord bindeth up the breach of his 
people [caused by sin] and healeth the stroke of their wound. " (Isa. 
30:26.) But not only will the knowledge of the Lord flow out from 
the opened books, but the city (government-ruling) will be such as 
to shed light upon them. 

(Continued on page 2.) 

R334 : page 2 

(Continued from page 8.) 

"And the nations shall walk in the light of it." [The words-"of them 
which are saved"— are omitted from the oldest Mss.] 

And the kings [saints, Rev. 5:10] shall bring the glory and honor of 
themselves into the city. And they shall bring the glory and honor 
(the choice, bright, perfected) of the nations into the city. Thus we 
see that this government will at first contain the glory of the 
spiritual kings of earth, and afterward as the Millennial age 
progresses, the kingdom will embrace or include all of earth's pure 
and good— but only those counted worthy of life. Among them, will 
be found none defiled— for all who will, may by that time have been 
cleansed from all sin and defilement. 



SEVENTH VIEW. 

THE RIVER OF WATER OF LIFE REV. 22:1-3,17. 

This view begins after the city (government) of God is established 
in earth, and illustrates its blessings under still different figures. 

A river of water of life is seen, and trees of life whose fruit sustains 
life, and whose foliage heals the people. How this calls our minds 
back to the Paradise from whence Adam was driven on account of 
sin, and to the tree of life in the midst of Eden, from which he was 
debarred, and from the lack of whose fruit Adam and his race died. 

Oh, what a picture of the "restitution of all things, which God hath 
spoken"-the healing of all the curse, the blotting out of sin, and 
with it, of misery, pain, and death, because a ransom has been paid; 
and he who ransomed, is the one who gloriously restores. 

The water of life which will there flow from the throne is a picture 
of the future; for not yet has the throne been established on the 
earth. We still pray "Thy kingdom come," and not until that prayer 
is answered, can that river of water of life flow. The water of life is 
knowledge— truth-for which mankind famishes now. It will flow 
out bountifully when the tabernacle of God is with men. Then 
thirsty humanity, groaning and in painful bondage to sin and death, 
will be refreshed and restored. 

A type of humanity may be seen in the condition of Israel in the 
wilderness. Thirsty, they cried to the Lord for water; the rock was 
smitten, and from it came forth streams in the desert. So now 
mankind's prayers and groans (Rom. 8:21,22) have been heard of 
Jehovah and he has permitted the ROCK, Christ Jesus, to be 
smitten. Yes, and the smiting still continues, for we are permitted to 
"fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ. " (Col. 
1:24.) And while one member is being smitten, it is true that the 
smiting is still in process; but when all the sufferings of Christ 
(head and body) are ended, then will flow forth streams of water of 
life, and whosoever will may drink freely and live forever. Typical 
Israel drank of the typical water from the typical rock; but the 
substance is of Christ and the whole world— whosoever is athirst 
may yet come to the river of life and drink freely. (1 Cor. 10:4.) 

Knowledge of God (whom to know is life eternal) is now possessed 
to a limited degree by those now begotten of the word of truth, but 
it is as Jesus expressed it, in such, "a well of water springing up"; 
but in the next, the Millennial Age, it will be a full, broad river of 
truth and of the knowledge of the Lord. Now confined to the few- 
"a little flock," it will then be free to all. Then the little flock who 
now walk the narrow way to reach the grand prize of life - 
"Immortality" -will have reached and won the prize. The chaste 
Virgin now espoused to the Son of Heaven's King, will be united to 
the Bridegroom-no longer the virgin, she will be the Bride, the 
Lamb's wife and joint heir: and her future work as Bride is shown 
in verse 17- "The Spirit and the Bride say come. And let him that 



heareth say, come. And let him that is athirst, come. And 
whosoever will let him take of the water of life freely. " 

In the present Gospel age we (a) members of the espoused Virgins 
may be used by the Spirit, in the work of taking out (selecting) the 
one who shall shortly be the Bride, and share the Bridegroom's 
name and glory and work, and this is a grand privilege; but what 
comfort it brings to the heart of every one begotten of the Spirit of 
God (Love) to know that the very object of our present selection is 
to enable us to be in the next age co-workers together with the 
Bridegroom and our Father, in blessing all families of earth by 
causing the water to flow freely, and inviting them to drink into the 
knowledge and love of God and live forever. 

Trees of life seem to symbolize saints, whose leaves— professions- 
teachings, will heal men, and whose fruit will be adapted to the 
changing conditions of men as they are brought upward toward 
perfection- fruit suitable for each changing season, thus restoring 
man, to man's estate. 

"And there shall be no more curse" -the curse will be gradually 
removed and man gradually released, under the blessings of that 
glorious age. There his servants shall serve him, and reign unto the 
age of ages, when the kingdom shall be delivered to God even the 
Father. 


