Pay Constant Attention to Your Teaching
1 The new Theocratic Ministry School program will begin in January 1995. What is new in the program? The exciting history of Jehovah’s modern-day organization will be the subject for discussion in most of the instruction talks. During the course of the year, 178 pages of the book Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Proclaimers of God’s Kingdom will be considered. Since there will be no review questions following the instruction talk from the Proclaimers book, what can we do to pay attention to our teaching and maximize the benefits?​—1 Tim. 4:16.
2 Although many have already read the Proclaimers book, consideration of the material in the school schedule will help all to appreciate even more their theocratic heritage. (Ps. 71:17, 18) Why not set aside some time each week to review the assigned material in the Proclaimers book?
3 Lively and Interesting Instruction Talks: Instruction talks from the Proclaimers book should be presented in a lively and interesting manner. They should also highlight the practical value of the information, making use of it to deepen respect for Jehovah’s organization and appreciation for the privileges that are ours as God’s servants. If each family that attends the School brings a copy of the Proclaimers book to the meeting, family members can follow the instruction talk more closely and benefit from the illustrations and photographs in the book.
4 Thought-Provoking Bible Readings: Reading well, with proper sense stress and feeling, is an important part of effective teaching. In addition, the amount of assigned material to be read in Talk No. 2 is not extensive, and ample time will usually be available for introductory and concluding comments by the speaker. The introduction should stimulate interest in the assigned material and prepare the audience to discern its practical value. The conclusion may include explanatory comments and application of the material, with the speaker making full use of the time allotted.
5 Further information on the school program and on how assignments are to be handled can be found in the “Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1995.” We pay attention to our teaching by reviewing the instructions in this material, by preparing our assignments well, and by applying the counsel we are given, in order to improve in the art of speaking and teaching. Those not yet enrolled in the school are warmly invited to do so.

