Service Meetings for December
Week Starting December 5
Song 68
12 min: Local announcements and appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Point out one or two striking articles that could be featured when offering the latest magazines. Have capable publisher demonstrate a presentation, using one of the articles.
15 min: “A Model to Follow Closely.” Questions and answers.
18 min: “Invite Others to Follow the Greatest Man.” Discuss with audience. Arrange for two brief demonstrations. Stress need to keep accurate house-to-house records; briefly review what information should be recorded.
Song 153 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 12
Song 86
13 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News. Accounts report, including any donation acknowledgments. Offer some suggestions on how to respond to worldly holiday greetings.​—See Our Kingdom Ministry, December 1990, page 8.
14 min: “Pay Constant Attention to Your Teaching.” Talk by the school overseer. Review instructions that accompany the “Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1995,” pointing out any reminders especially needed by the congregation.
18 min: “Show Appreciation for God’s House.” Questions and answers. Make further comment about the need for punctuality at meetings.​—See The Watchtower of June 15, 1990, pages 26-9.
Song 99 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 19
Song 78
10 min: Local announcements. Review local arrangements for field service during the upcoming holiday period. Suggest ways of presenting current magazines in local territory.
20 min: “Pay Attention to the Prophetic Word.” Insert. Questions and answers on paragraphs 1-8, to be handled by an elder. Discuss application of cited scriptures.
15 min: “Urge Them to Become His Followers.” Discuss with audience. Have two brief demonstrations. Recommend that all use some field service time each week for making return visits.
Song 22 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 26
Song 74
 5 min: Local announcements. Discuss “Will Your Meeting Times Change?” if applicable to your congregation.
20 min: “Pay Attention to the Prophetic Word.” Insert. Questions and answers on paragraphs 9-13, to be handled by an elder. Stress importance of preparing for, regularly attending, and participating in the Congregation Book Study. Show appreciation for spiritual instruction, critical for our guidance in these last days.
10 min: Local needs. Or give a talk on the article “Are You Helping Your Child to Choose Jehovah?” in The Watchtower of October 1, 1994, pages 26-30.
10 min: Prepare for January offer. Any 192-page book published prior to 1982 may be used. If the congregation has none in stock, the book True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? may be offered. If this book will be used locally, prepare a presentation that can be used when offering the publication at the door. If some other book will be offered, prepare one or two appropriate presentations for it. Ideas for presentations can be found in the Reasoning book, pages 9-15. Have a capable publisher demonstrate presentation.
Song 94 and concluding prayer.

