From Our Readers
Improving Reading
I really appreciated your article “You Can Be a Better Reader!” (August 22, 1984) Previously I used to read articles but did not get much out of them because I really just glanced over them rapidly. As a result, I could not remember much of what I had read. But now, thanks to that article, I get much more out of my reading. Thanks a lot.
A. B., Brazil
See also our issue of September 8, 1985.​—ED.
Child Molesting
I wish to express my deep gratitude for your articles on child molesting. (January 22, 1985) I used the articles to explain to my eight-year-old twin daughters exactly what sexual abuse was. To my horror, they then said: “We know someone that happened to.” It was their eight-year-old cousin. My niece had confided in them, but no one else knew. We were able to handle the matter immediately and put an end to it in its early stages​—hopefully before too much damage was done. Thank you!
S. S., Minnesota
Peace in the Family
Your issue on “Peace in the Family” (January 8, 1986) came at the very time it was needed. In a heated discussion with my husband, I took that magazine out of its wrapper just enough to see what it was about. I could hardly believe it. I opened it up and started reading. The article “It’s All His Fault!” was just what I needed to read because I was sure that it was his fault. I read it again later and I realized how much at fault I was. Thank you so much for these articles on families. Please continue; they have helped so many times.
S. F., Florida
Collecting Shells
During my many years in East Africa, I have seen people collect live shells and destroy the animal inside, and now the shells [mollusks] are gone. If people would just take the dead shells, OK, but now there is a greed for everything that has a shell. In most places where we had thousands of shells, not one is to be found anymore.
H. L., Kenya
We did not intend to encourage the wanton destruction of live mollusks just to get shells for ornaments. Collecting dead or empty shells can be a delightful hobby. The instructions on cleaning shells could apply to cleaning shells of dead mollusks, though likely that part could have been more carefully worded.​—ED.
Getting a Job
Many times the “Young People Ask” articles help those of us who are not so young. I am referring to the article “How Do I Handle a Job Interview?” (February 8, 1983) The company that employed me for 12 years had announced it would close soon, and since I had passed the 40-year mark with some diminished physical abilities, the idea of looking for work was not appealing. But thanks to the ideas presented to the young people, this middle-ager has a new job after only four résumés were sent out, and on the first interview. Again, my warm thank-you.
R. H., Michigan

