Make a Success of Nursing Your Baby!
Thoroughly discouraged​—that is how some mothers feel after attempting to breast-feed their babies in the first few days and weeks after giving birth. However, I found that with a little know-how and perseverance, nursing can be both successful and delightful. Allow me, therefore, to share what I’ve learned through reading, talking with other mothers, and personal experience.
“When should I begin nursing my baby?”
As soon as possible after giving birth. In many cases you can begin right there on the delivery table. You might ask your doctor if this can be arranged. One of the advantages of natural childbirth, that is, childbirth without medication, is that the baby is born more alert and hence begins nursing more quickly.
“I do not have enough milk!”
That is the claim of some new mothers. Indeed, sometimes a new mother is so anxious for the milk to come that it simply will not come. This happens because the muscles controlling the milk ducts tense up, preventing a free flow of milk. So you need to relax. Remember, too, that your milk production is stimulated by the act of feeding your baby. The more you nurse, the more milk you produce. So give your baby several small meals instead of one or two large ones. In three or four days, your milk production usually picks up sufficiently. Why, grandmothers have been able to nurse grandchildren in an emergency! And even some adoptive mothers have been able to produce milk by just letting their baby nurse.
“My baby wants to eat every two hours!”
Another complaint of new mothers. They fear that their infant is not being satisfied by their milk. But it is perfectly normal for a newborn to nurse every two hours. Some infants nurse up to ten times in 24 hours! By the time the baby is two or three months old, it will probably have worked itself up to a three- or four-hour feeding schedule.
“What should I do in case of a breast infection?”
Do not take your baby off the breast. Instead, nurse twice as often as usual on the infected side in order to keep the breast empty. The infection, you see, is likely in the milk duct and not in the milk itself. Your doctor may prescribe a mild antibiotic and recommend warm compresses and bed rest. I personally took 1,000 milligrams of vitamin C every two or three hours when I first noticed the infection, and by the second day it was cleared up.
“What if I run out of milk?”
Impossible. The breast is a factory working 24 hours a day. Production can be slowed down, though, due to stress, fever, or emotions. The remedy is to relax, put problems out of your mind, and concentrate on giving of yourself to your baby. Nurse more often until your milk supply is ample again.
“Is there anything my husband can do to help out?”
The biggest thing a husband can do is offer his love and moral support. He should bear in mind that having a baby is quite a shock to a woman’s body. It takes her a while to recuperate. So he should remind her that her rest and the baby’s welfare are more important than a perfectly kept house. Possibly he can lend a hand with shopping and doing the dishes in the meantime.
How long should I nurse?
That depends upon you and your baby. Mother’s milk is a complete food, and baby does not need anything else until about the end of five months. My personal goal for nursing my children was one year. Sarah, though, waited until Isaac was five years old to wean him!​—Genesis 21:7, 8.
Nursing provides a wonderful opportunity for a woman to get acquainted with her baby and express her love for it. Remember, all too soon it won’t be a baby anymore. So take advantage of those precious months while baby is small.​—Contributed.

